                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  GOLD STANDARD GRAVITY

                                         James E. Anderson
                                           Yoto V. Yotov

                                        Working Paper 17835
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17835


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




A much earlier version of a portion of this work was presented at the NBER ITI meetings, Spring 2010
and the Venice Trade Costs conference, June 2010. We thank participants for helpful comments, especially
Dave Donaldson, Keith Head and Michael Waugh. We also thank Arthur Lewbel for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by James E. Anderson and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Gold Standard Gravity
James E. Anderson and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 17835
February 2012
JEL No. F1

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper provides striking confirmation of the restrictions of the structural gravity model of trade.
Structural forces predicted by theory explain 95% of the variation of the fixed effects used to control
for them in the recent gravity literature, fixed effects that in principle could reflect other forces. This
validation opens avenues to inferring unobserved sectoral activity and multilateral resistance variables
by equating fixed effects with structural gravity counterparts. Our findings also provide important
validation of a host of general equilibrium comparative static exercises based on the structural gravity
model.


James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu

Yoto V. Yotov
Drexel University
LeBow College of Business
Department of Economics and International Business
Matheson Hall, Suite 503-C
Philadelphia, PA 19104
yotov@drexel.edu
       The extensive gravity model literature moved from pulp fiction to high brow shelves
with the development of the structural gravity model by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)
and its success in explaining the border puzzle posed by McCallum (1995). This paper
provides the first empirical test of structural gravity. The results are a gold standard bench-
mark.1 Structural gravity forces account for 95% of variation in product/importer/time and
product/exporter/time fixed effects estimated from empirical gravity equations for 18 manu-
facturing sectors and 76 countries from 1990-2002. Similar results are found in a robustness
check on different and perhaps special data for 28 goods and services sectors in Canada’s
provinces from 1997-2007: 96% of variation is explained. These results provide an empirical
justification for comparative static applications of structural gravity.2 Perhaps more im-
portant, they justify inference of unobservable multilateral resistances and unobservable or
distrusted sales and expenditure variables from estimated fixed effects and structural gravity
restrictions.
       Gravity estimation following Feenstra (2004) usually features importer and exporter coun-
try fixed effects as controls in trade flow equations. Econometric problems of exogeneity and
omitted variables are demolished when fixed effects replace the theoretically indicated size
and multilateral resistance variables. Another potential advantage is that this specification is
agnostic as to whether the fixed effects are explained solely or at all by the structural gravity
forces. Bilateral trade cost proxies such as distance have consistently estimated coefficients;
but if the structural model is valid, much structural information is lost — the bank building
is blown up to get at the safe inside.
       The methodological novelty of this paper is to compare the patterns of fixed effects in the
rubble to a separate reconstruction of structural patterns predicted by theory. Estimated
   1
      “The gold standard” is a pervasive metaphor in medical and health research for the most certain medical
knowledge or best test, the meaning we intend. The metaphor suggests the highly probable fixity of exchange
rates in the gold standard era. The connotation of crisis when the test is failed is not intended.
    2
      Comparative static applications start with Anderson and van Wincoop’s own comparative static exper-
iment with the effect of removing the Canada-US border barrier, and have proliferated in the subsequent
literature, especially with variations on the Eaton-Kortum (2002) model that nests structural gravity within
a Ricardian production model.



                                                     1
bilateral trade costs are combined with independent data on total sales and expenditures to
construct a facsimile of the theoretical structural gravity model. If structural gravity theory
is right, these constructs should equal the estimated fixed effects. The results reported below
show that pure structural gravity forces explain almost all of the variation in estimated fixed
effects generated from gravity regressions.
   The very high goodness of fit was a big surprise to us. The structural gravity forces include
multilateral resistance terms solved from highly nonlinear equation systems derived from
structural gravity theory. The equations use shipments data, expenditure data and bilateral
trade cost estimates that are all measured with error. In principle the directional (importer
and exporter) product/country/time fixed effects could be generated by an agnostic model
containing many other variables not in the structural gravity model. Even if the structural
model were valid, these considerations formed our prior belief that the test was risky in
Popper’s (1963) sense. Popper’s riskiness criterion implies that the result is an impressive
validation of the model.
   Our reconstruction method is applied to gravity in this paper, but is presumably more
widely applicable when fixed effects are used to estimate in the context of a structural model.
It may often be possible to analyze estimated fixed effects to reveal information about the
structure from which they fell.
   Section 1 sets out the structural gravity model and its empirical implementation. Section
2 presents the goodness of fit comparisons. Section 3 subjects the results to robustness
checks. Section 4 concludes with drawing out implications for future research. Appendix A
describes the data used for the main results. Appendix B describes the Canadian data used
in a robustness check.




                                               2
1         The Structural Gravity Model

Anderson (1979) derives the structural gravity model under the assumptions of identical
preferences represented by a globally common Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES)
sub-utility function and product differentiation by place of origin (Armington). Bergstrand
(1989) shows that this model nests inside a monopolistic competition structure that deter-
mines the size of total shipments in each originating country. Anderson and van Wincoop
(2004) argue that under technical assumptions that generate trade separability, structural
gravity can nest inside a wide variety of general equilibrium models that determine the size of
sales and expenditures in each country, the role of gravity being to determine the distribution
pattern of given total sales and expenditures.3
        At the sectoral level (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004) the resulting model is:

                                                                          !1−σk
                                                 Ejk Yik           Tijk
                                        Xijk   =                                                           (1)
                                                  Yk              Pjk Πki
                                                                  !1−σk
                                                   X         Tijk          Ejk
                                  (Πki )1−σk =                                                             (2)
                                                     j
                                                             Pjk           Yk
                                                                  !1−σk
                                                   X         Tijk          Yik
                                  (Pjk )1−σk =                                 ,                           (3)
                                                     i
                                                             Πki           Yk


where Xijk denotes the value of shipments at destination prices from origin i to destination
j in goods class k. Ejk is the expenditure at destination j on goods in k from all origins. Yik
denotes the sales of goods k at destination prices from i to all destinations, while Y k is the
total output, at delivered prices, of goods k. Tijk ≥ 1 denotes the variable trade cost factor
on shipment of commodities from i to j in class k, and σk is the elasticity of substitution
    3
    Anderson (2011) shows that exactly the same system as (1)-(3) below can be derived from two other
foundations that feature selection of heterogeneous agents on an extensive margin. One is a model of
heterogeneous buyers and the other is a combined production and distribution model of heterogeneous sellers
(Eaton and Kortum, 2002) in a Ricardian production framework. The key assumption leading to the ‘as if’
CES structure is that the heterogeneous agents are distributed according to the Type II (Frechet) extreme
value distribution. In these interpretations, the dispersion parameter of the distribution is equivalent to the
elasticity of substitution minus 1 in the CES interpretation.



                                                         3
across goods in k. Finally, Πki and Pjk are multilateral resistance (MR) terms (Anderson and
van Wincoop, 2003) that are theoretically derived average outward and inward resistance to
shipments toward all destinations and from all origins, respectively.
       Multilateral resistance is not observable, but it can be estimated in a two step process
based on estimating a stochastic version of (1) by using exporter and importer fixed effects
to control for Yik (Πki )σk −1 and Ejk (Pjk )σk −1 . (Tijk )1−σk is estimated using proxies for bilateral
trade costs. The second step is to solve (2)-(3) for the multilateral resistances, given the
Yik s and Ejk along with the estimated (Tijk )1−σk s. The system only solves for the multilateral
resistances up to a normalization, which may be chosen for convenience (Anderson and
Yotov, 2010a), as its value is irrelevant to the methods below.4
       The novelty of structural gravity theory is the multilateral resistance variables.5 Equa-
tions (2)-(3) derive from world market clearance equations (one for the national variety of
each country in each product line) and national budget constraints (one for each country in
each product class). See Anderson and Yotov (2010a,b) for detailed analysis of calculated
multilateral resistances from estimated gravity equations. These applications reveal large
variation in multilateral resistance across product lines, countries and direction of trade.
Because multilateral resistance can be interpreted as sellers’ (for outward) and buyers’ (for
inward) incidence of all trade costs and because these trade costs are large themselves, it
is important to know how believable are estimated multilateral resistances such as those of
Anderson and Yotov (2010a,b).
       Turning to the estimation of the gravity equations, following the standard practice in the
gravity literature, bilateral trade costs are approximated here by a set of observable proxy
   4
      The normalization is needed because if {Π0 , P 0 } is a solution to (2)-(3) then so is {λΠ0 , P 0 /λ} for any
λ > 0. In our methods below, as indeed in (1)-(3) after dividing the elements of (2)-(3) through by the left
hand side variable, the Πs and P s appear as a product, hence λ cancels.
    5
      Anderson (1979) noted their presence but did not propose a solution for estimating or calculating them,
still less performing comparative statics with them.




                                                        4
variables:


                       1−σk         P4      k ln DIST m +β k BRDR +β k LAN G +β k CLN Y + 83 β k SM CT RY
                                           βm
                                                                                          P
                Tijk          =e     m=1             ij   5      ij 6       ij 7       ij   i=8 i        ij
                                                                                                              .   (4)


Here, ln DISTijm is the logarithm of bilateral distance between trading partners i and j. We
follow Eaton and Kortum (2002) to decompose distance effects into four intervals, m ∈ [1, 4].
The distance intervals, in kilometers, are: [0, 3000); [3000, 7000); [7000, 10000); [10000,
maximum]. BRDRij captures the presence of contiguous borders. LAN Gij and CLN Yij
account for common language and colonial ties, respectively. Finally, SM CT RYij is a set of
country-specific dummy variables equal to 1 when i = j and zero elsewhere.6 These variables
capture the effect of crossing the international border by shifting up internal trade, all else
equal. Use of the internal trade dummies has the advantage of exogeneity, in contrast to
direct measures of forces that discriminate between internal and international trade.
       The next step toward estimation is to use (4) to substitute for the power transform of
bilateral trade costs in (1). The Poisson pseudo-maximum-likelihood (PPML) estimator
of Santos-Silva and Tenreyro (2007) is used to address the issues of heteroskedasticity and
zeroes in bilateral trade flows.7 The PPML technique is used to estimate the following
econometric specification of the gravity model for each class of goods in our sample:

                                         4
                                         X
         k                                      k
        Xij,t      = exp[β0 +                  βm ln DISTijm + β5k BRDRij + β6k LAN Gij + β7k CLN Yij +
                                         m=1
                              84
                              X
                          +         βik SM CT RYij + ηi,t
                                                      k      k
                                                          + θj,t ] + kij,t , ∀i, j, t;                           (5)
                              i=8

   6
      It should be noted that we can only identify country-specific coefficients βik in a panel setting, which
has been used to obtain our main results. Lacking observations for enough degrees of freedom, we have to
impose common cross country SMCTRY coefficients in our yearly estimates, which are used in the robustness
analysis.
    7
      The choice of estimator turns out to be irrelevant in practice in our data. Experiments with ordinary
least squares (dropping zero bilateral trade observations) and with the Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein
(2008) selection estimator give the same results for relative trade costs. Realizing that gravity equations can
only estimate relative trade costs, results are the same after normalization of the trade costs. The irrelevant
differences in estimated levels of trade costs arise from differing implicit normalizations of the estimators.




                                                                  5
       k
where ηi,t denotes the set of time-varying source-country fixed effects that control for the
(log of) outward multilateral resistances along with total sales Yi,tk , and θj,t
                                                                              k
                                                                                  denotes the
fixed effects that control for the (log of) inward multilateral resistances along with total
              k 8
expenditures Ej,t .
       The panel data estimation approach allows us to identify separate country-specific es-
timates of the international border variables, SM CT RYij , an important dimension of het-
erogeneity as we verify below. A well-known disadvantage of pooling gravity data over
consecutive years is “that dependent and independent variables cannot fully adjust in a sin-
gle year’s time” (p.8 Cheng and Wall, 2005). To address this critique, we use four-year lags
and employ data for 1990, 1994, 1998, and 2002.
       To estimate (5) and to construct the trade cost indexes needed for our test of structural
gravity, we use data on trade flows, output, expenditures, bilateral distances, contiguous
borders, colonial ties, and common language from Anderson and Yotov (2010b). Their
sample covers the period 1990-2002 for 76 countries and 18 manufacturing commodities
aggregated on the basis of the United Nations’ 3-digit International Standard Industrial
Classification (ISIC) Revision 2. Appendix A lists the countries and commodities in the
sample and provides details on the data sources and all variables. In addition, as a robustness
check, we experiment with an alternative data set covering Canada’s provincial trade for 28
sectors, including services, for the period 1997-2007. See Appendix B for the results and
Appendix C for description of the data.
       Without going into details, we note that the gravity estimates of (5) are reasonable,
intuitive and comparable to the aggregate gravity estimates from the existing literature.
See Anderson and Yotov (2010b) for a detailed discussion of the properties of the gravity
estimates and the multilateral resistances.
   8
    Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) use full information methods to estimate the multilateral resistances.
Feenstra (2004) advocates the directional, country-specific fixed effects approach. To estimate the effects of
the Canadian Agreement on Internal Trade (AIT), Anderson and Yotov (2010) use panel data with time-
varying, directional (source and destination), country-specific fixed effects. Olivero and Yotov (forthcoming)
formalize their econometric treatment of the MR terms in a dynamic gravity setting.



                                                      6
2     The Fit of Structural Gravity

Structural gravity theory implies that the expectation of the estimated (denoted with a hat)
                k       k
fixed effects ηbi,t + θbj,t from equation (5) should be equal to the structural gravity term:


                     k
                    ηi,t    k
                         + θj,t = ln [Yik (Πki )σk −1 Ej,t
                                                       k     k σk −1
                                                           (Pj,t )   /Ytk ], ∀i, j, k, t.


Here the absence of a hat denotes the theoretical expected value. The main point of this
paper is the remarkably close alignment of theory with prediction, empirical gravity is 95%
explained by estimated structural gravity forces.


2.1    Simple Fit Measures

The structural gravity term is built up from the estimation of (5) and the restrictions of
system (2)-(3). The estimated regression coefficients permit construction of the (1−σk power
transforms of) estimated bilateral trade costs for each trading pair, year and commodity in
our sample. These estimated trade costs are used along with data on the Ejk s and Yik s in
system (2)-(3) to solve for (the 1 − σk power transforms of) the multilateral resistance terms.
The latter combine with the sales and expenditure data to yield the composite structural
gravity term
                                              b ki,t )σk −1 Ej,t
                                      [Yi,tk (Π              k b k σk −1
                                                                 (Pj,t ) ].

Data on the elasticities of substitution σk s are not needed for any calculations here because
both the bilateral trade costs and the multilateral resistance terms enter the gravity system
and our tests powered to 1 − σk .
    The excellent performance of the structural gravity model is revealed by examining the
residuals of the estimated fixed effects from their theoretically predicted values:


                   k
                  rij,t     k
                        = ηbi,t     k
                                + θbj,t              b k )σk −1 E k (Pbk )σk −1 ], ∀i, j, k, t.
                                        − ln [Yi,tk (Π                                            (6)
                                                       i,t       j,t   j,t




                                                       7
               k
The residuals rij,t are interpreted as the residuals from a regression of the estimated fixed ef-
        k
fects ηbi,t    k
            +θbj,t                                                                       b k )σk −1 E k (Pbk )σk −1 ],
                   on the constructed estimate of the structural gravity term ln [Yi,tk (Π i,t       j,t   j,t

constraining the slope coefficient to equal 1 and the intercept to equal 0.
                                                            k         k
    By construction the fixed effects estimated from (5), ηbi,t and θbj,t , are estimated as devia-
                                                                          b k )σk −1 E k (Pbk )σk −1 /Y k ]
tions from the US. Thus, by construction, the composite variable ln [Yik (Π i         j,t   j,t        t

is also a deviation from the US value. In principle, differencing from the US cancels out the
global scaling variable 1/Ytk that is otherwise a component of the structural gravity term.
    The analysis of variance provides familiar measures of the goodness of fit of structural
gravity. Let V (x) denote the variance of the random variable x. The proportion of the
variation of fixed effects explained by the structural gravity term is given by 1−V (r)/V (η+θ),
the simple R2 of a constructed regression with slope coefficient set equal to 1 and constant
term set equal to 0. Table 1 reports constructed simple R2 s for each sector in our sample.9
As can be seen from panel A of the table, the simple R2 ’s are very large and mostly above
0.9. The outlier is Coal and Petroleum at 0.62, followed by Apparel at 0.71, and Beverages-
Tobacco and Raw Metals at 0.84. The explanation is that these sectors have the worst fitting
first-stage gravity regressions (available by request) as well. The relatively poor behavior is
attributable to unmeasured asymmetric policy barriers and their movements over time that
are prominent for these three sectors. The constructed simple R2 across all industries is 0.88,
and without the problematic sectors, the goodness-of-fit statistic increases to 0.93.
                                                                 k       k
    The portion of the variance of the estimated fixed effects ηbi,t + θbj,t being explained by
                                     b ki )σk −1 Ej,t
the structural gravity term ln [Yik (Π            k b k σk −1
                                                      (Pj,t ) /Ytk ] is astonishing. Our prior expec-
tations were far more pessimistic, considering the amount of sector-country-time variation
in the fixed effects and in the constructed structural gravity terms.10
    The standard decomposition of variance (applying the theoretical slope coefficient of 1 to
   9
     We do not report sector-year goodness-of-fit measures for brevity. However, those statistics (mostly
above 0.9) are available by request and are in support of the sectoral findings analyzed here. Furthermore,
as shown below, we argue that all time effects are effectively absorbed by the structural gravity term.
  10
     The vast majority of the fixed effects are very precisely estimated. At the same time they vary quite a
bit across countries and across commodities.



                                                     8
the size and multilateral resistance components) demonstrates that not all the explanatory
power of the unit slope regression is due to the size effects. Panel B of Table 1 shows that the
multilateral resistance terms ln(Π        k 1−σk
                                 b ki,t Pbj,t )  account for between 17% (Machinery) and 39%
                                    k       k
(Minerals) of the variance of the ηbi,t + θbj,t                                          k
                                                s, while the size effect terms ln(Yi,tk Ej,t ) account for
between 33% (Coal and Petroleum) and 74% (Machinery). The importance of size effects
is no surprise based on the large atheoretic gravity literature, but it is notable that here
they contribute to explaining the fixed effects in precisely the theoretically predicted form
of Yik Ejk , in contrast to the atheoretic practice of using origin and destination GDP with
estimated exponents that differ from 1. More importantly, the large portion of variance
explained by the multilateral resistance term is striking because prior considerations suggest
that it would be risky to use them to predict trade flows. Multilateral resistance is due
strictly to structural gravity theory, and is calculated from the solution to the nonlinear
system (2)-(3) that places great reliance on all the structural restrictions of the model.
       The constructed R2 s from Table 1 fall short of 1 in part due to measurement error in
     k
the Ej,t s and Yi,tk s that are drawn from the UNIDO shipments data.11 To account for the
influence of measurement error, we regress the rij,t ’s for each sector on time fixed effects ψt
to control for differing time mean measurement error in the E’s and Y ’s.12 Additionally, we
control for country-specific measurement error with exporter fixed effects φi and importer
fixed effects ϕj along with a sector specific mean error α. The resulting regression equation,
estimated with OLS for each sector k, is:


             k       k          k b k σk −1 k b k σk −1
           ηbi,t + θbj,t − ln [Ej,t (Pj,t ) Yi,t (Πi,t ) ] = αk + ψtk + φki + ϕkj + ekij,t , ∀i, j, t;         (7)
  11
     Theory assumes shipments evaluated at full user prices whereas actual shipments data excludes trade
costs paid by users. The exclusion cancels on average in the shares but introduces unknown error to (2)-(3)
and thus to estimates of multilateral resistances.
  12                   k
     The estimated ψbj,t  + φbki,t values can be rescaled as factors that shift trade flows of the gravity equation
in levels, obtained by exponentiating. These range from around 0.26 to 1.73, plausibly associated with
sector fixed effects on the following reasoning. Suppose, plausibly, that the mean measurement error for each
goods class k is in proportion to the observable component of global shipments. The range of the estimated
country-time   fixed effects values is comparable to the range of values implied by the total shipments data
Y k /[ k Y k /N ] where N is the number of sectors. This is (0.07, 2.51) and is stable over time.
      P




                                                        9
where ekij,t is a random error term.
       Estimation results from equation (7) are omitted for brevity but available by request.
Here, we just use the R2 s from the regressions based on (7) to construct the composite
goodness-of-fit indexes reported in the first row of panel C in Table 1. For example, we
obtain an R2 = 0.668 from (7) for Food and we add the additional explained variation of
  k       k
ηbi,t + θbj,t (66.8% of 0.045=1-0.955) to that of the simple R2 = 0.955 from panel A to construct
the composite R2 of 0.985 reported in panel C.
       The composite indexes reveal that, in combination, the time, exporter and importer
fixed effects contribute to a moderate increase in the explanatory power of structural gravity.
Naturally, the contribution of the fixed effects is most pronounced for the problematic sectors.
The simple R2 s for Apparel (0.71) and Coal and Petroleum (0.62) increase to 0.91 and 0.80,
respectively. On average, across all sectors, adding the additional explained variation by the
fixed effects yields a composite R2 of 0.952: structural gravity explains 95% of the variation in
                                                  k       k 13
the estimated sector-country-time fixed effects ηbi,t + θbj,t . To demonstrate the performance
of the structural gravity model visually, in Figure 1 we plot the kernel density estimated
distribution of the r’s after correcting for measurement errors. As expected, the residuals
are densely clustered around zero, meaning that structural gravity predicts the fixed effects
very successfully.
       In our next experiment, we show that the time variation of the structural gravity term
captures essentially all of the time variation of the fixed effects, an important confirmation
due to the substantial time variation in the data. This observation is already implied by the
large constructed R2 s from panel A of Table 1, but strengthened by estimating a variant
regression based on (7) with time effects only. Composite R2 s based on this specification
are reported in row ψt of panel C in Table 1. Comparisons between these numbers and the
simple R2 s from panel A reveal that the time fixed effects contribute very little, if at all, to
                               k       k
the unexplained variation of ηbi,t + θbj,t . The largest difference between the simple R2 s from
  13
    The fit improves to 97.6% when the four worst performing sectors (Coal and Petroleum, Apparel, Bev-
erage/Tobacco and Metals) are dropped from the sample.


                                                  10
panel A and the composite R2 s obtained with time fixed effects only is 0.017 for Apparel.
                                                       k       k
This suggests that essentially all time variation in ηbi,t + θbj,t is absorbed by the structural
gravity term.
   Concern about possible large exporter and importer fixed effects on outliers (despite their
moderate overall impact on the composite R2 ) led us to examine the effect of successive
introduction of the fixed effects from the estimation of (7) over the entire range of estimated
values. For expositional simplicity, we estimate (7) on a sample pooled across all sectors and
                                                                                         k
all years. Figure 2 illustrates the result of several experiments. The x-axis shows the rij,t ’s
and the y-axis shows the fitted residual values, the ebkij,t ’s of (7). A perfect fit of the model
with no measurement error in the Es and Y s would result in a fitted line that coincides with
a horizontal line at zero.
   We start by plotting the fitted line and the corresponding 95 percent confidence band
from a specification with sector fixed effects only. The resulting fitted line, labeled “Fitted
Values Sector FEs”, is not horizontal at zero, but the horizontal line at zero is completely
contained within the 95 percent confidence band. The data points (not shown) are densely
clustered about 0 on Figure 2 (as Figure 1 shows), where the fixed effects have almost no
impact, but for a small proportion of outliers the fixed effects matter significantly.
   The individual roles played by the exporter, importer and time fixed effects in shifting
the outliers are isolated in two other experiments displayed in Figure 2. First, we introduce
the directional (exporter and importer) country fixed effects (φi and ϕj ), in addition to
the sector fixed effects, on suspicions that the former might control for activity elasticities
not equal to one or other country-specific effects not explained by structural gravity. The
resulting fitted line, labeled “Fitted Values Country FEs”, is a bit closer to the horizontal
line at zero, but well within the 95% confidence band of the original fitted line, obtained
with sector fixed effects only. Second, we also introduce a time dimension by adding year
fixed effects. The resulting fitted line “Fitted Values All FEs” almost coincides with the
line based on the former specification with sector, importer and exporter fixed effects only,


                                               11
confirming the insignificant contribution of time. Based on these experiments, we conclude
                                      k    k         σk −1                 σk −1
that the structural gravity term ln [Ej,t Pj,t               Yi,tk Πki,t           ] absorbs essentially all time and
country variation in the directional country-time fixed effects.


2.2     Regression Error Test

It is natural to look for a hypothesis test of structural gravity. Unfortunately a valid test
statistic requires the doubtful condition that the observations of


            k
          ηbi,t     k
                + θbj,t  bk − ψbtk − φbki − ϕ
                        −α                                 b ki )σk −1 Ej,t
                                            bkj − ln [Yik (Π            k b k σk −1
                                                                            (Pj,t ) /Ytk ], ∀i, j, k, t


are independent draws. Since the (unknown) measurement error process driving the Es
and Y s is knitted into the calculated Πs
                                       b and Pbs, there is no way to build a model of the

dependence or develop a useful sufficient condition for independence.
   In contrast, it is feasible to generate a conventional t-test statistic focused on regression
error, taking the E, Y data as given. We construct a t-test of the null hypothesis for the
residuals of (7), the raw residuals of (6) adjusted for mean measurement error. Drawing
bootstrapped standard errors from the estimated data-generating process of the first stage
gravity regressions, we obtain 100 bootstrapped first-stage gravity slope and fixed effect es-
timates. Then for each bootstrapped iteration, we construct a set of multilateral resistances,
                                                                                   k
which we combine with output and expenditures data to construct 100 raw residuals rij,t (s)
for s = 1, ..., 100. Next, we estimate regression (7) for each bootstrapped iteration s and cal-
culate the estimated residuals ebkij,t (s). For each iteration s the mean residual across partners
in (6) is r̄tk (s). Finally, we use the mean of r̄tk (s) over iterations s, r̄tk and the standard error
of the generated distribution of mean residuals r̄tk (s) to construct the t-statistic. P-values
from one-sample t-tests for each sector in our sample are reported in Panel E of Table 1.
Once again, our findings provide strong confirmation in support of the structural gravity
model. With the exception of apparel, leather and printing, we cannot reject (at the 5%


                                                       12
level) the null hypothesis that each of the sectoral level residuals have zero mean. For each
of these rejections the omission (due to lack of information) of important non-tariff barriers
to trade from our gravity estimation is the source of the problem, as opposed to a failure of
the structural gravity approach.


2.3     Trade Flows Fit Comparison

The relative performance of structural gravity is alternatively measured by the change in
fit of the model to the trade flow data when the fixed effects are replaced by the structural
gravity terms. This indirect measure addresses the potential problem that even though the
fixed effect and structural measures are close, they may differ substantially in explanatory
power in the trade flow model from which parameters are inferred. The comparative trade
                                                                                   k       k
flow fit check also alleviates the suspicion that because both the fixed effects η̂i,t + θ̂j,t and
                                  k b k σk −1 k b k σk −1
the structural gravity terms ln [Ej,t (Pj,t ) Yi,t (Πi,t ) ] are fitted values (or combinations
of fitted values), in some hidden way they are fitted to each other.
   The appropriate measure of relative performance is Aikake’s (1974) Information Criterion,
since we compare non-nested models estimated with PPML. The agnostic fixed effects model
has the minimum AIC value in all sectors, necessarily so because its 2 · 75 · 4 = 600 fixed
effects are optimized to fit the more than 20,000 observations of the trade flow data. The
600 values of the structural gravity term cannot do better. The relative probability that the
structural model nevertheless minimizes information loss is a measure of the closeness of fit
of the structural to the agnostic model, understanding that neither model is the unknown
perfect model that completely explains the data. The results are reported in Panel D of
Table 1.
   In the first row of the panel, we report relative probabilities when the full set of fixed
effects are replaced with the structural gravity term ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Π
                                                                               b k )σk −1 . These proba-
                                                                                 i

bilities range from 0.871 for Food to 0.307 for Apparel, with 16 of 18 sectors yielding relative
probability values greater than the critical value 0.37 (differences in AIC values less than


                                                  13
2) that in practice is often taken as “considerable” support for the alternative (structural)
model. The goodness of fit (measured by relative probability) would rise substantially by
augmenting the pure structural gravity term with the controls for mean measurement error
estimated from equation (7), just as it does in moving from the simple R2 of Panel A to the
composite R2 of Panel C in Table 1. Overall, the results confirm that the close fit of the
estimated fixed effects to their structural gravity counterparts in Panel A is due to similar
performance of the agnostic and structural models in explaining the trade flows from which
all parameters are inferred.
    To gauge the importance of the purely structural multilateral resistance terms, in the
second row of panel D, we report relative probabilities obtained by replacing the full set
of fixed effects only with the product of (the log of) output and expenditures ln Yik Ejk ,
thus omitting the MR effects. Without exception across sectors, omitting the multilateral
resistance terms results in worse model performance. Some sectors are more affected than
others. Intuitively, the MR effects are stronger for sectors with higher transportation costs
(see Wood, Furniture, Paper, Petroleum and Coal). Moreover, once we fail to account for the
general equilibrium trade cost effects that are channeled via the multilateral resistances, the
resulting specifications for half of the commodities in our sample fail to pass the conventional
threshold of 0.37 (differences in AIC values less than 2). This suggests that econometric
trade flow models that use size variables as covariates but fail to control for the multilateral
resistance terms are misspecified.



3     Smell Tests

Does the gold standard claim advanced here withstand common sense smell tests? This
section shows that it does with several robustness checks. First, alternative estimation with
much more eclectic use of gravity components does not add any appreciable explanatory
power. Second, we obtain similar results with alternative samples, different specifications,



                                              14
and new data sets from Canadian provincial trade in goods and services.
       Despite unavoidably biased estimation, it is natural to examine how the structural gravity
term and its components perform as regressors in explaining the directional country-time
                k       k
fixed effects ηbi,t + θbj,t when the coefficients are free to vary to improve the fit. The regression
most closely linked to the constructed composite R2 using the results of regression (7) is


                     k       k                    k b k σk −1 k b k σk −1
                   ηbi,t + θbj,t = γ0k + γ1k ln [Ej,t (Pj,t ) Yi,t (Πi,t ) ] + kij,t , ∀i, j,            (8)


for each k and t, and overall. Here kij,t is a random error term. Estimation is biased because
                                                              k b k σk −1 k b k σk −1 14
kij,t is obviously correlated with measurement error in ln [Ej,t (Pj,t ) Yi,t (Πi,t ) ]. Hy-
                                              b1k 6= 1 are thus invalid, but reported anyway
pothesis tests for such examples as estimated γ
for interested readers.
       Estimating regression (8) reveals that allowing γ1k to vary from its theoretical value
of 1 only very marginally raises the goodness of fit, R2 . Variants of (8) that progres-
sively relax the coefficient restrictions on the components of the structural gravity term
     k b k σk −1 k b k σk −1
ln [Ej,t (Pj,t ) Yi,t (Πi,t ) ], constrained to equal γ1k in (8), further shift the coefficient es-
timates away from 1 while again very marginally improving goodness-of-fit. In all variants,
both the size and multilateral resistance components explain important proportions of the
              k       k
variance of ηbi,t + θbj,t . We conclude from these experiments that there is no persuasive or
even modestly credible evidence against restricting the coefficient on the composite structural
gravity term to its theoretically required value of 1.
       Details of the results by sector are reported in Tables 2-3.15 The first panel of the table
presents the results of estimating (8) for each sector. Most importantly, the R2 s of these
estimated regressions are not much larger than the corresponding simple R2 s from panel A
  14
     Measurement error in the structural gravity term is due to the activity variables {Yik , Ejk } both di-
rectly and in calculation of multilateral resistances, along with the usual estimation error from the gravity
                                                                          k       k
coefficients, both of which are correlated with estimation error in the ηbi,t + θbj,t ’s.
  15
     To take advantage of the additional information contained in the standard errors of the country-specific,
directional fixed effects, we estimate (8) using weighted ordinary least squares with weights equal to the
inverse squared standard errors of the sum of the fixed effect estimates. The intuition is that more precise
estimates should be given higher weights in the estimations.


                                                       15
of Table 1. The largest improvements are for the problematic sectors of Apparel and Coal
and Petroleum.
       The extra freedom of regression (8) to vary the slope γ1k does very slightly improve the
fit of the regression, but at the cost of introducing biased estimation of coefficients. Without
exception the estimates of the coefficient of γ1k are very precisely estimated and relatively
close to 1.16 The estimates of Paper and Electric Products are closest to 1 with values of
0.941 (std.err. 0.001) and 0.940 (std.err. 0.002), respectively, even though a standard F test
(invalid but descriptively useful) renders them statistically different from 1. Apparel and
Coal and Petroleum are the worst performing sectors, in accordance with our main findings
from the previous section. Aggregate estimates of (8) from Table 4 pooled over sectors and
time (in column 1) and by year pooled over sectors (in the next four columns) similarly
demonstrate close conformation of the data to the restrictions of structural gravity, despite
biased estimators.
       The performance of separate components of structural gravity is revealed by eclectic
regressions reported in the next sections and panels of Tables 2-3. In the lower section of
panel A of each table, the composite term is split into its size (ln Yik Ejk ) and multilateral
                            b k )σk −1 ) components estimated from:
resistance (ln(Pbjk )σk −1 (Π i



                     k       k                       k σk −1 b k σk −1
                   ηbi,t + θbj,t = φ̃k0 + φk1 ln [(Pbj,t )  (Πi,t )    ] + φk2 ln [Ej,t
                                                                                    k
                                                                                        Yi,tk ] + kij,t   (9)


The standard F-test (invalid due to biased estimation but used as a descriptive device
nonetheless) rejects the null hypotheses that φk1 and φk2 are equal to 1, but the main mes-
sage from the estimation of (9) is that both size and multilateral resistance terms are highly
significant economically and statistically (again, with the caveat that biased standard errors
are used).
       A still more eclectic approach allows for decompositions of the directional country fixed
  16
       The standard errors are of course biased.




                                                            16
effects:
                                k
                              η̂i,t                  b k )σk −1 Y k ] + uk
                                    = β0k + +β1k ln[(Π                                     (10)
                                                       i,t       i,t     i,t


                           k
                         η̂i,t                  b k )σk −1 + β k ln Y k + ũk
                               = β̃0k + +β2k ln(Π                                          (11)
                                                  i,t         3      i,t    i,t


for the source country, and


                                 k                     k σk −1 k
                               θ̂j,t = α0k + α1k ln[(Pbj,t )            k
                                                              Ej,t ] + vj,t                (12)


                           k                     k σk −1
                         θ̂j,t = α̃0k + α2k ln(Pbj,t )   + α3k ln Ej,t
                                                                   k       k
                                                                       + ṽj,t .           (13)

for the destination country.
    Estimates from (10)-(11) giving the success of structural components in predicting out-
                    k
ward fixed effects ηi,t , by sector pooled across years, are reported in panel B of Tables 2-3.
The outward fixed effects are explained with somewhat higher R2 than are the sum of inward
and outward effects from estimating (8) or (9). In addition, we note that overall, the β1k
estimates from (10) are closer to 1 as well. See Furniture, for example (Table 2, panel B),
                                                                          k
with an estimate of β̂1 = .99 (std.err. 0,014). The inward fixed effects θj,t are explained with
somewhat lower R2 in panel C, and when structural term is split into its size and multilat-
eral resistance components in the bottom section of panel C, the estimated effects of inward
multilateral resistance are often significantly lower and relatively less precisely estimated
than the coefficient estimates on expenditures. This arises because the variation in inward
multilateral resistance is much less than the variation in outward multilateral resistance.
The main message of these experiments is that both size and multilateral resistance terms
are economically and statistically highly significant, while the extra freedom of the eclectic
regressions to alter the slope coefficients from their theoretical values only very marginally
improves goodness of fit.
    In (8) all effects of time are attributed to the composite structural gravity term. Ro-
bustness checks show that time has essentially no additional explanatory power. Several


                                                   17
informative experiments alter the fixed effect components of specification (8) that uses the
composite structural gravity term. For brevity, we limit our experiments to the sample
pooled across all sectors and years. The results are reported in the top panel of Table 5.
In the first column of the table, we report the base estimates, which are obtained with
sector fixed effects only. In column ‘Time’, we introduce year fixed effects to equation (8),
in addition to the sector fixed effects. The new results are virtually identical to the ones
from column (1). Similar findings are obtained with sector-year fixed effects. See column
‘ProdTime’ of Table 5.
   In column ‘Country’, we introduce exporter and importer fixed effects (φi , ϕj ), in addition
to the sector-time interactions from column ‘ProdTime’. Two findings stand out. First,
the estimate of the coefficient on the composite term falls significantly. The high positive
correlation between the country fixed effects and the size variables in the composite structural
terms permits the former to take away some explanatory power from the structural terms.
Second, combined with the evidence of insignificant time effects, the high goodness-of-fit
statistic R2 = 0.96 implies that there is not much room for improvement by introducing
time-varying country-specific characteristics. Furthermore, the small effect of eliminating
time-varying country fixed effects is reassuring because time-varying, country-specific border
barriers are not modeled in the underlying gravity regression (5) due to lack of data, and
might have an influence on the estimated fixed effects drawn from (5).
   Next, in the bottom panel of Table 5, we experiment by altering our sample and by
employing different data sets. Column ‘Internal’ reports estimates based on the subsample
                                                                                     k       k
for internal trade (i = j), where the dependent variable is constructed as the sum ηbi,t + θbi,t .
These results are stronger as compared to the main findings from column (1). The estimate
of γ̂1 = 0.952 (std.err. 0.004) is very close to 1, but still statistically different from 1, and the
R2 increases as well, suggesting that, on average, the structural gravity component explains
almost 97% of the variability in the sum of the directional fixed effects for each country.
Additional experiments, available by request, reveal that allowing for country-specific border


                                                 18
effects improves the fit of this specification significantly.
    Finally, in order to ensure that our results are not due to specific features of the data, we
employ an alternative data set covering trade between all Canadian provinces and territories,
the US and the rest of the world (ROW) for 28 sectors (19 goods and 9 services) during the
period 1997-2007.17 A notable advantage of this data set is that it enables us to test gravity
for services as well as goods. The specific geography and trade of Canada require a new
definition of bilateral trade costs, which we describe in Appendix C, but other than that,
we employ the same econometric procedures to obtain results. The new findings validate
structural gravity resoundingly.
    The simple R2 for the Canadian provincial goods and services trade fixed effects is 0.86,
very close to the 0.88 for world manufacturing trade that is reported in Section 2. Split
into services and goods the simple R2 s are respectively 0.95 and 0.82. The composite R2 ’s
formed by adding the explained variance from estimating (7) are 0.95 for goods and 0.99 for
services, with an overall composite R2 equal to 0.96. We also confirm that the time fixed
effects do not add much explanatory power but those effects vary across goods and services.
The composite R2 ’s constructed with time fixed effects only for goods increases to 0.86, while
the R2 for services remains 0.95. Inspection of the gravity data and estimates by year reveals
that the explanation for the effects of time effects for goods is driven by noisier data and
poor first-stage gravity performance in 1997.
    Compared to the 0.95 composite R2 for global manufacturing, the application of province/country
fixed effects to control for measurement error in (7) plays a larger role in improving goodness
of fit for Canadian provincial goods trade. This is due to the prominence of Rest of World
(ROW) trade in the gravity model estimated for Canada: specifically, the importer/product
fixed effect for ROW ϕkROW,t on the right hand side of (7) explains a sizable portion of the
variation in the dependent variable of (7).
    The various robustness checks of this section based on (8) and applied to Canadian
  17
     These data set is constructed by Anderson et.al. (2012) in an effort to investigate the effects of exchange
rates on Canadian trade. See Appendix C for further details.


                                                      19
trade confirm that relaxing the theoretical coefficient restrictions only marginally improves
goodness of fit. See the last three columns in the bottom panel of Table 5. In column ‘CAAll’,
which reports results across all sectors, the composite structural term explains by itself close
to 95% of the variability of the sum of the gravity fixed effects, and its coefficient estimate
of 1.187 (std.err. 0.005) is close to one. Decomposition into goods and services in columns
‘CAGoods’ and ‘CAServices’ respectively further confirms our findings. The goodness-of-fit
for services is a remarkable .97, while the corresponding statistic for goods is .87.



4     Conclusion

This paper provides a validation of structural gravity theory based on the close fit of es-
timated fixed effects to their theoretical counterparts. Popper’s riskiness criterion implies
that the close fit is impressive, a gold standard benchmark. Various robustness checks do
not shake this confidence. We conclude with drawing out the implications for future work.
    If structural gravity is to be relied upon, it strengthens the credibility of the wide range
of comparative static exercises that have become popular in the last decade following the
examples of Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) with one
sector versions. The reliability of disaggregated structural gravity reported on here extends
the potential range of such exercises.
    Reliance on structural gravity also enables powerful tools for dealing with missing or non-
credible data. Empirical research on disaggregated trade (and investment and migration)
flows is typically hampered by such data problems. Structural gravity and its estimated
bilateral resistances and fixed effects can, with sufficiently rich but incomplete data, gen-
erate projected bilateral flows, total shipments and expenditures and inward and outward
multilateral resistances and unobservable bilateral trade costs.




                                               20
References

Aikake, Hirotugu 1974. “A New Look at the Statistical Model Identification”, IEEE Trans-
actions on Automatic Control, 19 (6), 716-23.
Anderson, James E. 2011. “The Gravity Model”, Annual Review of Economics, 3, 133-60.
Anderson, James E. 1979. “A theoretical foundation for the gravity equation”, American
Economic Review 69, 106-116.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2004.“Trade Costs”, Journal of Economic
Literature, 42, 691-751.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to
the Border Puzzle”, American Economic Review, 93, 170-92.
Anderson, James E. and Yoto V. Yotov. 2010a. “The Changing Incidence of Geography,”
American Economic Review, vol. 100(5), pages 2157-86.
Anderson, James E. and Yoto V. Yotov. 2010b. “Specialization: Pro- and Anti-Globalizing,
1990-2002,” NBER Working Paper 14423.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H., 1989, “The Generalized Gravity Equation, Monopolistic Competi-
tion, and the Factor-Proportions Theory in International Trade,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 71, No. 1, February 1989, 143-153.
Cheng, I.-Hui and Howard J. Wall. 2002. “Controlling for heterogeneity in gravity models
of trade”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper vol. 1999-010C.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002), “Technology, Geography and Trade”, Econo-
metrica, 70: 1741-1779.
Feenstra, Robert. 2004. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer. 2000. “Non-Europe : The Magnitude and Causes of Market
Fragmentation in Europe”, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 136, 285-314.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz and Yona Rubinstein. 2008. “Estimating Trade Flows:
Trading Partners and Trading Volumes”, Harvard University, Quarterly Journal of Eco-

                                             21
nomics, 123: 441-487.
Mayer, T. and R. Paillacar and S. Zignago. 2008. “TradeProd. The CEPII Trade, Produc-
tion and Bilateral Protection Database: Explanatory Notes”, CEPII.
Mayer, T. and S. Zignago. 2006. “Notes on CEPIIs distances measures”, CEPII.
McCallum, John (1995) “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns,”
American Economic Review, 1995, 85(3), pp. 615-623.
Olivero, Maria and Yoto V. Yotov. Forthcoming. “Dynamic Gravity: Theory and Empirical
Implications,” Canadian Journal of Economics.
Popper, Karl (1963), Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge.
Routledge, London.
Redding, Stephen and Anthony J. Venables (2004), “Economic Geography and International
Inequality”, Journal of International Economics 62, 53-82.
Rose, Andrew K. (2004), “Do WTO members have more liberal trade policy? ”, Journal of
International Economics, 63, 209-235.
Santos Silva, Jorge and Sylvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity”, Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 88, No. 4: 641-658.




                                           22
Figure 1: Estimated Distribution of r




  Figure 2: Residual Fixed Effects




                 23
                                                   Table 1: Main Tests of Structural Gravity, by Product
                    k
     Dep. Var.     rij,t                    Food        BevTob   Textiles   Apparel   Leather   Wood       Furniture      Paper       Priniting
                     2
     A. Simple R                            .955         .841     .901       .708      .809     .884         .896          .958         .951
     B. Variance Decomposition
                )
             k σk −1 b k σk −1
     ln [(Pbj,t        (Πi,t )       ]      .377         .385      .261      .229      .207      .346         .314         .282          .371
           k      k
     ln [Ej,t Yi,t  ]                       .578         .456       .64      .478      .602      .538         .582         .676           .58
     C. Composite R2
     ψt , φi , ϕj                           .985         .904      .964      .909      .918      .956         .963         .982          .982
     ψt                                     .955         .843      .904      .725      .811      .886         .899         .958          .952
     D. Goodness-of-Fit (AIC)
     exp[(AICF E − AICST R )/2]
     ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Πb k )σk −1
                                 i           .87         .745      .691      .307       .67      .514          .51         .636           .71
           k      k
     ln [Ej,t Yi,t ]                        .424         .365      .536      .214      .564      .215         .187         .304          .202
     E. T-tests
     (|T | > |t|)                           .672         .506      .062       .04      .028      .971         .547         .63           .002


                      k




24
     Dep. Var. rij,t                      Chemicals PetrCoal RbbPlst Minerals Metals Machinery                 Electric  Transport     Other
     A. Simple R2                           .957      .623       .943       .958        .84       .908          .928        .903          .89
     B. Variance Decomposition
                )
             k σk −1 b k σk −1
     ln [(Pbj,t        (Πi,t )       ]      .233      .293       .289       .388       .239       .169          .212        .205         .176
           k      k
     ln [Ej,t  Yi,t ]                       .724      .331       .654        .57       .601       .739          .717        .698         .714
     C. Composite R2
     ψt , φi , ϕj                           .987      .802       .984        .99       .924       .977           .98        .973         .962
     ψt                                     .957      .628       .943        .96       .845        .91          .931        .905         .893
     D. Goodness-of-Fit (AIC)
     exp[(AICF E − AICST R )/2]
     ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Πb k )σk −1
                                 i          .676      .565       .712       .696       .777       .559          .354        .717         .487
           k      k
     ln [Ej,t Yi,t ]                        .452      .216        .37       .427       .471       .469          .236        .625         .436
     E. T-tests
     (|T | > |t|)                           .237      .966       .636       .409       .998       .444          .108         .65          .56
     This table reports the main tests of structural gravity by sector. In panel A, we report simple goodness-of-fit measures based on equation
     (6). In panel B, we decompose the variance into its multilateral resistance and size components. In panel C, we construct composite
     goodness-of-fit statistics based on specification (7). In panel D, we report relative AIC probabilities from alternative PPML specifications.
     Finally, in panel E, we report p-values from one-sample t-tests by sector. See text for details.
                                                  Table 2: Smell Tests of Structural Gravity, By Product
                          k       k
     A. Dep. Var. ηbi,t      + θbj,t         Food       BevTob      Textiles    Apparel     Leather      Wood      Furniture     Paper     Priniting
                              b k )σk −1
     ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Π i            0.926       0.915       0.893       0.788       0.824       0.886       0.923       0.941       0.930
                                           (0.001)**   (0.005)**   (0.002)**   (0.004)**   (0.004)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**
     N                                       20882       20746       20882       20882       20807       20882       20882       20882       20882
     r2                                      0.962       0.815       0.917       0.738       0.852       0.904       0.900       0.961       0.956
     Size vs. MRs
     ln(Pbk )σk −1 (Π
          j
                    b k )σk −1
                       i                     0.811       0.871       0.733       0.689       0.817       0.774       0.823       0.838       0.764
                                           (0.002)**   (0.007)**   (0.005)**   (0.009)**   (0.011)**   (0.004)**   (0.005)**   (0.003)**   (0.002)**
     ln Yik Ejk                              0.943       0.939       0.893       0.804       0.826       0.906       0.930       0.946       0.942
                                           (0.001)**   (0.005)**   (0.002)**   (0.004)**   (0.004)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**   (0.001)**   (0.001)**
     N                                       20882       20746       20882       20882       20807       20882       20882       20882       20882
     r2                                      0.967       0.817       0.921       0.751       0.852       0.910       0.901       0.962       0.965

                      k
     B. Dep. Var. ηbi,t
          k b k σk −1
     ln Yi (Πi )                             0.945       0.975       0.935       0.871       0.869       0.913       0.994       0.947       0.934
                                           (0.008)**   (0.051)**   (0.015)**   (0.032)**   (0.044)**   (0.016)**   (0.014)**   (0.009)**   (0.009)**
     N                                        290         288         290         290         289         290         290         290         290
     r2                                      0.975       0.820       0.938       0.779       0.842       0.944       0.932       0.975       0.973
     Size vs. MRs
     ln(Π
        b k )σk −1
          i                                  0.834       0.920       0.863       1.008       1.221       0.886       0.991       0.899       0.803




25
                                           (0.013)**   (0.068)**   (0.040)**   (0.074)**   (0.089)**   (0.024)**   (0.040)**   (0.024)**   (0.018)**
     ln Yik                                  0.978       1.022       0.936       0.872       0.839       0.922       0.995       0.954       0.967
                                           (0.008)**   (0.042)**   (0.016)**   (0.032)**   (0.049)**   (0.015)**   (0.017)**   (0.011)**   (0.010)**
     N                                        290         288         290         290         289         290         290         290         290
     r2                                      0.981       0.822       0.939       0.781       0.853       0.945       0.932       0.975       0.979

                         k
     C. Dep. Var. θbj,t
     ln Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1                     0.889       0.839       0.827       0.760       0.785       0.842       0.808       0.917       0.932
                                           (0.016)**   (0.037)**   (0.040)**   (0.034)**   (0.041)**   (0.024)**   (0.034)**   (0.021)**   (0.023)**
     N                                        286         286         286         286         286         286         286         286         286
     r2                                      0.937       0.899       0.847       0.779       0.865       0.869       0.819       0.903       0.899
     Size vs. MRs
     ln(Pbk )σk −1
          j                           0.690       0.769       0.463        0.525       0.519         0.541        0.437       0.607        0.612
                                    (0.019)** (0.048)** (0.071)** (0.070)** (0.063)** (0.045)** (0.080)** (0.074)**                      (0.037)**
     ln Ejk                           0.887       0.865       0.802        0.785       0.814         0.862        0.795       0.888        0.876
                                    (0.014)** (0.036)** (0.039)** (0.031)** (0.042)** (0.019)** (0.033)** (0.023)**                      (0.021)**
     N                                 286         286         286          286         286           286          286         286          286
     r2                               0.953       0.904       0.880        0.800       0.878         0.905        0.859       0.922        0.943
     Standard errors in parentheses. + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01. This table reports tests of structural gravity by sector. The dependent
     variables (see panel labels A., B., and C.) are functions of the directional, country-specific fixed effects estimates, obtained from panel
     PPML gravity estimations. All estimates are obtained with year fixed effects, which are omitted for brevity. The estimator is weighted
     least squares.
                                                 Table 3: Smell Tests of Structural Gravity, By Product
                          k       k
     A. Dep. Var. ηbi,t      + θbj,t       Chemicals   PetrCoal     RbbPlst    Minerals     Metals     Machinery    Electric   Transport     Other
                              b k )σk −1
     ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Π i            0.937       0.725       0.927       0.933       0.827       0.883       0.940       0.875       0.873
                                           (0.001)**   (0.004)**   (0.002)**   (0.001)**   (0.003)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**
     N                                       20882       20657       20882       20882       20882       20882       20882       20882       20882
     r2                                      0.961       0.716       0.955       0.958       0.897       0.926       0.930       0.928       0.910
     Size vs. MRs
     ln(Pbk )σk −1 (Π
          j
                    b k )σk −1
                       i                     0.862       0.587       0.803       0.759       0.617       0.937       0.924       0.891       0.912
                                           (0.004)**   (0.005)**   (0.003)**   (0.003)**   (0.008)**   (0.006)**   (0.006)**   (0.005)**   (0.009)**
     ln Yik Ejk                              0.935       0.775       0.924       0.968       0.817       0.883       0.942       0.875       0.872
                                           (0.001)**   (0.004)**   (0.002)**   (0.001)**   (0.003)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**   (0.002)**
     N                                       20882       20657       20882       20882       20882       20882       20882       20882       20882
     r2                                      0.959       0.729       0.956       0.969       0.906       0.927       0.932       0.929       0.911

                      k
     B. Dep. Var. ηbi,t
          k b k σk −1
     ln Yi (Πi )                             0.939       0.714       0.930       0.945       0.836       0.859       0.931       0.857       0.873
                                           (0.010)**   (0.027)**   (0.018)**   (0.009)**   (0.033)**   (0.018)**   (0.014)**   (0.015)**   (0.020)**
     N                                        290         287         290         290         290         290         290         290         290
     r2                                      0.974       0.772       0.964       0.965       0.911       0.932       0.952       0.935       0.928
     Size vs. MRs
     ln(Π
        b k )σk −1
          i                                  0.964       0.699       0.943       0.780       0.824       1.129       1.026       1.025       1.173




26
                                           (0.032)**   (0.041)**   (0.035)**   (0.026)**   (0.086)**   (0.052)**   (0.038)**   (0.041)**   (0.064)**
     ln Yik                                  0.937       0.721       0.929       0.999       0.836       0.854       0.919       0.853       0.856
                                           (0.011)**   (0.038)**   (0.020)**   (0.012)**   (0.034)**   (0.017)**   (0.017)**   (0.015)**   (0.018)**
     N                                        290         287         290         290         290         290         290         290         290
     r2                                      0.974       0.772       0.964       0.972       0.911       0.938       0.953       0.939       0.935

                         k
     C. Dep. Var. θbj,t
     ln Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1                     0.923       0.696       0.927       0.910       0.868       0.992       0.917       0.958       0.904
                                           (0.018)**   (0.058)**   (0.024)**   (0.023)**   (0.041)**   (0.021)**   (0.040)**   (0.022)**   (0.024)**
     N                                        286         286         286         286         286         286         286         286         286
     r2                                      0.921       0.555       0.895       0.918       0.896       0.905       0.802       0.915       0.879
     Size vs. MRs
     ln(Pbk )σk −1
          j                           0.670        0.394       0.513        0.635       0.458          0.432        0.372       0.525       0.420
                                    (0.053)** (0.061)** (0.036)** (0.027)** (0.072)** (0.071)** (0.112)** (0.057)** (0.070)**
     ln Ejk                           0.902        0.830       0.856        0.905       0.809          0.914        0.860       0.906       0.883
                                    (0.018)** (0.057)** (0.017)** (0.016)** (0.040)** (0.019)** (0.044)** (0.022)** (0.021)**
     N                                 286          286         286          286         286            286          286         286         286
     r2                               0.929        0.703       0.943        0.956       0.925          0.927        0.820       0.934       0.895
     Standard errors in parentheses. + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01. This table reports tests of structural gravity by sector. The dependent
     variables (see panel labels A., B., and C.) are functions of the directional, country-specific fixed effects estimates, obtained from panel
     PPML gravity estimations. All estimates are obtained with year fixed effects, which are omitted for brevity. The estimator is weighted
     least squares.
                     Table 4: Smell Tests of Structural Gravity, by Year
                 k       k
Dep. Var. ηbi,t     + θbj,t               ALL         1990        1994         1998           2002
ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Πb k )σk −1
                            i            0.891       0.907        0.905       0.884          0.877
                                       (0.001)**   (0.001)**    (0.001)**   (0.001)**      (0.001)**
cons                                     7.801       7.740        7.606       7.870          7.934
                                       (0.006)**   (0.014)**    (0.010)**   (0.013)**      (0.011)**
N                                       375440       68015       102225      102600         102600
r2                                       0.938       0.953        0.945       0.936          0.928
Size vs. MRs
ln(Pbjk )σk −1 (Π
                b k )σk −1
                  i                  0.775       0.815       0.788        0.768          0.749
                                   (0.001)** (0.002)** (0.003)** (0.002)**            (0.002)**
ln Yik Ejk                           0.898       0.911       0.908        0.893          0.890
                                   (0.001)** (0.001)** (0.001)** (0.001)**            (0.001)**
 cons                               -31.758     -32.504     -32.311      -31.544       -31.271
                                   (0.033)** (0.066)** (0.057)** (0.071)**            (0.062)**
N                                   375440       68015      102225       102600         102600
r2                                   0.940       0.954       0.947        0.938          0.931
Standard errors in parentheses. + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01. This table reports
tests of structural gravity pooled across all sectors. The first column reports estimates
across all years. The next four columns report estimates by year. The dependent variable
            k       k
is always ηbi,t + θbj,t . All estimates are obtained with sector fixed effects, which are omitted
for brevity. The estimator is weighted least squares. See text for further details.



                Table 5: Testing Structural Gravity, Robustness Analysis
                                               Main         Time       ProdTime      Country
       ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Π
                                b k )σk −1
                                  i            0.891        0.891        0.892        0.690
                                             (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)**    (0.001)**
       cons                                    7.801        7.700        7.874        9.919
                                             (0.006)**    (0.007)**    (0.010)**    (0.022)**
       Fixed Effects                             ψk         ψ k , δt       ψtk      ψtk , φi , ϕj
       N                                      375440       375440       375440       375440
       r2                                      0.938        0.939        0.940        0.958

                                          Internal     CAAll     CAGoods        CAServices
       ln Yik Ejk (Pbjk )σk −1 (Π
                                b k )σk −1
                                  i        0.952       1.187        1.219          1.124
                                         (0.004)** (0.005)** (0.007)**           (0.007)**
       cons                                7.287       3.067        2.868          -1.940
                                         (0.037)** (0.102)** (0.109)**           (0.024)**
       Fixed Effects                         ψk         ψk           ψk              ψk
       N                                    5142       18746        13832           4914
       r2                                  0.968       0.946        0.869          0.966
       Standard errors in parentheses. + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01. This table
       reports robustness tests of structural gravity. The dependent variable is always
         k
       ηbi,t + θbjk . The estimator is weighted least squares. See text for further details.




                                                         27
Appendix A: Main Data

This study covers 76 trading partners18 and 18 commodities aggregated on the basis of the
United Nations’ 3-digit International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) Revision 2.19
       Bilateral trade flows, measured in thousands of current US dollars, are from CEPII’s
Trade, Production and Bilateral Protection Database 20 (TradeProd) and the United Nation
Statistical Division’s COMTRADE Database.21 TradeProd is the primary source. The rea-
son is that TradeProd is based on CEPII’s Base pour l’Analyse du Commerce International
(BACI), which implements a consistent procedure for mapping the CIF (cost, insurance and
freight) values reported by the importers in COMTRADE to the FOB (free on board) values
reported by the exporters in COMTRADE.22 To further increase the number of non-missing
bilateral trade values, we add the mean of the bilateral trade flows from COMTRADE.23
       Industrial production data comes from two sources. The primary source is the United
Nations’ UNIDO Industrial Statistics database, which reports industry level output data
at the 3 and 4-digit level of ISIC Code (Revisions 2 and 3). In addition to UNIDO, we
  18
      Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Belgium-Luxembourg, Bolivia, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Germany, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt,
Spain, Estonia, Finland, France, United Kingdom, Greece, Guatemala, Hong Kong, China, Hungary, In-
donesia, India, Ireland, Iran, Italy, Jordan, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyz Republic, Korea, Kuwait,
Sri Lanka , Lithuania , Latvia, Morocco, Moldova, Mexico, Macedonia, Malta , Mongolia, Mozambique,
Mauritius , Malaysia , Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Panama, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rus-
sian Federation, Senegal, Singapore , El Salvador, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Tanzania, Ukraine, Uruguay, United States, Venezuela, South Africa.
   19
      The complete United Nations’ 3-digit International Standard Industrial Classification consists of 28
sectors. We combine some commodity categories when it is obvious from the data that countries report
sectoral output levels in either one disaggregated category or the other. Our commodity categories are: 1
Food; 2 Beverage and Tobacco; 3 Textiles; 4 Apparel; 5 Leather; 6 Wood; 7 Furniture; 8 Paper; 9 Printing;
10 Chemicals; 11 Petroleum and Coal; 12 Rubber and Plastic; 13 Minerals; 14 Metals; 15 Machinery; 16
Electric; 17 Transportation; and, 18. Other. A detailed conversion table between ours and the UN 3-digit
ISIC classification is available upon request.
   20
      For details regarding this database see Mayer, Paillacar and Zignago (2008).
   21
      We access COMTRADE through the World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) software,
http://wits.worldbank.org/witsweb/.
   22
      As noted in Anderson and Yotov (2010), in principle, gravity theory calls for valuation of exports at
delivered prices. In practice, valuation of exports FOB avoids measurement error arising from poor quality
transport cost data. For details regarding BACI see Gaulier and Zignago (2008).
   23
      We also experiment by just using the export data from COMTRADE and then assigning missing trade
values to the observations when only data on imports are available. Estimation results are very similar.




                                                    28
use CEPII’s TradeProd database,24 as a secondary source.25 10.8 percent of the original
data were missing after combining the two data sets. As output data are crucial for the
calculation of the multilateral resistance indexes, we construct the missing values. First, we
interpolate the data to decrease the missing values to 8.6 percent.26 Then, we extrapolate
the rest of the missing values using GDP deflator data, which comes from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators (WDI) Database.27
       We generate internal trade and also expenditure data by combining total shipments data
and export data. Internal trade volumes are calculated as

                                                             X
                                          Xiik = Yik −              Xijk .                             (14)
                                                             j6=i


For expenditures, we use
                                                 X
                                         Ejk =          (Xijk + Xjj
                                                                 k
                                                                    ).                                 (15)
                                                 i6=j

This procedures may result in negative expenditure and internal trade values, and does so for
1.7% of the internal trade observations and for 0.29 percent of the expenditures. In addition,
4.6 percent of the expenditures were missing.28 To construct the missing expenditure values,
first, we interpolate the data, then, we extrapolate the rest using CPI data from the WDI
Database.29
       To substitute for the negative internal trade and expenditure values, we use the average
internal trade to expenditure ratio for each country across all products. This has to be done
so that the expenditure shares and shipment shares remain consistent by modifying their
values in turn. Specifically, let K(i) denote the set of goods for which, for any country i,
  24
     TradeProd uses the OECD STAN Industrial Database as well as UNIDO’s IndStat Database.
  25
     We experiment with two output variables, based on the main data source, to obtain identical results.
  26
     Most of the missing observations are for the early years in the sample (1990-1993) and for the former
Soviet republics (e.g. Armenia, Estonia, Lithuania, etc.), which declared independence during the early 90s.
  27
     GDP deflator data were not available for Belgium-Luxembourg (BLX). We use Belgium’s GDP deflator
data to proxy for BLX.
  28
     Once again, most of the missing observations are for the early years in the sample (1990-1993) and for
the former Soviet republics, which declared independence during the early 90s.
  29
     CPI data were not available for Belgium-Luxembourg (BLX). We used Belgium’s CPI to proxy for BLX.


                                                        29
Xiik > 0. Aggregate across k ∈ K(i) to form the aggregate version of (14):


                                              0                              0
                                                      X
                                         Yi −                      Xijk = Xii .                            (16)
                                                   k∈K(i),j6=i



Similarly form ‘aggregate’ expenditure


                                          0
                                                     X
                                        Ei =                      (Xjik + Xiik ).                          (17)
                                                  k∈K(i),j6=i



From these restricted aggregates, form the average ratio of internal trade to expenditure:


                                                              0      0
                                                  sii = Xii /Ei , ∀i.                                      (18)


Finally, generate the value of inferred internal trade as


                                                          0
                                          Xiik = sii Ei , ∀k ∈
                                                             / K(i).                                       (19)


Using the generated values from (19), replace the values of internal trade where (14) gives
a non-positive value. Then use (14) again with the new data. For consistency of the data,
this means that the original data on Yik must be increased by the inferred value of internal
trade from (19).
       To construct the distance variable, we employ the methods from Mayer and Zignago
(2006).30 Their approach is appealing because it can be used to calculate consistently both
internal distances and bilateral distances.31 In addition, we follow Eaton and Kortum (2002)
to decompose distance effects into four intervals. The distance intervals, in kilometers, are:
  30
      Their procedure
                   P is based P on pop
                                   Head and Mayer (2000), using the following formula to generate weighted
distances: dij = k∈i pop    k
                         popi  l∈j popj dkl , where popk is the population of agglomeration k in trading partner
                                      l


i, and popl is the population of agglomeration l in trading partner j, and dkl is the distance between
agglomeration k and agglomeration l, measured in kilometers, and calculated by the Great Circle Distance
Formula. All data on latitude, longitude, and population are from the World Gazetteer web site.
   31
      In the few instances where we were not able to implement Mayer and Zignago’s procedure, we just took
the distance between the main cities from the two trading partners.



                                                          30
[0, 3000); [3000, 7000); [7000, 10000); [10000, maximum]. Data on other standard gravity
variables such as common language, common border, and colonial ties are from CEPII’s
Distances Database and from Rose (2004).32 We also generate a set of border dummy
variables, which take a value of one for internal trade.


Appendix B: Canadian Data

In order to apply our tests to Canadian trade, we employ a different definition of bilateral
trade costs (due to the specifics of Canada’s geography and trade), and we use different
data. Other than that, the econometric treatment and all other procedures are the same as
described in the main text.
       Canadian Trade Costs. Following Anderson et.al. (2012), we define bilateral trade costs
for a generic sector as:


                 t1−σ
                  ij  = eγ1 DIST AN CEij +γ2 CON T IG     P R P Rij +γ3 CON T IG P R STij +
                                                                                              ×

                           eγ4 SAM E   P ROVij +γ5 CAN +γ6 U SA+γ7 ROW
                                                                         .                             (20)


Here, DIST AN CEij is the logarithm of bilateral distance between trading partners i and
j. CON T IG P R P Rij takes a value of one when two provinces share a common border
and is set to zero otherwise. CON T IG P R STij is equal to one when a Canadian province
neighbors a US state. The next four variables are designed to capture regional borders.
SAM E P ROVij takes a value of one for intra-provincial trade, i.e. when i = j and i ∈ CA,
and it is equal to zero otherwise. Finally, CAN , U SA and ROW are indicator variables
designed to capture internal trade(international borders) for each of the three large regions
in our sample. For example, U SA is equal to one for trade within US, and it is equal to zero
otherwise. ROW and CAN are defined similarly. It should be noted that, given the compo-
sition of our sample, CAN takes a value of one for inter-provincial trade as well as for intra-
  32
    Rose’s (2004) original data covers the period up to the year of 2000, so we update some of the variables
in order to match the time span investigated in this study.


                                                     31
provincial trade, and it is equal to zero elsewhere. Thus, the estimate on SAM E P ROVij
would capture any deviation of intra-provincial trade above or below inter-provincial trade
and should be interpreted accordingly.33
       Canadian Data. Our data set extends the Canadian goods data from Anderson and Yotov
(2010a) and combines it with the Canadian services data from Anderson et.al. (2011). It
covers the period 1997-200734 for a total of 28 sectors (19 goods and 9 services). The trading
partners include 12 provinces and territories, USA and a rest of the world (ROW) aggregate.35
Without going into details,36 we note that our sources for trade flows data are Statistics
Canada, the United Nation Statistical Division (UNSD) Commodity Trade (COMTRADE)
DataBase and the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Statistics Canada offers data on
provincial output for both goods and services. Manufacturing output data for US and for the
rest of the world come from the United Nations’ UNIDO Industrial Statistics database and
from the World Database of International Trade (BACI), constructed by CEPII. Agricultural
and mining output data for US and ROW are from the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAOSTAT) and from the Energy Information Administration, respectively.
Finally, production data for US services come from the BEA and output for the rest of
the world is from the GTAP database. Production data limitations allowed us to construct
goods multilateral resistances for the period 1997-2003 and services multilateral resistances
for the period 2003-2007. This determined the samples for our gravity tests in Table 5.




  33
     Such a distinction cannot be made for the aggregate regions (US and ROW).
  34
     The first-stage gravity estimates employed in our tests are based on 2-year lags.
  35
     The Northwest Territories and Nunavut are combined, even though they are separate since April, 1999.
  36
     See the Data Appendix from Anderson and Yotov (2010a) for details on the goods data and Anderson
et.al. (2011) for details on the services data.


                                                   32
