                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CREDIT SUPPLY AND HOUSE PRICES:
                EVIDENCE FROM MORTGAGE MARKET SEGMENTATION

                                           Manuel Adelino
                                          Antoinette Schoar
                                           Felipe Severino

                                        Working Paper 17832
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17832


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




We thank Viral Acharya, Chris Foote, Gustavo Manso, Atif Mian, Sendhil Mullainathan, Chris Mayer,
David Scharfstein, Todd Sinai, Mathew Slaughter, Jeremy Stein, Bill Wheaton, and seminar participants
at the 2012 AEA Conference, CFS-EIEF Conference on Household Finance, Columbia Business School,
Dartmouth College, Duke University, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Federal Reserve Board, McGill University, MIT Finance Lunch, NBER Asset Pricing and Household
Finance meetings, Princeton University, University of California at Berkeley, Weimer School May
2012 Meetings, Western Finance Association 2012 Meetings, and Yale School of Management for
thoughtful comments. We also thank Andrew Cramond from Dataquick for help with the data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence from Mortgage Market Segmentation
Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino
NBER Working Paper No. 17832
February 2012, Revised March 2013
JEL No. D12,G10,R20

                                                 ABSTRACT

We show that easier access to credit significantly increases house prices by using exogenous changes
in the conforming loan limit as an instrument for lower cost of financing. Houses that become eligible
for financing with a conforming loan show an increase in house value of 1.16 dollars per square foot
(for an average price per square foot of 220 dollars) and higher overall house prices controlling for
a rich set of house characteristics. However, these estimated coefficients are consistent with a local
elasticity of house prices to interest rates that is lower than some previous studies proposed (below
10). In addition, loan to value ratios around the conforming loan limit deviate significantly from the
common 80 percent norm, which confirms that it is an important factor in the financing choices of
home buyers. In line with our interpretation, the results are stronger in the first half of our sample (1998-2001)
when the conforming loan limit was more important, given that other forms of financing were less
common and substantially more expensive. Results are also stronger in zip codes where personal income
growth is low or declining, and in regions with lower elasticity of housing supply.


Manuel Adelino                                          Felipe Severino
Duke University                                         MIT Sloan School of Management
Fuqua School of Business                                100 Main Street, E62-678
100 Fuqua Drive                                         Cambridge, MA 02142
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                   fseverin@mit.edu
manuel.adelino@gmail.com

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17832
1       Introduction
One of the central debates in finance is about the role of credit on the level of asset prices
and the creation of bubbles (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Allen and Gale, 1998; Bernanke
and Gertler, 2001; Kindleberger, Aliber, Solow, 2005; Mian and Sufi, 2009; Brunnermeier,
Eisenbach and Sannikov, 2012). A salient recent example is the US housing market: many
observers of the crisis have proposed that easy access to credit, and the reduced cost of
credit, were the central factors fueling the increase in housing prices as well as the subse-
quent reversal in house price growth when credit dried up (Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van
Nieuwerburgh, 2010; Hubbard and Mayer, 2008; Khandani, Lo, and Merton, 2009; Pavlov
and Wachter, 2010; Mayer, 2011). Proponents on the other side of the debate argue that
cheap credit alone cannot explain the house price boom and bust, and that other forces are
likely to have been at play (Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko, 2010).
    The key difficulty in measuring the effect of credit on the price of housing is establishing
the direction of causality between credit conditions and house price growth: On the one
hand, easier and cheaper access to credit might reduce borrower financing constraints and
increase total demand for housing, which in turn would lead to higher prices. On the other
hand, however, credit conditions might be responding to expectations of stronger housing
demand and, as a consequence, higher house prices. In this latter scenario, cheaper credit
is not the driver of house price increases, but a byproduct of increased demand for housing,
since housing as collateral becomes more valuable. As we see in the existing literature, it
has been very difficult to separate these two effects.1
    In this paper, we use annual changes in the conforming loan limit (CLL) as an instrument
for exogenous variation in the cost of credit, and in the availability of credit itself. The
CLL determines the maximum size of a mortgage that can be purchased or securitized by
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. This implicit (and since 2008, explicit) government support
for loans below the conforming loan limit provides easier access to credit for a wide range of
borrowers and reduces the cost of credit relative to jumbo loans. The difference in interest
rates between conforming loans and jumbo loans (those that are above the conforming limit)
is estimated to be up to 24 basis points in the 90’s and 2000’s (McKenzie, 2002; Ambrose,
LaCour-Little, and Sanders, 2004; Sherlund, 2008; Kaufman, 2012). Loutskina and Strahan
(2009, 2011) show that lenders screen borrowers for jumbo loans more intensely than they do
those that apply for conforming loans, which implies that mortgages below the conforming
loan limit are both cheaper and easier to obtain than above this limit.
    1
     A recent paper by Favara and Imbs (2011) uses branching deregulation in the 1990s to identify the causal
link between credit supply and house prices and finds that states where there is deregulation subsequently
experience larger house price increases.


                                                     2
    The key idea of our identification strategy is that changes in the conforming loan limit
(CLL) from one year to the next are exogenous not only to individual transactions, but also
to the conditions of local housing markets or the local economy, since this change is based
on the countrywide average appreciation in house prices. Our empirical approach involves
comparing transactions with a price that can be financed more easily using a conforming
loan, and houses that are more expensive and for which buyers need to obtain larger loans
to maintain the same loan-to-value ratio. We track houses in this price range in the year
that the limit is in effect as well as the subsequent year, once the limit is raised and all
houses in the sample become eligible for conforming loans. This setup enables us to cleanly
identify the effect of the cost and access to credit based on the exogenous variation of the
CLL and control for any overall trends in house prices.
    The threshold that we use to define houses that are “easy” to finance with a conforming
loan in a given year is the conforming loan limit divided by 0.8.2 By construction, buyers
of houses with a price below this threshold can get a conforming loan that makes up 80
percent of the price of the house, whereas, if the price of the house is above 125 percent of
the CLL, it can no longer be financed at 80 percent with a conforming loan.3 Above this
price threshold, borrowers either finance their home with an 80 percent first mortgage using
a jumbo loan (i.e. a loan above the CLL) at a higher interest rate, or, if they want to take
advantage of the lower interest rate below the CLL, they have to use savings or alternative
forms of financing to make a larger down payment.
    The intuition behind this estimation strategy is that transactions that fall just above
the threshold are harder to finance, and thus, their prices have been bid up less relative to
the underlying fundamentals of the house. An increase in the conforming loan limit should
affect this part of the house price distribution more strongly since it allows borrowers who
previously were not able to get attractive financing to enter this segment of the market.
Importantly, our sample includes all transactions in this price range independent of the
financing choice of each borrower. This excludes any bias from our estimates that might
come from the endogenous choice of financing of a specific transaction, e.g. richer people
who can afford to put more money down might also purchase houses that are more expensive
based on (unobservable) quality dimensions.
    We first confirm that the conforming loan limit has a significant impact on borrowers’
   2
       Kaufman (2012) uses this threshold for appraisal values to study the effect of the conforming status of
a loan on its cost and contract structure.
     3
       80 percent loan to value ratios (LTV) are widely used in the industry as an important threshold for
first lien mortgages. Loans with an LTV ratio below 80 are associated with more attractive terms and
conforming loans above 80 percent require private mortgage insurance in order to qualify for purchase by
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac (Green and Wachter, 2005).



                                                      3
choice of financing. The data shows that the norm in the mortgage market during this period
was to borrow at an LTV of exactly 0.8 (on average 60 percent of transactions are at an
LTV of 0.8). However, for houses that transact just above 125 percent of the CLL, a much
larger fraction of purchases are at an LTV below 0.8, since many borrowers choose to take
out a mortgage exactly at the conforming loan limit. This produces a large discontinuity
in the number of loans that are made at exactly the conforming loan limit, suggesting that
the CLL is an important determinant of mortgage finance. Borrowers that buy houses
with a price above the threshold of 125 percent of the CLL may choose a conforming loan
either because they are excluded from the jumbo loan market altogether, or because the
combination of a conforming loan and additional financing is a cheaper option. Whatever
the reason, these borrowers are de facto constrained in their choice of financing relative to
borrowers who buy houses at a price below 125 percent of the CLL.
    In our main analysis, we test the impact of easier access to credit on house prices
instrumented via the change in the conforming loan limit. We run differences-in-differences
regressions in which we compare transactions just above and just below the threshold of 125
percent of the CLL in the year that the limit is in effect, and in the subsequent year when
all of the transactions can obtain an 80 percent conforming loan.4 We use three different
dependent variables to capture the value of a property: (1) the value per square foot; (2)
the residuals of log of house prices from a hedonic regression using a large set of controls
for the underlying characteristics of the house, and (3) the residuals of the value per square
foot from similar hedonic regressions. 5
    We show that exogenous changes in the availability of credit due to changes in the CLL
have a significant effect on the pricing of houses that can be financed more easily using
a conforming loan. Specifically, we find that transactions in the “constrained” group of
borrowers, i.e. those with transaction values just above 125 percent of the CLL, are made
at lower values per square foot than those for the unconstrained group. We see a 1.16 dollar
discount per square foot for a mean value per square foot of 220 dollars and mean size of
1935 square feet. This difference is still significant but reduced to 0.65 dollars per square
   4
      This is the case for all years between 1998 and 2005. For example, the CLL in 1999 is USD 240, 000,
which gives a threshold of USD 240, 000/0.8 = 300, 000 for this year. This means that in the regression for
1999, we include houses priced at between 290, 000 and 310, 000 in the years of 1999 (the year the CLL is
in effect) and 2000. The CLL in the year 2000 was raised to 252, 700, so the new threshold for that year is
315, 875. Clearly, all the houses we included in the analysis for 1999 can be financed at 80 percent with a
conforming loan in the year 2000.
    5
      We run the hedonic regressions by year and by metropolitan statistical area (of which we have 10)
and we use the set of controls available from deeds registries data, which includes common variables such
as number of rooms and number of bedrooms, but also detail on the type of heating, architectural type,
building type, among many others (we discuss these controls in more detail in Section 3.2).



                                                    4
foot after we control for house characteristics, suggesting that part of the effect we find can
be accounted for by differences in the observable quality of houses above and below the
threshold. The effect is smaller (and often insignificant) in the second half of our sample
(2002-2005), which is the period when jumbo loans became cheaper and easier to obtain
(partly due to the increased ease with which they could be securitized) and also when second
lien mortgages became widely available (see Figure 1 in the Online Appendix). Both these
effects go in the direction of making the CLL less important in the latter part of the sample,
since borrowers above and below the threshold were getting similar access to finance.
    Given our estimate for the change in house prices due to changes in credit conditions, we
can compute the semi-elasticity of prices to differences in interest rates in the region close
to the threshold. As our measure of the cost differential faced by buyers above and below
the threshold, we use the differences in interest rates estimated in the prior literature of
10 to 24 basis points between conforming and jumbo loans. We obtain elasticity estimates
that range from a low end of 1.2 to an upper range of 9.1 depending on the period and the
exact estimate for the interest rate differential between jumbo and conforming loans that we
use for our calculations. Therefore, when we use exogenous variations in the ease of credit
conditions, we find elasticity estimates that are at the lower end of what has been previously
found in the literature. This suggests that it is of first order importance to control for the
endogenous decrease in the cost of capital in times when house price appreciation is high.
    One basic assumption underlying our analysis is that the CLL provides a significant
improvement in the cost of funding and in the access to finance for people buying houses
at a price just around the threshold. We expect this effect to be stronger when buyers face
other types of constraints at the same time, namely in terms of their income. To test this
intuition, we interact the changes in the CLL with the economic condition of the average
household in a neighborhood. We find that the effect of credit supply on value per square
foot is much stronger in zip codes and years that are below the 10th percentile of the income
growth for each individual regression. The point estimate for these areas shows that value
per square foot is 2.50 dollars higher in the year that a house becomes eligible to be financed
with a conforming loan. This is more than double the size of the average effect that we
found in the overall sample.
    We also test whether our instrument has an impact on the number of transactions
we observe above the threshold. There is no visible bunching of transactions around the
threshold of CLL divided by 0.8, suggesting that the supply of housing does not react
strongly to the CLL. In our empirical tests we find no significant effect of our instrument
on the quantity of houses transacted during the first half of the sample. We do see fewer
transactions above the threshold in the period 2002-2005, which may help explain the weaker


                                              5
response in prices that we find in the later period.
    Our estimation strategy allows us to estimate the causal effect of changes in credit
availability on the valuation of houses. Since house price levels differ across the various
states of the United States, the change in the CLL affects different parts of the housing
stock across areas depending on the price level of the area. This allows us to control for
the possibility that there are differential growth rates within the distribution of house types
across the country. For example, one concern would be that middle class families might
be the ones buying a certain type of house and, at the same time, have a different income
growth from other parts of the economy. Our instrument allows us to rule this out, because
the same “type” of house will have different prices depending on the part of the country in
which it is located. However, we do not observe the exact mechanism through which credit
conditions feed through to house prices. There are at least two alternative ways that credit
could affect prices: First, better access to credit increases demand for houses since more
people can now bid on properties, and as a result, we see an increase in the price of the
transactions. A second and alternative channel would be that borrowers who have easier
access to finance bargain less hard for a reduction in property prices relative to borrowers
who struggle to find financing. Importantly, in either of these channels a change in access
to finance is driving the change in borrower behavior and consequently house prices.
    We can rule out an alternative hypothesis related to a selection effect driving our results,
whereby buyers of houses “above the threshold” in the year that the conforming loan limit is
in effect are different along some unobservable characteristics from the other buyers. Several
features of our analysis make selection an unlikely explanation of the results. First, for a
selection hypothesis to be a true alternative to our explanation of the results, it would have
to involve arguments other than access to credit to explain why buyers were different above
and below the threshold. Second, these “special” buyers would both have to be better able
to deal with the reduced access to credit (potentially because they are wealthier or have
higher income) and bargain harder for houses. It is unclear why wealthier borrowers should
pay less for a similar house than poorer borrowers. If wealthier people bought higher quality
houses and we did not observe these differences, these unobservable characteristics would
create bias in the opposite direction. Third, our identification strategy would require that
the selection effect change each year parallel to the change in the size of the conforming
loan limit, which is very unlikely. Finally, to help further rule out this selection hypothesis,
we run our main regressions excluding borrowers that choose LTVs below 80 percent in
the year that the CLL is in effect. If selection was the explanation of the results, these
transactions should be by “wealthy” borrowers driving the results. We find that the results
do not change materially when we exclude this subset of transactions.


                                               6
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses related literature and
the user cost model. Section 3 describes our data and the identification strategy. In Section
4, we lay out the regressions results and robustness checks of our main analysis. Section 5
discusses the findings and concludes.


2     The User Cost Model
In this paper, we are interested in estimating the impact of changes in credit conditions
on the price of housing. The existing literature has focused on different versions of the
user-cost model of Poterba (1984) to draw conclusions about the role of interest rates and
other costs of owning for house prices. In this model, agents are indifferent between owning
and renting if the housing market is in equilibrium, where the mortgage interest rate is the
main determinant of the cost of owning. Below, we show that different assumptions yield
very different conclusions about the role of interest rates in driving the cost of housing and
highlight why our estimate of the impact of the cost of credit on prices is an important
contribution to this debate. We follow the notation in Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko
(2010) to describe the basic elements of the user cost model. Renting a property involves
paying rent equal to Rt in each period. Owning a property, on the other hand, includes
making a down-payment θ that is a proportion of the price of the house Pt and obtaining a
mortgage that is rolled over each period, such that principal is never paid down completely.
The borrower then pays interest on the mortgage at a rate rt that is deflated by the relevant
tax rate φ, as well as property taxes and maintenance costs equal to τ that both grow at
a rate g. The model assumes that individuals have a private discount factor of ρt . If we
assume that market interest rates and private discount rates are constant and equal to each
other, we can write the indifference condition for users as:

                                    Rt
                                       = (1 − φ)r − g + τ                                   (1)
                                    Pt

This is shown in Glaeser et al (2010) and is similar to what is presented in Hubbard and
Mayer (2008) as well as a simplified version of the user cost in Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai
(2005). If the assumptions of this model hold, changes in the user cost (the right-hand side
of the equation) should lead to changes in the price to rent ratio according to this formula.
For example, if the user cost is 5 percent, then the price of a house should be about 20 times
its market rent. In such a world, a drop of 1 percentage point in mortgage rates would lead
to a decline of (1−τ ) in the user cost, or 0.75 if we assume a marginal tax rate of 25 percent.
The price to rent ratio would then be 23.5, an increase in the price of 17.5 percent. This

                                               7
is the magnitude of the elasticities proposed in Himmelberg et al (2005), and in Hubbard
and Mayer (2008). Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010) dispute some of the simplifying
assumptions in the model above, and show that a more realistic model can produce much
lower elasticities of prices to interest rates. In particular, if private discount rates are not
the same as market rates, then changes in interest rates wont change the way users discount
future expected house price appreciation. This change alone can reduce the elasticity to
just 8, instead of the initial 17.5. Glaeser et al (2010) propose other mechanisms through
which the elasticity could be substantially reduced, namely mean reverting interest rates,
which means borrowers anticipate having to sell a home at a time when rates are higher,
or the possibility of prepaying a mortgage, which again lowers the predicted elasticity. Our
econometric approach allows us to more carefully identify the magnitude of the change in
house prices due to changes in the average cost of financing, since we look at exogenous
movements in the cost of capital for home buyers. Our empirical results provide estimates
for the numerator of the elasticity calculation. In Section 4.4, we discuss the range of
elasticities that are consistent with our results.


3     Data and Methodology
The dataset we use in this paper contains all the ownership transfers of residential properties
available in deeds and assessors records for the cities that are covered by Dataquick. Our
dataset spans 11 years, from 1998 to 2008, and contains all transactions recorded on the
deeds registries for seventy-four counties in ten metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) -
Boston, Chicago, DC, Denver, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Diego, and
San Francisco. We limit our attention to transactions of single-family houses, which account
for the large majority (approximately 78 percent) of all observations.
    Each observation in the data contains the date of the transaction, the amount for which
a house was sold, the size of the first mortgage, and an extensive set of variables about the
property itself. These characteristics include the property address, interior square footage,
lot size, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, total rooms, house age, type of house
(single-family house or condo), renovation status, and date of renovation. Additional, more
detailed characteristics, include the availability of a fireplace, parking, the architectural and
structural style of the building, the type of construction, exterior material, availability of
heating or cooling, heating and cooling mechanism, type of roof, view, attic, basement, and
garage. We describe the procedure for cleaning the raw data received from Dataquick in
the Online Appendix to the paper.



                                               8
3.1     Summary Statistics
The sample that we use for this paper contains 3.9 million transactions of single-family
houses that are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. We can see in Panel A of Table 1 that
the average transaction value in our sample is 308,520 dollars with a standard deviation of
123,930 dollars. The average size of the houses in the cleaned dataset is 1,735 sqft, and the
houses have, on average, 3 bedrooms and 2 bathrooms. The average loan to value is 0.81
(including only the first mortgage for each transaction), and the median LTV is 80 percent.
The average value per square foot is 194 dollars with a standard deviation of 92 dollars per
square foot (first row of Panel B).
    Table 1 also shows the summary statistics for the restricted sample we use in the regres-
sions in the final three columns. For the restricted sample6 , the average price for each house
is higher than in the whole dataset, the average value per square foot is 220 dollars with
a standard deviation of 93 dollars per square foot, given that this subsample includes only
houses that are close to the conforming loan limit. This is consistent with the fact that the
conforming loan limit was set to cover substantially more than 50 percent of the mortgages
made every year (Acharya, Richardson, Nieuwerburgh, White, 2011). These houses are
also, on average, larger and have more bedrooms and bathrooms than the whole Dataquick
sample.
    Panel A of Table 2 shows marked differences in the summary statistics for each of the ten
MSAs included in our data. The table shows that San Francisco is the metropolitan area
with the highest valuation, with an average house price of 384 thousand dollars. Denver and
Las Vegas represent the areas with the lowest valuation, with an average of approximately
250 and 262 thousand dollars respectively. When we compare values per square foot, we
get a similar picture, namely San Francisco is the area with the highest valuation with an
average of 266 dollars per square foot, and Las Vegas is the area with the lowest valuation
with an average of 137 dollars per square foot.
    Table 2 Panel B shows the evolution of prices through time. Here we see the increase
in house prices from an average of 240 thousand dollars in 1998 to a peak of 366 thousand
dollars in 2006, as well as the increase in the volume of transactions over the same period.
The increase in prices and volume is linked to an increase in volatility. The standard
deviation of the transactions increased from 102 thousand dollars in 1998 to 122 thousand
dollars in 2006. A similar pattern can be observed for the value per square foot measure,
where standard deviation is 51 dollars per square foot in 1998, and increases to 106 dollars
per square foot in 2006. Finally, the loan to value average (including only the first mortgage)
    6
     In this case, transactions that are used as control for one year, and treatment in the following period, are
duplicated to reflect the statistics of the regression sample, the augmented data set has 262,671 observations

                                                       9
is stable both across MSAs and through time at around 0.8.


3.2       Hedonic Regression
One of the advantages of using deeds registry data is the richness of the information provided
on the property characteristics, which allows us to account for price differences between
houses that can be attributed to observable features. Specifically, we will be able to assess
whether the price impact we observe due to the changes in the conforming loan limit can be
attributed to differences in the quality of the houses, or whether these differences are there
even after accounting for quality.
    In order to distinguish between these two explanations, we estimate hedonic regressions
of value per square foot and log of house price on a number of house characteristics, and
estimate the residuals for each of these two left-hand side variables (which we denote by
LHSi ). Specifically, we estimate the following regressions by MSA and by year:

                              LHSi = γ0 + ΓXi + monthi + zipcodei + εi

    We use both the price of a transaction as well as the value per square foot as our
dependent variables. By estimating these regressions by year and by MSA, we allow the
coefficients on the characteristics to vary along these two dimensions. We also use monthly
indicator variables to account for seasonality in the housing market, as well as zip code
fixed effects. The set of controls Xi is a similar set of controls to that used in Campbell,
Giglio, and Pathak (2010) with some additional characteristics. The controls include square
footage, high and low square footage dummies, the size of the lot, number of bedrooms and
bathrooms, and a number of indicators for interior and exterior house characteristics (eg.
fireplace, style of the building, etc.). We describe which variables are included, as well as
the detail of the construction of each variable, in the Online Appendix to the paper.
    The estimated R2 of each of these regressions (80 in total for each of the two left-hand side
variable–10 MSAs in 8 years) is between 40 and 60 percent for the price of the transaction,
and 50 to 70 percent when we use value per square foot as a dependent variable7 .
    Summary statistics for the residuals from the hedonic regressions for the whole sample
are shown in Panel B of Table 1. The average residuals are, by construction, zero. The
standard deviation of the errors is about 42 dollars per square foot, and 0.17 thousand
dollars for the log of the price of the house. The hedonic regressions are estimated on the
whole clean sample8 , so when we restrict our attention to the regression sample, the average
   7
       Unreported regressions.
   8
       Please see the Online Appendix for a detailed description of what is included in this subset of the data.


                                                       10
error no longer has to be zero. Indeed, for the regression sample, the average residual
from the hedonic regressions for the value per square foot is positive at 5.3 dollars, and the
average error for the log of transaction value of the house is 0.05 dollars (last three columns
of Panel B of Table 1). The standard deviation of the residuals for the regression subsample
is similar in magnitude to what we obtain for all the transactions.


3.3     Empirical Approach
3.3.1    Identification Strategy

To identify the effect of changes in credit conditions on house prices, we restrict our analysis
to two groups of buyers who all buy houses in a tight price range, but differ in the financing
available to them. The sample for our regressions is made up of houses that transact in
a band around 125 percent of each year’s conforming loan limit, as well as houses in the
subsequent year in the same price range. Specifically, we divide houses into two groups:
houses below the threshold of 125 percent of the year’s CLL (i.e. transactions that fall
between 125 percent of CLL and 125 percent of CLL minus USD 10,000) and houses above
that threshold that transact between 125 percent of CLL and 125 percent of CLL+10, 000.
By construction, in the year that the conforming loan limit is in effect, houses above the
threshold of 125 percent of the CLL cannot be financed at 80 percent using a conforming
loan, whereas the houses below the threshold can be financed. Thus, home buyers that
bid for houses priced above 125 percent of CLL cannot finance a full 80 percent of the
transaction with the cheaper and more easily available conforming loans. In the subsequent
year, the CLL is raised and both groups of transactions can be financed at 80 percent with
a conforming loan.9 Our sample includes all transactions in this price range, independent
of the mortgage choice made by each buyer. This way, our estimates are not biased by the
endogeneity of the choice of financing of each specific transaction.
    The identification strategy is best understood through an example. Consider the year
1999: In that year, the conforming loan limit (CLL) for single-family houses was USD
240, 000. The corresponding threshold for house prices that we use for this year is 300, 000
(240, 000/0.8 or, equivalently, 1.25 ∗ 240, 000). In this year, the group of houses “above the
threshold” have prices between USD 300, 000 and USD (300, 000 + 10, 000) = 310, 000 and
houses “below the threshold” have a transaction price between USD (300, 000 − 10, 000) =
290, 000 and USD 300, 000 (those that transact at exactly USD 300, 000 are included in
   9
     While this was no longer true for the years after 2006, in all cases between 1998 and 2005, the limit
increases enough from year to year to make up 80 percent of the price of the transactions we have in the
sample.



                                                   11
this second group). For the purposes of our main regressions, we track these two groups of
houses from 1999 to 2000, where 1999 is the year in which the CLL is in effect and 2000 is
the year in which all these transactions could be bought using a conforming loan at a full
80 percent LTV. In fact, the CLL changed in 2000 to USD 252, 700, so the threshold of 125
percent of CLL was now USD 315, 875 and even our “above the threshold” group for 1999
is now eligible to get an 80 percent LTV conforming loan.
    One important assumption in our analysis is that borrowers in the group “above the
threshold” of 125 percent are constrained in their choice of financing. In order to stay at an
LTV of 0.8, they have to take a jumbo loan and these have been found to be more expensive
by between 10 and 24 basis points relative to conforming loans (McKenzie, 2002; Ambrose,
LaCour-Little, and Sanders, 2004; Sherlund, 2008; Kaufman, 2012). Alternatively, they can
also borrow up to the CLL and then cover the rest of the house price with savings or other
funding, which means having a first mortgage LTV of less than 80 percent. This additional
source of funding is likely substantially more expensive relative to the conforming mortgage
rate. For some borrowers, this may, in fact, be the only option, as they may be excluded
from the jumbo market altogether because of more careful screening of jumbo loans done
by originating banks (Loutskina and Strahan, 2009, 2011). Whether they choose a jumbo
loan or they make up the difference using other sources of financing, these borrowers have
a higher average cost of capital than the buyers below the threshold. Figure 1 shows the
frequency of transactions by price and choice of first mortgage (both in USD 10,000 bins).
The figure shows that the most frequent choice on the part of borrowers is to have an LTV
of exactly 80 percent (that is, the large mass along the diagonal of the figure). The main
exception to this rule occurs exactly at the conforming loan limit, where a significant mass
of borrowers chooses an LTV below 0.8 by sticking to a conforming loan (in 2000 the limit
was USD 252,700, and in 2004 it was 333,7000). In unreported analyses, we find that in the
year in which the CLL is in effect, about 45 percent of the houses below the threshold in
our sample are bought with an LTV of exactly 80 percent, whereas, for houses above this
boundary just 19 percent of borrowers pick 80 percent LTVs (which for these transactions
means using a jumbo loan). Additionally, on average 55 percent of the transactions just
above the threshold are financed using a conforming loan, which means having an LTV
lower than 80 percent. These borrowers end up with an LTV of 77-79.5 percent, which is
a very infrequent choice anywhere else in the distribution. Again, these borrowers might
have a lower LTV because they choose to stay below the CLL due to the cost of the loan,
or because they are excluded from the jumbo market altogether. Whatever the reason, this
group of borrowers is “constrained” in the set of options available for financing their house.



                                             12
3.3.2   Empirical Specification

Our main regressions estimate the size of the effect of the constraint imposed by the con-
forming loan limit on the valuation of transactions made just above the threshold of 125
percent of the CLL. We run differences-in-differences regressions year-by-year with one in-
dicator variable for houses priced above the conforming loan limit divided by 0.8, another
indicator for the year in which the CLL is in effect, and an interaction of these two indicator
variables. We also include ZIP code fixed effects in all regressions, so our estimates do not
reflect differences between neighborhoods, but rather variation within zip codes.
    The sample for each year-by-year regression includes houses within a USD 10,000 band
around the conforming loan limit in the year in which the limit is in force, as well as the
subsequent year. This implies that the “Above the Threshold” indicator variable takes
a value of 1 if the price at which a house transacts is greater than 125 percent of the
conforming loan limit of a certain year, and less than that amount plus 10,000 dollars. This
same variable is a 0 for transactions between 125 percent of the CLL and 125 percent of the
CLL minus 10,000 dollars. The “Year CLL” indicator variable is a 1 in the year in which
the CLL is in effect for each regression, and a 0 in the subsequent year. We use a tight
band around the threshold so that all transactions in the year after the limit is in effect are
eligible for an 80 percent LTV conforming loan. We thus have a group of transactions that
is “easy to finance and another one that is “hard to finance in the year that the limit is in
effect, but all transactions in the sample are “easy to finance once the limit is raised.
    We run regressions of the following form:



V aluation measurei = β0 +β1 1AboveT hreshold +β2 1Y ear CLL +β3 1Above   T hreshold×Y ear CLL +γZIP +εi


    We estimate this regression for each year between 1998 and 2005. We cannot include
2006 and 2007 in our estimates because the conforming loan limit did not change after
2006 in our data (house prices dropped and the administration left the limit unchanged).
After we obtain β1 , β2 , and β3 for all 8 years (1998-2005), we estimate Fama-MacBeth
averages (Fama and MacBeth, 1973) of these coefficients and obtain the standard errors of
this average by using the standard deviation of the estimated coefficients and dividing it by
the square root of the number of coefficients.
    We should point out that our approach is not a regression discontinuity design, but
rather differences-in-differences for each pair of years. There are a couple of reasons for this:
First, the threshold that we use does not imply a sharp discontinuity in the ease of financing
a home. For a house just one dollar above the threshold, a homebuyer only has to come up

                                               13
with one additional dollar of equity (and still obtain a conforming mortgage), which means
the total cost of financing the house is almost unchanged. As we move progressively away
from the threshold, transactions become harder to finance. For our differences-in-differences
estimator to be valid, all we need is that houses above the threshold are somewhat harder
to finance, though not necessarily discontinuously so.
    The second reason for not using a regression discontinuity design is that in the year that
the limit is in effect, homebuyers choose to buy houses above or below the threshold, i.e.
the position with respect to the limit is not exogenous. On the contrary, our differences-in-
differences specification uses the exogenous change in the conforming loan limit to compare
a group of transactions that are above the limit in a year, but below in the next with a
group of transaction that are always below the limit, achieving a clean identification of the
effect of credit availability on house prices.

3.3.3    Differences in Financing Choices

As we pointed out above, the equivalent to a first stage in our empirical strategy is to show
that the changes in the conforming loan limit have a significant effect on the financing choices
of borrowers. In Figure 1 we can see the importance of both the 80 percent LTV rule, as
well as the conforming loan limit, in determining financing choices for the whole distribution
of transactions. In Figure 2 we focus on the groups of transactions that we include in the
regressions. The first panel tracks transactions up to USD 10,000 below 125 percent of the
conforming loan limit in each year, whereas the second panel includes transactions up to
USD 10,000 above the threshold. We show the total number of transactions (for all years
between 1998 and 2006) in each month during the year prior to the limit being in effect,
in the year that the limit is valid, and in the subsequent year. We also break down the
transactions by the choice of LTV - the transactions at the bottom of each panel have an
LTV below 75 percent, the second group includes transactions with an LTV between 75
percent and 79.5 percent, the third has transactions with LTV=80 percent, and the top
group has all the transactions with an LTV above 80.1 percent. The main message from
Figure 2 is that in the year that the CLL is in effect, the composition of financing choices
by borrowers differs very significantly, with the 80 percent group becoming very prominent
for the transactions below 125 percent of the CLL, whereas it is small for the transactions
above the threshold. At the same time, the borrowers who stick with a conforming loan and
buy houses above 125 percent of the CLL become an important fraction of all borrowers
(they have an LTV between 75 and 79.5 percent).10 In the year after the limit is in effect,
  10
     The first picture for the group below 125 percent of the CLL also shows a noticeable fraction of
borrowers with an LTV between 75 and 79.5 percent in the year before the CLL is in effect. This is because

                                                   14
the choice of LTV across the two groups becomes indistinguishable.
    In Table 3, we present the effect of the changes in the conforming loan limit on the
financing choices made by the borrowers included in the sample of our main regressions. In
this table, we are verifying what we see in the pictures, namely that borrowers on average
end up with lower LTVs when they buy houses above the threshold of 125 percent of CLL.
Results for the effect of the CLL on financing choices are shown in Table 3. We find that
LTVs are, on average, 0.3 to 0.7 percentage points lower for the group of transactions that
happen above the threshold of 125 percent of the CLL in the year that the limit is in effect.
This effect is statistically and economically significant given how little variation there is in
the modal choice of LTV of borrowers. The second panel on Table 3 shows that borrowers
also obtain, on average, smaller loans in the year that the limit is in effect and when the
price of the house is above the threshold. The difference in log loan amount is, on average,
0.0056 to 0.0088 dollars, and based upon the findings in our main results, we conjecture
that it is the fact that borrowers obtain smaller first mortgages that leads to the difference
of approximately 1.16 dollars per square foot (for an average value per square foot of 220
dollars).

3.3.4    Differences in the Number of Transactions

There are several reasons to expect quantities to change due to differential ease in access to
credit, including different levels of down-payment (Stein, 1995) or sellers waiting for buyers
to obtain better credit conditions (Genesove and Mayer, 1997). In fact, unless the supply
elasticity of houses is very low (or zero), we expect the price effect due to a change in the
demand for housing to be accompanied by a change in the number of transactions.
    As discussed in Section 3.3.2, we do not use a regression discontinuity approach to
address the question of the change in the quantity of transactions. Figure 3 confirms that
this would produce no significant result. This figure shows the number of transactions
relative to the threshold in each year. The figure is centered at “0, i.e. the transactions
at exactly 125 percent of the CLL. The figure shows that there is no discontinuity in the
number of transactions above and below the threshold. We confirmed this result by splitting
the sample into old and new houses, different MSAs, and in the first half and second half
of each year (all unreported).
    Given that a regression discontinuity would not be appropriate in our setting, we use
these transactions were not eligible for a conforming loan at an 80 percent LTV in the year before the new
limit was in effect and were, in general, just slightly above that threshold. This is thus a reflection of the
same phenomenon we see for the group above 125 percent of the CLL in the year that the new limit is in
place.



                                                     15
a setup similar to our main regressions to look for changes in the number of transactions
above and below the threshold. We consider the difference in the share of transactions in our
sample that fall above and below the threshold in the year that the limit is in effect and in
the subsequent year in a differences-in-differences setup. This test is equivalent to a T-test
for the mean of the variable “Above Threshold” that compares the average of this variable
in the year that the limit is in effect and in the subsequent year. If our instrument affects
the quantity of transactions, we should see an increase in the share of observations above the
threshold when the limit is raised, as access to credit become easier for those transactions.
We show in Table 4 that this test reveals no changes in the share of transactions above
and below the threshold for the first part of our sample (1998-2001), and that there is a
statistically significant effect for the second part of the sample. This effect means that the
share of transactions above the threshold is approximately 50 basis points lower in the year
that the conforming loan limit is in effect during the period 2002-2005. This shows that
the effect of cheaper credit provided by conforming loans is reflected only on house prices
in the first part of our sample, and that in the second part of the sample, it impacts both
quantities and prices, i.e. supply elasticity of houses seems to have been higher in the second
part of the sample. This, along with the reasons we give in Section 4.1 on the availability of
second liens and jumbo loans, may help explain why the effect we find on prices is smaller
relative to the earlier years (when the quantity response was not there).


4     Access to Credit and House Prices
4.1    Main Regression Results
We present the results for our canonical specification in Table 5. This table presents Fama-
MacBeth coefficients from year-by-year regressions, as described before in Section 3.3.2. The
coefficient of interest in Panel A of Table 5 is that on the interaction variable, and it shows
that houses above the threshold of CLL/0.8 transacted at a value per square foot that was
lower by about 1.16 dollars in the year that the CLL was in effect. The results are stronger
for the first half of the sample, where the point estimate is -1.55 dollars per square foot for
this set of transactions.
    The other coefficients on the regressions for value per square foot are consistent with what
we know about house prices over this period. First, houses that are above the threshold of
125 percent of CLL (i.e. the more expensive houses in the regression sample) are associated
with a higher average value per square foot. In unreported analyses, we find that more
expensive houses are generally associated with a higher value per square foot (i.e. price


                                              16
rises quicker than house size in the whole distribution of transactions), and here we find
that this is also the case for the regression sample. Also, the “Year CLL” dummy variable
is associated with a strong negative effect, reflecting the strong increase in house valuations
that we saw in this period in the US. Given that the year in which the CLL is in effect is
always the “pre” year in the regressions, we expect those transactions, on average, to be
associated with a lower value per square foot.
    In Panels B and C we use the residuals from the regressions we described in Section 3.2
as the dependent variable to account for differences in quality between houses. The results
are qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to the ones we present in Panel A. In Panel
B we are using the residuals of a regression of log of house price on a set of characteristics,
and we find a point estimate of -0.0017 that translates to residual being lower by 620 dollars
for houses above the threshold of 125 percent of the CLL when the CLL binds, considering
an average transaction value of 371,340 dollars. This suggests that transactions that cannot
be financed at 80 percent with conforming loans are made at lower prices even after we
control for a rich set of house characteristics.
    Similarly in Panel C of Table 5, we confirm that even when we use the value per square
foot as a dependent variable but control for house quality, the interaction term is significant
and economically large even though the point estimate of 0.65 dollars for houses above the
threshold is slightly lower than the results in Panel A where we do not adjust for house
quality. The difference between the point estimate of 1.16 dollars of Panel A and 0.65
dollars in this specification indicates that houses above the limit are of somewhat worse
quality than those below the limit in the year that the limit is in effect.
    We also show that the estimated effect of the conforming loan limit on house prices is
stronger in the first half of the sample than in the second half. This result holds for all three
left-hand side variables. This is in line with our expectations, given that borrowers had
easier access to second lien loans after 2002 (we show the evolution of the use of second liens
in Figure 1 of the Online Appendix). Additionally, more borrowers use jumbo loans, which
may reflect a reduction of the cost differential of this type of loan relative to conforming
loans, and an increase in the ease of access to this type of loan, possibly driven by an
increased ease of securitization of these loans.


4.2    Credit Supply and Income
We now turn to how the effect of credit supply on house prices changes with the growth in
income in a zip code. To do this, we obtain data on zip code level average household income



                                               17
each year from 2000 to 2007 from Melissa Data.11 We create a new variable that is a “1” if
a zip code has negative nominal average income growth from one year to the next, and “0”
otherwise. We then run similar regressions to what we did before (year-by-year), adding
an interaction between our previous variables and this new zip code level “Negative Income
Growth” variable. Looking at the coefficient on the triple interaction term (negative income
growth, the year that the CLL is in effect, and being above 125 percent of the CLL) allows
us to identify how the effect of credit supply differs in times of positive and negative income
growth. Our hypothesis is that the effect of credit supply is stronger in times of negative
income growth, as households in a certain zip code are more likely to be constrained and
there is likely to be less competition for housing, which increases the probability that a seller
sells to a constrained buyer.
    We show the results for these regressions in Table 6. In the first column of Table 6 we
repeat our main regressions for the period 2001-2005 only, as this is the period for which we
were able to construct the income growth indicator variable. The results are consistent with
those in Table 5. In the second column of Table 6 we show Fama-MacBeth coefficients from
the regressions with the income growth interaction term. The triple interaction terms show
that the effect of credit supply on value per square foot is significantly stronger in zip codes
and years that are below the 10th percentile of income growth for the individual regression.
The point estimate shows that value per square foot is 1.55 dollars lower in the year that
the conforming loan limit is in effect for houses above 125 percent of the limit when income
growth is low in a zip code. We also find that the main effect from our regressions in Table
5 is quantitatively similar to before, implying that the simple inclusion of ZIP code level
income does not change any of our main results.
    In the Online Appendix we plot the distribution of value per square foot for ZIP codes of
different income levels. Those pictures also suggest that the distribution of value per square
foot is affected by the conforming loan limit in ZIP codes in the lowest quartile of the income
distribution. In particular, the average value per square foot is monotonically increasing for
up to conforming loan limit threshold, and from this point onwards the distribution becomes
flat. This pattern is not visible for zip codes with higher median incomes.


4.3       Robustness and Refinements
4.3.1      Differential House Price Trends

We want to rule out that our results are driven by differences in secular trends between
houses above and below the threshold of CLL/0.8. Specifically, if more expensive houses
  11
       Melissa Data obtains this data from the IRS and provides it in an easy-to-read format.

                                                     18
have, on average, lower house price growth from one year to the next relative to less expensive
houses, we might obtain the results reported in Table 5, but we might also obtain similar
results for samples with transactions above and below other arbitrary thresholds.
    In order to address whether the effect that we find is indeed the product of the true
conforming loan limits and not due to different trends along the distribution of houses, we
run the same regressions described in Section 3.3.2 for “placebo” loan limits. We do this by
shifting the true conforming loan limit in USD 10,000 steps from the true value each year.
We start at CLL-100,000 and move 20 steps until we reach CLL+100,000. For each of these
21 tests, we first define the “shift” relative to the true conforming loan limits, and then we
change the limits for all years by that amount. For example, when we are changing all the
limits by -20,000, this means that the “placebo” limit for 1999 is 220,000 dollars instead of
the true 240,000 dollars, the “placebo” limit for 2000 is 232,700 instead of 252,700, and so
on. We then run the same year-by-year regressions and produce Fama-MacBeth coefficients
for each of the 20 alternative “placebo” values for the CLL. The results from this exercise
are shown in Table 7.
    The table shows that the coefficients of interest we obtain for all three dependent vari-
ables (values per square foot, residuals from the transaction amounts, and residuals of values
per square foot) are systematically among the lowest of all obtained with the 20 “placebo”
trials (the ranking is given in the last two rows of the table). The coefficient on the value
per square foot measure is the lowest of the 21 trials whether we use the whole sample,
or whether we limit our attention a sample of transactions that all have an LTV between
0.5 and 0.8 (we discuss this subsample in more detail in the Online Appendix). When we
use the whole sample and the two residual measures from the hedonic regressions as the
left-hand side variables in the regressions, the coefficients for the true conforming loan limits
are the second and third lowest. In the restricted sample with LTVs between 0.5 and 0.8,
these two measures produce the second lowest and the lowest coefficient out of the 21 trials.
If we limit our attention to placebo limits that are below the true limits (i.e. the top half of
Table 7), all our measures produce the lowest coefficients out of those trials. We consider
these to be true “placebos”, because all the transactions used for those regressions are, by
construction, below the “eligibility” criteria of 125 percent of the true conforming loan limit
both in the year that the limit is in effect, and in the subsequent year. As such, these
transactions should not have any changes in credit availability from one year to the next.
    When we compute the standard deviation of those coefficients, we find that the coef-
ficients using value per square foot as the dependent variable are statistically significantly
different from the average of the other coefficients at a 5 percent level in both the whole
sample and in the restricted sample with LTV between 0.5 and 0.8. T-statistics for these


                                               19
tests are shown in the fourth row of Table 7. When we use the value per square foot residual
measure as a left-hand side variable, the coefficient has a t-statistic of 1.77 in the whole sam-
ple, and above 2.37 in the restricted sample. Finally, the coefficient from the regression that
uses the residual from the log of house price hedonic regression as a left-hand side variable
is not significantly different from the average of the other coefficients, as the t-statistics are
between 1.0 and 1.2 in both the whole sample and in the restricted sample. The fact that
the results are directionally the same when using all three left-hand side variables, and that
there is no “placebo” limit that consistently produces results that are as strong as the ones
from the true limit, further confirms that our coefficients are not obtained by pure chance.

4.3.2   Selection Into Treatment

As discussed in the introduction, there can be at least two alternative mechanisms for the
effect of the conforming loan limits on house valuation. The first mechanism is that easier
access to credit around the threshold leads to an increase in the demand for houses of a
certain type, which then leads to higher valuation of these houses (or, conversely, tighter
access to credit reduces the demand for houses above the threshold in the year that the limit
is in effect). The alternative mechanism is that different credit conditions above and below
the threshold attract a type of buyer in the year that the limit is in effect that is both better
able to deal with the worse access to credit (possibly because of higher wealth or income),
and is a more effective negotiator than other “typical” buyers. This would still mean that
our results are driven by credit conditions being different above and below the threshold,
but it would be a different mechanism for our results. This selection effect results from the
fact that borrowers can choose the level of their LTV. If all borrowers mechanically had to
use an LTV of 80 percent, there would not be any possibility for selection.
    To understand whether the aforementioned form of selection is important, we divide
transactions that are just above the cut off for being eligible for a CLL at 80 percent in a
given year into two groups: (1) transactions that nevertheless use a conforming loan and
therefore choose to have an LTV below 80 percent (making up the difference with other forms
of financing), and (2) transactions that use a jumbo loan with an 80 percent LTV, which
means they do not get a conforming loan. The first group isolates the set of borrowers where
selection could be an issue. These borrowers might be optimizing around the CLL threshold
and could therefore have other unobservable differences from the rest of the borrowers. For
example, these “special” buyers could have more wealth or higher income and thus might
also differ in other unobservables such as their ability to bargain. By excluding the group of
home buyers who choose this type of financing, we can test if these are driving our results,


                                               20
i.e. whether they alone buy cheaper houses. As an aside, it is ex ante not clear why those
borrowers would buy cheaper houses (based on value per square foot). The fact that they
are wealthier would usually lead us to believe that the omitted variable bias goes in the other
direction, i.e. they buy houses with higher unobservable quality. The following regressions
show that this group of borrowers does not drive our results.
    To test the importance of the selection effect, we run differences-in-differences regressions
excluding each of the two groups described above at a time (in the year that the limit is
in effect) and construct Fama-MacBeth coefficients, as we did in Table 5. The results are
shown in Table 8. We find that results do not change much when we exclude the jumbo loans
or when we exclude the conforming loans, which implies that our main results are not being
driven solely by either one of these groups of transactions. The statistical significance of the
results is similar, and the magnitude of the coefficients sometimes is larger for one group
and other times for the other, depending on the left-hand side measure we use. Overall, the
results point in the same direction for both sets of regressions.
    This robustness test shows that the effect of credit conditions on house prices in our
setting is not likely to be driven solely by selection of different buyers in our “treated”
group. If this were the case, we would expect the borrowers that pick a conforming loan
and end up with an LTV below 80 percent to be the ones driving our main result. The
fact that we also see similar results when we exclude this subgroup increases the likelihood
of our alternative explanation, namely that credit access changes demand for housing, and
that this shift in demand for housing drives the change in house valuation. Finally, in the
Online Appendix we show that our results are very stable if we use a 5,000 dollar band
around the threshold of CLL/0.8 instead of the 10,000, which suggests that the difference in
the cost of credit is likely to be similar for these two sets of buyers relative to buyers below
the threshold. This is further evidence that the result is not driven solely by buyers who
choose to obtain a conforming mortgage and put up additional equity from other sources.

4.3.3   Constraints to Housing Supply

To understand whether the effect of credit supply is amplified by the inability of housing
supply to adjust quickly to demand, we divide zip codes into high and low house supply
elasticity according to the measure in Saiz (2010). If the supply of housing were perfectly
elastic and able to adjust quickly to an increase in demand for houses, the effect on prices
should not be there. In this test, we find that the constraint imposed by the conforming
loan limit is stronger in zip codes located in more inelastic, metropolitan, statistical areas
(MSAs) according to the Saiz measure (Table 9). This result is in line with what we expect


                                               21
and with previous literature (e.g. Mian and Sufi, 2009), namely that better access to credit
will feed through to house prices more frequently in regions where the supply of houses
cannot adjust as easily. We are cautious to interpret this result, however, because we have
limited cross-sectional variation in the elasticity measure in our data. In fact, all of the
MSAs in our sample are above the median elasticity found in Saiz (2010) for the whole
country, and 7 of the 10 MSAs are in the top 20 percent of MSAs with the least elasticity
in the nation.


4.4     Economic Magnitude of the Effect
As we discuss in Section 2, there is significant disagreement as to what the magnitude of
the elasticity of house prices to interest rates is. As we discuss in that section, changes
to the way a standard user cost model is specified can produce vastly different estimates.
To understand the magnitude of our estimated effect, we compute the semi-elasticity of
house prices to interest rates, calculated as the percentage change in prices divided by the
change in interest rates. The change in the CLL gives us an unbiased local estimate of the
numerator of this semi-elasticity. To obtain an estimate of the denominator, we use the
differential in interest rates between jumbo and conforming loans that were estimated in
the prior literature.
    Table 10 shows our estimates for different scenarios. The change in house prices around
the CLL that we estimated ranges from 30 to 91 basis points. We obtain the low of 30 basis
points when we use the residuals from the hedonic regressions of value per square foot as
the dependent variable and include the whole time period (1998 to 2006). 12 . The high end
of the estimate (91 basis points) comes from the specification where we constrain the period
1998-2001 and use the raw value per square foot as the dependent variable. We exclude
our estimates for the period 2002 to 2005 since we know that the CLL was less important
during that time.
    There is an extensive literature that provides estimates of the jumbo-conforming spread,
see McKenzie (2002), Ambrose, LaCour-Little, and Sanders (2004), Sherlund (2008) and
Kaufman (2012). The most common estimates that have been found across all the papers
range from a low of 10 basis points to a high of 24 basis points.13 If we divide our estimated
range of house price changes by the range in the jumbo-conforming spread, we obtain
   12
      The point estimate in the regressions is 0.65 dollars from Panel C in Table 5, and we scale that by the
average value per square foot for the sample to obtain 30 basis point changes in value per square foot.
   13
      The paper by Kaufman (2012) obtains an estimate of 10 basis points by using a regression discontinuity
approach on the access to conforming loans around the threshold of CLL/0.8 in appraisal values. This
estimate is particularly relevant for our purposes given that it explores the part of the distribution of homes
that we also consider.


                                                      22
estimates for the elasticity of house prices to interest rates that vary between 1.2 and 9.1
(Table 10). These results are at the lower end of the elasticity that has previously been
estimated in the literature (see, for example, Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko, 2010), and it
is hard to justify estimates above 10 without making very aggressive assumptions about the
cost differential above and below the threshold.
    The prior calculation is our preferred method of obtaining an estimate of the elasticity.
However, we can obtain an alternative estimate of the elasticity by considering borrowers
who choose to obtain a conforming loan of less than 80 percent LTV above the threshold.
This means they put up additional equity which either has to be financed through a third
party loan or through savings. On average, given the range of transactions in our sample,
these borrowers put up an additional USD 5,000. If we assume that the cost of the additional
equity is at least 5 percentage points above the conforming mortgage rate, this is equivalent
to a spread of 6-8 basis points in the total cost of financing for these borrowers relative
to those who buy a house below the threshold. This then translates into an elasticity of
between 4.4 and 11.4, depending on the house price effect we use from our regressions. The
assumption for the spread of 5 percentage points over the conforming mortgage rate is not
high if we consider that many people use a jumbo loan even very close to the threshold
of the CLL, indicating that the cost of additional equity is, at least for some borrowers,
very substantial. The fact that we see borrowers stick with a conforming loan and put up
additional equity above the threshold may, in fact, be an indication that they are excluded
from the jumbo market altogether, rather than evidence that this is a cheaper option. As
Loutskina and Strahan (2009, 2011) show, jumbo loans are associated with more careful
screening of borrowers, which may mean that many households simply could not use an 80
percent LTV above the threshold of 125 percent of the CLL even if they were looking to do
so.
    Another way of assessing the economic importance of the effect we find is by comparing
the dollar amount of savings through lower interest rates and the house price differential.
Assume a loan of USD 300,000, which is approximately the conforming loan limit midway
through our sample (2002). If we use the upper end of the jumbo-conforming spread of
24 basis points, we calculate a cost difference of USD 720 in the first year of the life of
the loan. The present value of the cost difference over 30 years is USD 8,557 assuming a
6 percent discount rate. If we use the lower end of the jumbo-conforming spread that has
been estimated (10 basis points), this cost difference is USD 3,604. Our estimated effect of
the conforming loan is a price difference of USD 1.16 per square foot for an average size of
a house of 1,935 square feet. This translates into a USD 2,244 difference in the price of the
house. Thus, the savings in the present value of interest costs of 3.6 thousand dollars leads


                                             23
to an increase in the value of the house of about USD 2,000.
    One factor that is often raised when estimating house price elasticity is that home
buyers might expect the conforming loan limit to rise in the subsequent year and would
thus refinance their loan shortly after obtaining it. If refinancing were frictionless, buying
a house above the threshold would then cost 10-24 basis points more than the conforming
loan rate for just one year, because borrowers who took a jumbo loan would immediately
refinance into a conforming loan in the following year (once the limit was raised). This
would imply a very high elasticity of house prices to interest rates, as the difference in the
effective interest rate over the life of the loan paid by a borrower who took a conforming
loan and one who took a jumbo loan would be very small. However, this analysis misses the
transaction costs of refinancing, and the estimates of these transaction costs that have been
found in the literature are very large. A paper by Stanton (1995) finds that transaction costs
for mortgage prepayment are around 30 to 50 percent of the remaining principal balance
of a mortgage. These transaction costs include both explicit monetary costs (about one-
sixth of the total costs) and non-monetary prepayment costs (the remaining five-sixths).
A more recent paper by Downing, Stanton and Wallace (2005) produced a lower, but still
substantial, average transaction cost of refinancing of 11.5 percent of face value. The bottom
line from both these studies is clear - transaction costs are too high for the jumbo conforming
spread alone to significantly change the prepayment behavior of borrowers. In other words,
the benefit from obtaining lower interest rates by refinancing to a conforming loan in a year
or two are too small to overcome the transaction costs of refinancing.


5     Conclusion
In this paper we use the exogenous changes in the annual level of the conforming loan
limit as an instrument for easier access to finance and lower cost of credit. We find that a
home that becomes eligible for easier access to credit due to an increase in the CLL has, on
average, a 1.16 dollar higher value per square foot compared to a similar quality house that
is just above the threshold that allows it to be financed with a conforming loan at 80 percent
loan to value. The magnitude of the difference that we find is economically important given
the average value per square foot of houses that transact around the CLL of 220 dollars,
which means that a 1.16 dollar increase constitutes almost a 0.45 percent increase in prices.
Under our assumptions for the interest rate differential for transactions above and below
the threshold, this corresponds to a semi-elasticity of prices to interest rates of less than 10.
    Another way of stating our results is to say that the interest rate subsidy granted by
the GSEs and, ultimately, the taxpayer, does not fully benefit the buyers of homes and,

                                               24
instead, partially accrues to the sellers of homes in the form of higher house prices. Also,
the results suggest that mortgages are being supplied in a competitive fashion, and that
originating banks are not appropriating the mortgage subsidy provided by the GSEs. In
addition, we see that the CLL constitutes a first order factor in how houses are financed:
there is a significant fraction of borrowers who choose an LTV below 80 percent, between 77
and 79.5 percent, in order to stay below the conforming loan limit. These borrowers either
were unable to get a jumbo loan, or are trying to take advantage of the lower interest rate
of a conforming loan. But, as a result, many borrowers end up holding a larger fraction of
equity in their house than most other borrowers.
    In line with our expectations, these results are stronger in the earlier part of our sample
when borrowers were less likely to have access to other forms of financing, such as second
liens, and when the interest rate differential between jumbo loans and conforming loans was
larger. After 2004 in particular, we see that the vast majority of borrowers even above the
threshold of 125 percent of the CLL choose an LTV of 80 percent, which supports the idea
that access to jumbo loans and other forms of financing became much easier in the second
half of the sample. At the same time, the house price impact of the conforming loan limit
is also smaller in this time period. This suggests that those houses which were previously
just out of reach of being financed by a conforming loan at 80 percent could now be bid
up in price since people had easier access to jumbo loans and other forms of finance. The
results are also stronger in ZIP codes with the lowest income growth, usually negative, and
also in areas with lower elasticity of housing supply. While we can only estimate a local
treatment effect around the CLL, this presents a first test of the exogenous effect of cheaper
mortgage loans on house prices. We estimate an elasticity of house prices to interest rates
that is below 10, implying that the drop in mortgage rates cannot account for the increase
in house prices between 2000 and 2006. However, we do show that those credit conditions
matter for the formation of prices. Our results do not support a view that credit market
conditions purely respond to housing demand, but point instead to a directional effect that
easier credit supply leads to an increase in house prices.




                                              25
References
 [1] Acharya, V., Richardson, M., Nieuwerburgh, S. V., and White, L. J. (2010) Guaranteed
        to Fail: Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Debacle of Mortgage Finance. Princeton
        University Press, March 2011.
 [2] Allen, F. and Gale, D. (1998) Optimal Financial Crises. Journal of Finance, Vol. 53(4),
        1245-1284.
 [3] Ambrose, B. W., LaCour-Little, M., and Sanders A.B. (2004) The Effect of Conform-
       ing Loan Status on Mortgage Yield Spreads: A Loan Level Analysis. Real Estate
       Economics, Vol. 32, No. 4, 541-569.
 [4] Bernanke, B. and Gertler, M. (2001) Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in
        Asset Prices? American Economic Review, 91 (May), 253-57.
 [5] Brunnermeier, Markus K., Eisenbach, T., and Sannikov, Y. (2012) Macroeconomics
        with Financial Frictions: A Survey. Working Paper.
 [6] Campbell, J.Y., Giglio, S., and Pathak, P. (2010) Forced Sales and House Prices.
       American Economic Review, Forthcoming.
 [7] Downing, C., Stanton, R., and Wallace, N. (2005) An Empirical Test of a Two-Factor
       Mortgage Valuation Model: How Much Do House Prices Matter? Real Estate Eco-
       nomics, Vol. 33, Issue 4, 681-710.
 [8] Fama, E. F., and MacBeth, J. D. (1973) Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical
        Tests. Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 3, 607-636.
 [9] Favara, G., and Imbs, J. (2011) Credit Supply and the Price of Housing. CEPR Dis-
        cussion Paper, No. 8129.
[10] Favilukis,J., Ludvigson, S.C., and Nieuwerburgh, S. V. (2010) The Macroeconomic
        Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General
        Equilibrium. NBER Working Paper, No. 15988.
[11] Genesove, D. and Mayer, C. J. (1997) Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate
       Market. American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 3. (Jun, 1997), 255-269.
[12] Glaeser, E. L, Gottlieb, J., and Gyourko, J. (2010) Can Cheap Credit Explain the
        Housing Boom. NBER Working Paper, No. 16230.
[13] Green, R. K., and Wachter, S. M. (2005) The American Mortgage in Historical and
        International Context. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19, No. 4, 93-114.
[14] Himmelberg, C., Mayer, C., and Sinai, T. (2005) Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles,
        Fundamentals and Misperceptions. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19(4),
        67-92.
[15] Hubbard, G., and Mayer, C. (2008) House Prices, Interest Rates, and the Mortgage
       Market Meltdown. Columbia Business School Working Paper.
[16] Kaufman, A. (2012) What do Fannie and Freddie do? Unpublished Manuscript.


                                            26
[17] Khandani, A. E., Lo, A.W., and Merton, R.C. (2009) Systemic Risk and the Refinanc-
       ing Ratchet Effect. NBER Working Paper, No. 15362.
[18] Kindleberger, C., Aliber, R. and Solow, R. (2005). Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A
        History of Financial Crises. Wiley Investment Classics, Book 39.
[19] Kiyotaki, N., and Moore, J. (1997) Credit Cycles. Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
        105, No. 2, 211-248.
[20] Loutskina, E., and Strahan, P. (2009) Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank
        Financial Condition on Loan Supply: Evidence from Mortgage Originations. Jour-
        nal of Finance, 64(2), 861-922.
[21] Loutskina, E., and Strahan, P. (2011) Informed and Uninformed Investment in Housing:
        The Downside of Diversification. Review of Financial Studies, 24(5), 1447-80.
[22] Mayer, C. (2011) Housing Bubbles: A Survey. Annual Review of Economics, 3:55977.
[23] McKenzie, J.A. (2002) A Reconsideration of the Jumbo/Non-jumbo Mortgage Rate
       Differential. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, Vol. 25, No. 2-3, 197-
       213.
[24] Mian, A., and Sufi, A. (2009) The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evi-
        dence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
        124, No. 4, 1449-1496.
[25] Pavlov, A., and Wachter, S. (2011) Subprime Lending and Real Estate Prices. Real
        Estate Economics, 39: 117
[26] Poterba, J. (1984) Tax Subsidies to Owner-occupied Housing: An Asset-Market Ap-
        proach. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 99(4), 729-52.
[27] Saiz, A. (2010) The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 125(3): 1253-1296.
[28] Sherlund, S.M. (2008) The Jumbo-Conforming Spread: A Semiparametric Approach.
        Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper, 2008-01.
[29] Stanton, R. (1995) Rational Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Secu-
        rities Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 8, No. 3, 677-708.
[30] Stein, J.C. (1995) Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with
        Down-Payment Effects. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, No. 2, 379-406.




                                           27
                           Figure 1: Transaction-Loan Value Surface
                       (a) 2000                                               (b) 2004




    Note: This figure shows the frequency of transactions at each house price-loan value combination for
the year 2000 and 2004, and the 10 MSAs covered in our data, where both house prices and loan values
were binned at USD 10,000 intervals. The mass of transactions on the diagonal have a loan to value of
approximately 0.8.




                                                  28
                  Figure 2: Borrower Composition for the Regression Sample
                               (a) Transactions below 125 percent of CLL




                               (b) Transactions above 125 percent of CLL




    Note: This figure shows the number of transactions by month for transactions within USD 10,000 of
the threshold of 125 percent of CLL. Transactions below and above this threshold are tracked from the
year prior to the CLL being in effect to the year after the CLL is lifted to its new value. We break down
transactions by LTV range to show the differences that emerge between houses above and below 125 percent
of the CLL.




                                                   29
            Figure 3: Frequency of Transactions as Percentage of CLL Threshold




    Note: This figure shows the frequency of transactions by their distance to the threshold of 125 percent
of the conforming loan limit. The vertical red line is the threshold and the transactions for all years are
centered around that value. The x-axis is represented as one minus the transaction value as a percentage
of each year’s threshold of 125 percent of the conforming loan limit (e.g. if the threshold is 200,000, a
transaction of 150,000 will appear as -25 percent).




                                                    30
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics


Panel A. House Characteristics.
                                             Whole Sample N=3,983,575          Restricted Sample N=262,671
                                             Mean Std. Dev. Median             Mean Std. Dev. Median
Transaction Value (USD 1000)                 308.52  123.93    286.00          371.34     54.92    380.00
Loan to value                                  0.81    0.15      0.80            0.76      0.13      0.80
House Size (sqft)                             1,735    672      1,592           1,935      701      1,816
Lot Size (sqft)                              10,197  15,495     6,700          11,734    17,923     7,203
Number of rooms                                6.84    1.60      7.00            7.23      1.61      7.00
Number of bedrooms                             3.20    0.78      3.00            3.33      0.78      3.00
Number of bathrooms                            1.93    1.03      2.00            2.11      1.07      2.00
House age (years)                            35.40    27.70    34.00           34.74      27.40    34.00

Panel B. House Valuation.
                                             Whole Sample N=3,983,575          Restricted Sample N=262,671
                                             Mean Std. Dev. Median             Mean Std. Dev. Median
Value per sqft (USD/sqft)                    193.59   91.60    172.03          219.63     93.37    200.20
Value per sqft residual (USD/sqft             0.00    42.30     -0.95           5.29      44.26     3.43
Log of transaction value residual (USD)       0.00     0.17     0.01            0.05       0.14     0.04

             Note: Panel A shows the descriptive statistics for all transactions in our
             data from 1998 to 2008. The data was extracted from deeds records by
             Dataquick. Panel B shows the different valuation measures we use in the
             regression analysis. Value per sqft is the transaction amount divided by the
             size of the house measured in square feet. Both the residual measures are
             obtained from hedonic regressions run by year and by metropolitan area
             of value per sqft and transaction value on a set of detailed house charac-
             teristics. We give more information on the construction of the residuals in
             Section 2, Data and Methodology.




                                                 31
                   Table 2: Summary Statistics by Geography and Year


Panel A. Geographic Distribution

MSA                        Transaction Value            Value per sqft      Loan to Value
               N Obs          Mean        Std. Dev      Mean Std. Dev       Mean Std. Dev
Boston         279,261        320.29       112.40       197.67     73.81     0.78     0.16
Chicago        377,031        262.41       108.15       174.37     68.63     0.81     0.15
DC             396,211        329.95       126.16       186.97     85.93     0.82     0.14
Denver         397,293        250.22        94.93       155.84     49.28     0.83     0.15
Las Vegas      345,219        262.24       102.87       136.62     45.38     0.82     0.14
Los Angeles    725,897        332.28       129.71       231.29    108.35     0.81     0.13
Miami          483,541        270.10       111.74       144.80    57.04      0.81     0.14
New York       487,104        341.00       121.13       221.25     92.55     0.78     0.17
San Diego      219,489        353.14       124.63       222.18    94.86      0.79     0.14
San Francisco 272,529         383.59       123.74       266.47    109.26     0.79     0.13
Total         3,983,575       308.52       123.93       193.59    91.60      0.81     0.15

Panel B. Distribution By Year and Thresholds

Year                       Thresholds                   Transaction Value   Value per sqft     Loan to Value
                N Obs      House Price   Conf. Loan     Mean Std. Dev       Mean Std. Dev      Mean Std. Dev
1998            134,200      283,938      227,150       239.78    102.07    133.84    50.59     0.81    0.15
1999            350,827      300,000      240,000       246.38    104.88    139.33    54.03     0.81    0.15
2000            354,071      315,875      252,700       257.67    109.21    149.65    61.64     0.81    0.16
2001            365,814      343,750      275,000       265.16    108.82    156.74    63.81     0.82    0.15
2002            397,527      375,875      300,700       283.79    114.34    171.06    71.85     0.81    0.15
2003            423,939      403,375      322,700       303.37    118.32    187.40    80.05     0.81    0.15
2004            525,407      417,125      333,700       331.81    121.20    212.65    90.51     0.79    0.14
2005            475,723      449,563      359,650       357.51    121.71    237.24    100.72    0.78    0.13
2006            376,182      521,250      417,000       366.27    121.89    247.02    105.50    0.79    0.13
2007            293,329      521,250      417,000       359.24    122.53    237.79    101.57    0.82    0.14
2008            286,556      521,250      417,000       325.11    119.84    206.92    91.62     0.84    0.15
Total          3,983,575                                308.52    123.93    193.59    91.60     0.81    0.15


             Note: This table uses all the deed registry data on house transactions for
             10 MSAs. Panel A shows the mean and standard deviation by city of (i)
             house price, (ii) value per sqft and (iii) loan to value. Panel B the mean
             and standard deviation by year for the same three variables.




                                                32
Table 3: Verification of the Impact of the CLL on Financing Choices

         Panel A: Loan to Value

                                All years    1998-2001    2002-2005
         Above Threshold        -0.004***    -0.006***    -0.002***
                                 (0.001)       (0.002)     (0.001)
         Year CLL               -0.008***     -0.005**    -0.011***
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.001)
         Above Threshold x      -0.004***      -0.004*     -0.003*
         Year CLL                (0.001)       (0.002)     (0.002)
         No. Obs.                242,753      100,870      141,883

         Panel B: Log Loan Amount

                                All years    1998-2001    2002-2005
         Above Threshold        0.0227***     0.0240***    0.021***
                                 (0.0016)      (0.0030)     (0.001)
         Year CLL              -0.0129***    -0.0087***   -0.017***
                                 (0.0024)      (0.0027)     (0.003)
         Above Threshold x      -0.0060**      -0.0069*      -0.005
         Year CLL                (0.0024)      (0.0038)     (0.003)
         No. Obs.                242,753       100,870     141,883

  Note: This table shows Fama MacBeth coefficients computed from year by
  year regressions that use two measures of financing choice as the dependent
  variable in each of the two panels. The sample includes all transactions
  within USD 10,000 of each year’s conforming loan limit, as well as trans-
  actions of the same amount in the subsequent year. Above the Threshold
  refers to transactions up to USD 10,000 above the conforming loan limit
  divided by 0.8 (i.e. the transactions that were “ineligible” to be bought
  with a conforming loan at a full 80 percent LTV) and Year CLL is the year
  in which the conforming loan limit is in effect.




                                      33
      Table 4: Impact of CLL on Number of Transactions

                         All years    1998-2001    2002-2005
             Year CLL    -0.003***      0.000      -0.006***
                          (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.001)
             No. Obs.     262,671      109,496      153,175


Note: This table shows Fama MacBeth coefficients computed from year
by year regressions that use a dummy variable for whether a transaction
happens above the threshold of 125 percent of the CLL as the dependent
variable. The sample includes all transactions within USD 10,000 of each
year’s conforming loan limit, as well as transactions of the same amount in
the subsequent year. Year CLL is the year in which the conforming loan
limit is in effect. Zip Codes fixed effects are included on each regression




                                     34
    Table 5: Effect of the CLL on House Valuation Measures


Panel A: Value Per Square Foot

                        All years     1998-2001            2002-2005
Above Threshold          1.261**       1.669***               0.852
                         (0.494)        (0.573)              (0.836)
Year CLL               -22.869***     -14.851***           -30.886***
                         (4.047)        (2.314)              (5.314)
Above Threshold x       -1.162***      -1.553***            -0.771**
Year CLL                 (0.264)        (0.297)              (0.369)
No. Obs.                 262,671        109,496              153,175

Panel B: Log of Transaction Value Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                        All years     1998-2001            2002-2005
Above Threshold         0.0129**      0.0154***              0.0104
                        (0.0013)       (0.0015)             (0.0009)
Year CLL               0.0387***      0.0356***            0.0417***
                        (0.0041)       (0.0047)             (0.0072)
Above Threshold x      -0.0017***     -0.0020***           -0.0013**
Year CLL                (0.0008)       (0.0015)             (0.0004)
No. Obs.                 251,431        103,535             147,896

Panel C: Value Per Square Foot Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                        All years     1998-2001            2002-2005
Above Threshold         1.733***       2.060***              1.407**
                         (0.360)        (0.425)              (0.595)
Year CLL                4.103***       3.935***             4.270***
                         (0.644)        (0.495)              (1.293)
Above Threshold x       -0.651***     -0.940***               -0.362
Year CLL                 (0.238)        (0.351)              (0.291)
No. Obs.                 251,764        103,709              148,055

 Note: This table shows Fama MacBeth coefficients computed from year
 by year regressions that use three alternative measures of valuation as the
 dependent variable in each of the three panels. The hedonic regressions that
 produce the residuals for panels B and C are described in Section 3.2. The
 sample for each year’s regression includes all transactions within +/- USD
 10,000 of that year’s conforming loan limit, as well as transactions in the
 same band in the subsequent year. All year by year regressions include ZIP
 code fixed effects. Above the Threshold refers to transactions up to USD
 10,000 above the conforming loan limit divided by 0.8 (i.e. the transactions
 that were “ineligible” to be bought with a conforming loan at a full 80
 percent LTV) and Year CLL is the year in which the conforming loan limit
 is in effect.

                                     35
     Table 6: Effect of the CLL on House Valuation in Different Income Growth Areas

                     Panel A: Value Per Square Foot

                                                      2001-2005       2001-2005
                     Above Threshold                     0.731            0.601
                                                        (0.667)          (0.638)
                     Year CLL                         -28.869***      -29.364***
                                                        (4.706)          (4.510)
                     Above Threshold x                 -0.846***       -0.953***
                     Year CLL                           (0.257)          (0.210)
                     Above Threshold x                                  -1.548**
                     Year CLL x Low Inc. Growth                          (0.652)
                     No. Obs.                          179,828          179,828

                     Panel B: Transaction Value Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                                                      2001-2005       2001-2005
                     Above Threshold                  0.0109***       0.0108***
                                                       (0.0008)        (0.0009)
                     Year CLL                         0.0418***       0.0439***
                                                       (0.0056)        (0.0057)
                     Above Threshold x                -0.0016***      -0.0022***
                     Year CLL                          (0.0003)        (0.0006)
                     Above Threshold x                                  -0.0018
                     Year CLL x Low Inc. Growth                        (0.0051)
                     No. Obs.                          173,347          173,347

                     Panel C: Value Per Square Foot Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                                                      2001-2005       2001-2005
                     Above Threshold                   1.396***        1.347***
                                                        (0.453)         (0.412)
                     Year CLL                          4.314***        4.806***
                                                        (1.017)         (1.072)
                     Above Threshold x                 -0.504**       -0.750***
                     Year CLL                           (0.250)         (0.158)
                     Above Threshold x                                   -0.319
                     Year CLL x Low Inc. Growth                         (0.651)
                     No. Obs.                          173,550         173,550

Note: This table shows Fama MacBeth coefficients computed from year by year regressions that use three
alternative measures of valuation as the dependent variable in each of the three panels. The sample for each
year’s regression includes all transactions within +/- USD 10,000 of that year’s conforming loan limit, as
well as transactions in the same band in the subsequent year. Above the Threshold refers to transactions up
to USD 10,000 above the conforming loan limit divided by 0.8 (i.e. the transactions that were “ineligible”
to be bought with a conforming loan at a full 80 percent LTV) and Year CLL is the year in which the
conforming loan limit is in effect. This specification interacts the diff-in-diff specification with a dummy
variable that uses changes in income at a zipcode level as proxy for good and bad times. Specifically, the
dummy is 1 if the changes in the average zipcode income are below the 10th percentile of each particular
diff-in-diff regression and 0 otherwise. We use tax income data at zipcode level available from 2000-2006,
which restricted our sample to 2001-2005


                                                      36
                          Table 7: Placebo Test for Coefficient of Interest


                                All Transactions                           0.5<LTV≤0.8 Transactions
                  Value Per          Log of      Value Per           Value Per     Log of     Value Per
                 Square Foot      Transaction Square Foot           Square Foot Transaction Square Foot
                                     Value       Residual                          Value      Residual
                                    Residual                                      Residual
  CLL(0)             -1.162          -0.002       -0.651               -1.257      -0.002     -0.931
 Average 20           0.045           0.001        0.222               -0.107       0.000     0.110
 coefficients
  St. Dev.           0.467            0.002            0.494           -0.107            0.002        0.440
 T-Statistic         2.586            1.206            1.770           2.626             1.009        2.365
 CLL Rank              1                4                2                1                3          1
 CLL Rank              1                2                1                1                1          1
 below only

Note: This table shows the average and standard deviation of a series of 20 placebo tests we perform by
shifting the conforming loan limit in USD 10,000 intervals from CLL-100,000 until CLL+100,000 (i.e. the
limits of all years are first changed by -100,000, then by -90,000, etc.). We use these placebo loan limits to
run year-by-year regressions and form Fama-MacBeth coefficients like those in Table 5 for each set of “false”
loan limits. The t-statistic is for the difference between the coefficients when we use the true conforming
loan limit and the average of all the other coefficients, using the standard deviation given by the 20 trials.
The three dependent variables are the same we use in Table 5. The coefficient of interest is on the interaction
between our “above threshold” variable and the year in which the conforming loan limit is in effect. As in
the previous tables, the sample for each year’s regression includes transactions within +/- USD 10,000 of
that year’s CLL, as well as transactions in the same band in the subsequent year. The first three columns
include all such transactions, whereas in the last three columns the sample is constrained to transactions
with an LTV between 0.5 and 0.8. All year by year regressions include ZIP code fixed effects. The last
two rows show the ranking of the coefficient when we use the true CLL, first for all 21 coefficients and then
when we only consider the placebo tests below the true CLL.




                                                      37
      Table 8: Effect of the CLL on the Valuation of Different Groups of Transactions

  Panel A: Value Per Square Foot

                                 Keeping Conforming                           Keeping Jumbo
                         All years   1998-2001 2002-2005            All years   1998-2001 2002-2005
  Above Threshold         0.939**     1.580***      0.297             0.868*     1.530***     0.207
                          (0.472)      (0.568)     (0.666)           (0.481)      (0.545)    (0.701)
  Year CLL              -24.539*** -15.953*** -33.126***           -24.874*** -16.040*** -33.708***
                          (4.351)      (2.564)     (5.712)           (4.454)      (2.596)    (5.813)
  Above Threshold x      -0.967**     -1.314**      -0.621          -2.177***    -2.618**   -1.736**
  Year CLL                (0.416)      (0.572)     (0.634)           (0.639)      (1.119)    (0.724)
  No. Obs.                177,227      72,048     105,179            160,342      62,905     97,437

  Panel B: Log of Transaction Value Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                                Keeping Conforming                             Keeping Jumbo
                        All years   1998-2001 2002-2005            All years     1998-2001 2002-2005
  Above Threshold       0.0117***    0.0145***  0.0090***          0.0119***     0.0146***   0.0091***
                         (0.0014)     (0.0018)    (0.0007)          (0.0013)      (0.0016)    (0.0008)
  Year CLL              0.0367***    0.0335***   0.0398***         0.0370***     0.0337***   0.0402***
                         (0.0038)     (0.0041)    (0.0067)          (0.0039)      (0.0042)    (0.0068)
  Above Threshold x     -0.0027**      -0.0019  -0.0034***           0.0004        -0.0020    0.0028**
  Year CLL               (0.0011)     (0.0022)    (0.0009)          (0.0015)      (0.0025)    (0.0012)
  No. Obs.               170,808       68,719     102,089           154,848        60,114      94,734

  Panel C: Value Per Square Foot Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                                 Keeping Conforming                            Keeping Jumbo
                         All years   1998-2001 2002-2005           All years     1998-2001 2002-2005
  Above Threshold        1.573***     1.947***    1.199***         1.583***       1.991***   1.175**
                          (0.290)      (0.357)      (0.414)         (0.308)        (0.333)    (0.470)
  Year CLL               3.514***     3.485***     3.543***        3.529***       3.552***   3.507***
                          (0.579)      (0.431)      (1.175)         (0.573)        (0.409)    (1.168)
  Above Threshold x      -1.399***    -1.216**    -1.583***          0.225          -0.462   0.911**
  Year CLL                (0.344)      (0.535)      (0.493)         (0.418)        (0.536)    (0.464)
  No. Obs.                170,946      68,790       102,156         154,949        60,165     94,784

Note: This table shows Fama Macbeth coefficients computed from year by year regressions that use three
alternative measures of valuation as the dependent variable in each of the three panels. The hedonic
regressions that produce the residuals for panels B and C are described in Section 3.2. The sample for
each year’s regression includes transactions within +/- USD 10,000 of that year’s conforming loan limit.
All year by year regressions include ZIP code fixed effects. We divide the transactions that happen at a
price above 125 percent of a year’s CLL in the year that the limit is in effect into two groups: those with
a conforming loan and those with a jumbo loan. We then run the same regressions including just one of
these two groups at a time. The first three columns include the transactions with a conforming loan and the
last three columns include transactions with a jumbo loan. Above the Threshold refers to transactions up
to USD 10,000 above the conforming loan limit divided by 0.8 (i.e. the transactions that were “ineligible”
to be bought with a conforming loan at a full 80 percent LTV) and Year CLL is the year in which the
conforming loan limit is in effect.



                                                    38
Table 9: Effect of the CLL on House Valuation in Low Supply Elasticity Areas (
Elasticity≤1)

    Panel A: Value Per Square Foot

                                     All          All     1998-2001 1998-2001      2002-2005    2002-2005
    Above Threshold               1.261**        1.221      1.669*** 3.069***         0.852        -0.628
                                  (0.494)      (0.799)       (0.573)   (0.374)       (0.836)      (0.749)
    Year CLL                    -22.869***   -15.282***   -14.851*** -8.015***     -30.886***   -22.550***
                                  (4.047)      (3.920)       (2.314)   (0.843)       (5.314)      (5.981)
    Above Threshold x            -1.162***      -0.430     -1.553***  -2.100**      -0.771**       1.239
    Year CLL                      (0.264)      (0.831)       (0.297)   (0.817)       (0.369)      (0.832)
    Above Threshold x                           -0.870                  0.726                    -2.466**
    Year CLL x Low Elasticity                  (0.977)                 (1.332)                    (0.992)
    No. Obs.                     262,671       262,671       109,496   109,496      153,175       153,175

    Panel B: Log of Transaction Value Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                                    All          All      1998-2001    1998-2001   2002-2005    2002-2005
    Above Threshold             0.0129***    0.0106***    0.0154***    0.0182***    0.0104***     0.0030*
                                 (0.0013)     (0.0030)     (0.0015)     (0.0012)     (0.0009)     (0.0016)
    Year CLL                    0.0387***    0.0263***    0.0356***    0.0306***    0.0417***    0.0219***
                                 (0.0041)     (0.0037)     (0.0047)     (0.0044)     (0.0072)     (0.0055)
    Above Threshold x           -0.0017**      0.0008       -0.0020      -0.0018   -0.0013***     0.0033*
    Year CLL                     (0.0008)     (0.0022)     (0.0015)     (0.0037)     (0.0004)     (0.0018)
    Above Threshold x                          -0.0032                   -0.0002                -0.0063***
    Year CLL x Low Elasticity                  (0.002)                   (0.004)                  (0.0020)
    No. Obs.                     251,431      251,431      103,535      103,535     147,896       147,896

    Panel C: Value Per Square Foot Residual from Hedonic Regressions

                                    All          All      1998-2001    1998-2001   2002-2005    2002-2005
    Above Threshold              1.733***     1.338**      2.060***     2.623***     1.407**       0.054
                                  (0.360)     (0.524)       (0.425)      (0.278)     (0.595)     (0.319)
    Year CLL                     4.103***     1.811**      3.935***     3.316***    4.270***      0.305
                                  (0.644)     (0.716)       (0.495)      (0.270)     (1.293)     (0.898)
    Above Threshold x           -0.651***      -0.503     -0.940***    -1.620***      -0.362      0.615
    Year CLL                      (0.238)     (0.546)       (0.351)      (0.306)     (0.291)     (0.684)
    Above Threshold x                          -0.241                     0.843                   -1.325
    Year CLL x Low Elasticity                 (0.740)                    (0.744)                 (1.104)
    No. Obs.                     251,764      251,764      103,709       103,709    148,055      148,055

Note: In this case the dummy is 1 for low elasticity places. For this specification that corresponde to the
lowest MSA ( Miami, San Francisco, San Diego, Los Angeles, New York, Chicago and Boston). The areas
with elasticity higher than 1 are Las Vegas, Denver and DC




                                                     39
                                   Table 10: Elasticity Estimates


                                                   Jumbo-Conforming Spread
                       ∆ House Prices in bp        Min (10 bp) Max (24 bp)
                           Max: 91.2                   9.1         3.8
                           Min: 29.7                   3.0         1.2

Note: This table shows elasticity calculations for different scenarios of both the house price increase es-
timated in the regressions and the interest rate differential implied for transactions above and below the
threshold of 125 percent of the conforming loan limit. We use the jumbo-conforming spread in interest rates
as the denominator in the elasticity calculation.




                                                    40
