                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WHAT EXPLAINS HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT? THE AGGREGATE DEMAND CHANNEL

                                            Atif R. Mian
                                             Amir Sufi

                                       Working Paper 17830
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17830


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




We are grateful to the National Science Foundation, the Initiative on Global Markets at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business, and the Center for Research in Security Prices for funding.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What explains high unemployment? The aggregate demand channel
Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 17830
February 2012
JEL No. E2,E32,E51

                                            ABSTRACT

A drop in aggregate demand driven by shocks to household balance sheets is responsible for a large
fraction of the decline in U.S. employment from 2007 to 2009. The aggregate demand channel for
unemployment predicts that employment losses in the non-tradable sector are higher in high leverage
U.S. counties that were most severely impacted by the balance sheet shock, while losses in the tradable
sector are distributed uniformly across all counties. We find exactly this pattern from 2007 to 2009.
Alternative hypotheses for job losses based on uncertainty shocks or structural unemployment related
to construction do not explain our results. Using the relation between non-tradable sector job losses
and demand shocks and assuming Cobb-Douglas preferences over tradable and non-tradable goods,
we quantify the effect of aggregate demand channel on total employment. Our estimates suggest that
the decline in aggregate demand driven by household balance sheet shocks accounts for almost 4 million
of the lost jobs from 2007 to 2009, or 65% of the lost jobs in our data.


Atif R. Mian
University of California, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
atif@haas.berkeley.edu

Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu
       A sustained high level of unemployment is one of the biggest and most vexing problems

in macroeconomics. The issue is especially relevant today: the employment to population ratio

dropped from 63% in 2007 to 58% in 2009 where it remains as of the summer of 2011. The

problem has been difficult to address in part because there is a lack of consensus on the reasons

for unemployment. There are many hypotheses put forth to explain job losses including a decline

in aggregate demand, business uncertainty, and structural adjustment of the labor force.

       Our analysis is motivated by recent research showing that shocks to household balance

sheets are responsible for a sharp and persistent decline in aggregate demand (e.g., Mian and Sufi

(2010), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011), Eggertsson and Krugman (2011), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni

(2011), Hall (2011), Midrigan and Philippon (2011)). In particular, Mian and Sufi (2010) and

Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) exploit geographical variation across U.S. counties in the degree of

household leverage as of 2006, and demonstrate that shocks to household balance sheets are

responsible for a large fraction of the decline in consumption from 2006 to 2010.

       Can the decline in demand associated with household balance sheet shocks explain the

sharp reduction in employment in the U.S. from 2007 to 2009? We show that the answer to this

question is a resounding yes. We refer to this channel as the aggregate demand channel for

unemployment and our analysis demonstrates that it explains a substantial fraction of jobs lost

from 2007 to 2009.

       Our test of the aggregate demand hypothesis is based on one of its main implications: a

negative consumer demand shock in a given location should reduce employment in industries

producing non-tradable goods in that specific location, but should reduce employment in

industries producing tradable goods throughout the country. For example, when Californians cut

back on consumption significantly more than Texans, the non-tradable sector in California loses



                                                1
more jobs than the non-tradable sector in Texas. However, because Californians buy tradable

goods produced throughout the country, job losses in the tradable sector will be distributed

evenly across all counties, including those in Texas.

       The starting point of our empirical approach is based on Mian, Rao and Sufi (2011), who

show that negative consumer demand shocks were strongest in counties with high household

leverage. We utilize industry-by-county data on employment broken down by non-tradable and

tradable industries. Industries are classified as non-tradable if they are focused in the retail or

restaurant business. In order to remove any direct effect of the residential housing boom and

bust, we explicitly remove construction or any other real-estate related sector from the non-

tradable definition.

       Consistent with the aggregate demand channel, job losses in the non-tradable sector from

2007 to 2009 were significantly higher in high leverage counties that experienced sharp demand

declines. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in the 2006 debt to income ratio of a

county is associated with a 3 percentage point drop in non-tradable employment during this time

period, which is 2/5 a standard deviation. Moreover, the large decline in employment in the

tradable sector is completely uncorrelated with 2006 debt to income – exactly as predicted by

the aggregate demand channel.

       Can the cross-sectional job loss patterns in non-tradable and tradable sectors be explained

by alternative hypotheses? One explanation for sustained low employment levels is based on

heightened economic and policy uncertainty. However, in its most basic form, the uncertainty

view does not predict such large cross-sectional differences across the country in employment

losses. Further, it is unlikely that the uncertainty hypothesis can rationalize the distinct relations

between household leverage and non-tradable versus tradable sector job losses that we find here.



                                                   2
         A second explanation for unemployment is based on the structural adjustment of the

labor force, as displaced labor from overly-inflated housing, construction, and financial sectors

relocate to alternative sectors. One may also argue that such structural adjustment issues are

more prevalent in more levered counties. However, we show that this argument is unlikely to be

an explanation for our results for several reasons. First, our definition of non-tradable job losses

explicitly removes job losses associated with construction and other related industries. Second,

including control variables for either the construction share of employment as of 2007 or the

growth in the construction sector from 2000 to 2007 does not change our results. In fact, these

controls are uncorrelated with non-construction non-tradable sector job losses.

         Further, we show that both the construction share as of 2007 and the growth in the

construction sector during the housing boom are uncorrelated with county-level household

leverage when instrumented with housing supply elasticity. The reason for this perhaps

surprising result is that low housing supply elasticity areas had higher price appreciation during

the boom and hence more leverage, but it was also more costly to expand the housing stock in

these areas.1

         We also examine other margins of adjustment in the labor market. Given the

disproportionate job losses in high leverage counties, one would expect to find evidence of a

relative wage decline in these counties. We find such evidence: a one standard deviation increase

in household leverage is associated with a 1/5 standard deviation reduction in wages. One might

also expect that workers would move out of high household leverage counties in response to

deterioration in local labor markets. However, we find no evidence of such mobility. In fact, as




1
 As an additional point, it is difficult for the structural adjustment argument to quantitatively explain the increase in
aggregate employment since the bulk of the employment losses occurred in non-construction tradable industries.

                                                            3
of 2009, net migration into high leverage counties is positive. Mobility out of high household

leverage counties does not explain the employment losses in these areas.

        In the final section of our analysis, we use our results to quantify the total employment

losses due to the aggregate demand channel. Our methodology for doing so is based on the

insight that one can use the cross-sectional county level estimate of the effect of demand shocks

on unemployment in the non-tradable sector to back out the effect of aggregate demand on

unemployment in all sectors.2 We estimate that aggregate demand channel can account for 4

million of the 6.2 million jobs lost between March 2007 and March 2009. The methodology

behind this calculation is described in Section 2 and the details of this aggregate calculation are

in Section 5. Taken together, our results suggest that a decline in aggregate demand related to

household balance sheet weakness is the primary explanation for high and persistent

unemployment during the economic slump.

        Our empirical analysis is most closely related to Mian and Sufi (2010) and Midrigan and

Philippon (2011). Mian and Sufi (2010) show a negative correlation between employment

growth during the recession and county-level leverage ratios, but note that a disadvantage of

their analysis is the inability to separate local employment losses due to local versus national

demand shocks. Our empirical methodology is designed to overcome this exact problem.

        Midrigan and Philippon (2011) build a general equilibrium model in which the recession

is triggered by differential shocks across states in the ability to use housing to finance immediate

consumption. In estimating parameters for their model, they utilize state level correlations

between ex ante leverage ratios and construction employment, consumption, and deleveraging.



2
 This methodology requires assumptions such as Cobb-Douglas preferences over tradable and non-tradable goods
and an elasticity of labor demand with respect to product demand that is constant across sectors. We address these
assumptions in detail in Section 2.

                                                         4
Our approach here is complementary. We use micro data on employment in tradable and non-

tradable industries to estimate the aggregate effect of demand on unemployment.

       The rest of the study proceeds as follows. In the next section we provide motivation for

the methodology which we outline in Section 2. Section 3 presents the data and our classification

scheme for tradable and non-tradable goods. Section 4 presents the results of our analysis.

Section 5 conducts our final aggregate calculation and Section 6 concludes.



Section 1: Motivation and Background

       The U.S. economy experienced a tremendous increase in household debt in the years

preceding the economic downturn. Household debt doubled from $7 trillion to $14 trillion from

2001 to 2007, and the debt to GDP ratio skyrocketed from 0.7 to 1.0 over the same time period.

The increase in debt was closely related to the rise in house prices. For example, Mian and Sufi

(2011) show that, holding income constant, homeowners borrowed aggressively against the

increase in house prices during this time period.

       Theoretical research argues that the elevated level of household debt in combination with

the collapse in house prices has been critical in explaining the onset, depth, and length of the

current economic slump. Models by Eggertsson and Krugman (2011), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni

(2011), Hall (2011), and Midrigan and Philippon (2011) explain the onset and depth of the

recession using a combination of tightened credit constraints related to the collapse in house

prices in combination with nominal rigidities including the zero lower bound on nominal interest

rates. While the models are distinct in the precise nature of the initial shock, all imply that a




                                                    5
decline in aggregate demand driven by household balance sheet weakness is a key driving force

explaining the recession.3

         Empirical evidence in Mian and Sufi (2010) and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) support the

argument that household balance sheet weakness was crucial in explaining the collapse in

consumption. In particular, these studies exploit geographic variation across U.S. counties in the

degree of household leverage as of 2006. The geographic variation proxies well for the borrower

heterogeneity that is present in the theoretical models described above. They show that highly

levered U.S. counties were the driving force behind sharp drops in consumption during the

downturn.

         Figure 1 summarizes the findings from Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011). To construct the

figure, they split U.S. counties into deciles based on the debt to income ratio as of 2006.4 In

Figure 1, high (low) household leverage counties are counties in the top (bottom) decile of the

2006 debt to income distribution.

         The top left panel shows that high household leverage counties experienced dramatic

house price declines during the recession and afterward. House prices declined from 2006 to

2010 by almost 30% in these areas. The combination of high debt levels and the sharp decline in

house prices represented a severe balance sheet shock to households. As the other three panels of

Figure 1 show, households in high leverage counties responded to this shock by sharply cutting

consumption. The drop in durable consumption was very large, but the drop in grocery spending

was also pronounced.



3
  Eggertsson and Krugman (2011) and Hall (2011) argue that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates is the
main nominal rigidity that makes the deleveraging-driven decline in aggregate demand crucial for understanding the
economic slump. It is not obvious theoretically that unemployment should result. See Hall (2011) in particular for a
discussion of this point.
4
  More specifically, the deciles are formed based on the predicted values of the debt to income ratio as of 2006 using
housing supply elasticity as an instrument. See Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) for more details.

                                                          6
        The magnitude of the drops in these variables was much smaller in counties with low

household leverage before the recession. House prices never declined in low leverage counties,

and consumption levels did not decline nearly as much. The magnitudes of the relative drop in

consumption in high debt counties found in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) are large.5 They estimate

that durable consumption levels dropped by 20 percentage points more from 2007 to 2009 in the

highest decile of the household leverage distribution versus the lowest decile. Non-durable

consumption levels dropped by 10 percentage points more over the same time period.

        There is no doubt that the decline in consumption levels from 2007 to 2010 was much

more severe in counties with elevated levels of household debt at the beginning of the recession.

The key question of our analysis is the following: how much of the decline in employment is

directly related to the aggregate demand decline?

        Figure 2 presents a first attempt to answer this question. It plots employment growth from

2007 to 2009 against the 2006 debt to income ratio for U.S. counties.6 There is a strong negative

correlation--counties with high household leverage before the recession experienced much

sharper declines in employment during the recession. Column 1 of Table 1 presents the weighted

least squares version of the scatter-plot in Figure 1. The coefficient in column 1 implies that a

one standard deviation increase in the 2006 debt to income ratio is associated with a 1.8

percentage decline in employment from 2007 to 2009, which is 1/3 standard deviation.7 The




5
  MRS (2011) show evidence on the channels through which weak household balance sheets affected consumption.
They show that the effect was much more pronounced among households with low net worth and high loan to value
ratios, and they emphasize the importance of deleveraging, delinquencies, and the reduction in collateral-based
borrowing availability. For this study, the exact channel for the decline in demand is less important.
6
  Employment at the county level is measured using the Census County Business Patterns data. These data are
measured in mid-March of each year. See Section 3 for more details. The figure includes the top 450 counties that
have at least 50,000 households.
7
  All standard deviation comparisons use the sample standard deviation where observations are weighted by the total
number of households as of 2000.

                                                         7
specification reported in column 2 restricts the sample to counties in Figure 2, i.e. counties with

more than 50,000 households as of 2000, and shows a similar estimate.

         In evaluating these estimates, an important issue is the source of variation in 2006

county-level leverage ratios. This issue is discussed at length in Mian and Sufi (2009), Mian and

Sufi (2011), and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011). Mian and Sufi (2009) provide evidence of a sharp

increase in the supply of mortgage credit in the U.S. from 2002 to 2006. They also show that the

house price impact of the increased supply of mortgage credit was not uniform across the

country: areas that were more constrained in their capacity to supply housing (e.g., due to

difficult-to-build terrain as identified by Saiz (2011)) experienced larger house price gains as

credit supply expanded.

         Mian and Sufi (2011) use individual level panel data on consumer borrowing to show that

U.S. households borrowed 25 to 30 cents for every dollar increase in the value of their housing.

This home-equity based borrowing represents a large fraction of the overall increase in U.S.

household leverage between 2002 and 2006. In short, the increase in supply of credit to the U.S.

led to sharper rise in house prices in counties that had more difficult-to-build terrain. The

increase in house prices in turn allowed home owners living in these counties to increase their

leverage to unprecedented levels. While this mechanism does not explain all of the cross-

sectional variation in leverage by 2006, it does explain a major portion of it.8

         Taken together, these results suggest that a natural instrument for the 2006 leverage ratio

is the elasticity of housing supply in the county (Saiz (2011)).9 The Saiz elasticity measure is

available for 877 counties. Column 3 repeats the column 1 regression for this sub-sample and

gets similar results. Column 4 presents the first stage regression of debt to income on housing

8
 In particular, cities in Arizona and Nevada are important outliers. See Mian and Sufi (2009, 2011) for more details.
9
 The Saiz (2011) measure is constructed at the CBSA level. For the 877 counties for which the Saiz (2011) data are
available, there are 260 CBSAs. The average number of counties per CBSA is 3 and the median is 2.

                                                          8
supply elasticity which indeed predicts leverage strongly. A one standard deviation increase in

elasticity leads to a 1/3 standard deviation lower 2006 debt to income ratio in the county. The

instrumental variables estimate of leverage on employment is in column 5 and is similar to its

WLS counterpart in column 3.

       As we discuss further in Section 3, the instrumental variables estimate is valuable given

that the predicted value of the 2006 county level debt to income ratios is uncorrelated with other

confounding variables. In particular, once instrumented, 2006 county level leverage ratios are

uncorrelated with both the share of construction workers in 2007 and the growth in the

construction industry during the housing boom. This will allow us to cleanly separate the

aggregate demand channel from the construction-related structural adjustment hypothesis.



Section 2: Empirical Framework

       The evidence in Figure 2 and Table 1 is useful as motivation, but has some drawbacks.

First, even if the entire decline in consumption during the recession was concentrated in high

leverage counties, we would not expect employment losses to be entirely concentrated in the

same counties. The reason is obvious: goods consumed in high leverage counties are not

necessarily produced in the same county. As a result, the correlation between total employment

growth and the demand shock at the county level under-estimates the true impact of aggregate

demand on employment.

       Second, the drop in overall employment in high leverage counties may be driven by

shocks other than aggregate demand shocks. For example, perhaps high leverage counties were

harder hit by a collapse in construction and related sectors. More generally, perhaps high

leverage counties were systematically more exposed to certain sectors that received a more



                                                 9
negative productivity shock. In this section, we outline the empirical strategy for overcoming

these concerns.

A. Basic framework

        Consider an economy made up of N equally sized counties or “islands” indexed by c.

Each county produces two types of goods, tradable (T) and non-tradable (NT). Counties can

freely trade the tradable good among themselves, but must consume the non-tradable good

produced in their own county. Consumers have Cobb Douglas preferences with weights                          and

 1        given to the non-tradable and tradable good, respectively. Cobb Douglas preferences

imply that in response to a negative demand shock, consumers cut back on the two types of

goods proportionately.10

        Counties differ in the extent of the demand shock, which we denote by                 . Without loss

of generality we index counties such that                       , so county 1 is hit with the smallest demand

shock and county N with the most negative demand shock. Moreover                     is measured in units of

the consumption decline in county c.

        Households in a county consume goods produced in their own county and other counties.

As a result, we need to separate the household demand shock                 in a county from the decline in

demand faced by producers in county c. Let             represent the decline in demand faced by all

producers in county c. Then given Cobb Douglas preferences and the distribution of                   :

                                                  1         ̅                                         (1)

Where ̅         ∑        . Let β represent the elasticity of employment with respect to output

demand. Then the employment decline in county c is given by β . As equation (1) makes clear,


10
   Both Eggertsson and Krugman (2011) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011) model the demand shock as a
tightening of the borrowing constraint on levered households. Levered households respond to the shock by reducing
consumption substantially.

                                                       10
the employment decline in a county depends on both the local demand shock for non-tradable

goods         as well as the county's production share of the aggregate demand shock for tradable

goods 1           ̅.

B. Other sources of employment loss

        We have so far assumed that demand shocks are the only source of employment losses in

the economy. However, there may be alternative reasons for employment declines that need to be

considered when taking the aggregate demand hypothesis to data. We consider two other

mechanisms highlighted in the literature. First, declines in output and employment may be due to

economy-wide factors such as uncertainty shocks (Bloom (2009); Baker, Bloom, and Davis

(2011)). Second, certain counties may be more exposed to employment losses due to “structural

unemployment.” For example, if the economic decline is driven by a re-allocation of resources

away from finance and construction toward other sectors, then counties with larger gains from

finance and construction in the housing boom period will have more unemployed workers.

Unemployment may remain high as these unemployed workers are retrained for new jobs.

        Let     denote employment losses common to all counties due to economy wide factors

such as uncertainty shocks and let     denote employment losses in county c due to structural

shocks. Then total employment losses       in a county are given by:

                                                1       ̅                           (2)

C. Isolating the impact of the aggregate demand shock on aggregate employment

        Equation (2) represents total employment losses in a given county inclusive of the three

main hypotheses we have considered. The aggregate employment losses from demand shocks

are obtained by first summing the county-level employment shocks that come from the decline in

local demand for non-tradable goods and then adding employment losses from the decline in the


                                                 11
aggregate demand for tradable goods. Doing so gives us an aggregate non-tradable goods

demand effect of                 ̅ and the total aggregate tradable goods demand effect of              1       ̅.11

Therefore, the total employment loss due to demand shocks is                                                  ̅ and

depends only on the aggregate shock ̅.

        We next illustrate how                                 can be estimated using county-level data.

The estimation of                                 requires two additional steps: we must remove the

effects of structural unemployment             and the economy wide shock          from (2), and we need a

suitable measure of          .

        We define the non-tradable sector as the sector that is non-tradable and not exposed to

structural unemployment.12 Then employment losses in the non-tradable sector can be written as:

                                                                                                  (3)

where         represents employment losses in the non-tradable sector, where                                and

          1         ̅       1              . Equation (3) takes out the impact of structural employment

by limiting itself to the non-tradable sector.

        A problem with the estimation of equation (3) is that the actual county-level demand

shock      is not directly observed. However, suppose that there is an observable county

characteristic          such that      is monotonically related to     (and hence        ). In our context,

represents the debt to income ratio as of 2006 which we have already shown in Figure 1 is

strongly correlated with the strength of the consumer demand decline across counties (see also

Mian and Sufi (2010) and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011)).13



11
   That is: ∑              ∑         1
12
   In the empirical section, this translates into removing construction and real-estate related industries from the
definition of non-tradable goods.
13
   We could alternatively use the accumulation of household debt from 2002 to 2006 as our measure of , by using
the growth in household debt from 2002 to 2006 or the change in the debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006. These

                                                        12
        We can use         to back out the marginal effect of the demand shock                  on non-tradable

employment. To see this, rewrite (3) in differences such that,

                                     ∆                                                                (4)

The differencing in equation (4) has stripped out the effect of economy wide shock                          from the

equation. More importantly, given the monotonic relationship between                      and        , an unbiased

estimate of ∆        is given by:

                                              |                  |                                    (5)

The term in square brackets can be estimated non-parametrically, or if the relationship between

     and       is linear then via standard OLS. Let ∆                         |                  |       , be an

unbiased estimate for ∆          then

                          ∑      ∆       =∑   2                  1                    1               (6)

Equation (6) and the analysis above gives us the following proposition that summarizes our

methodology for estimating                                   .


     Proposition 1: As long as the employment effect of the demand shock is non-positive
     for the county that is least impacted (i.e.          0), the estimate  ∑ ∆
     represents an underestimate of the total employment loss in the economy due to the
     aggregate demand shock.

The parameter       can be estimated as the share of non-tradables in the overall economy. In our

empirical analysis that follows, we will explicitly test for the condition                       0 and implement

the methodology summarized in Proposition 1.14



two variables are highly correlated with the debt to income ratio as of 2006. The results of our analysis do not
depend on which of the three we use. See Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) for more discussion on this issue.
14
   This condition,           0, which is satisfied in the data, helps to mitigate concerns that general equilibrium
effects are leading to an over-estimate of the employment losses using the cross-sectional approach. Whatever
positive general equilibrium effects on employment are present in counties with low household leverage, they are
not positive enough to avoid job losses in those counties. This is precisely why our methodology under-estimates the
total job losses due to the aggregate demand channel.

                                                        13
D. Other possible general equilibrium effects

        Our primary focus is on estimating the employment consequences of demand shocks                          .

However as Midrigan and Philippon (2011) show, heterogeneous demand shocks faced by

different counties can also potentially impact relative wages across counties and labor mobility.

For example, relative wages could decline in areas harder hit by the demand shock. The relative

drop in wages could in turn make these counties more competitive in the tradable sector

production. The net impact of these labor market adjustments depends on parameters such as

wage and labor market rigidity. In the empirical section that follows, we explicitly consider these

general equilibrium effects as well.



Section 3: Data, Motivating Example, and Industry Classification

A. Data

        County by industry employment and payroll data are from the County Business Patterns

(CBP) data set published by the U.S. Census Bureau. CBP data are recorded in March each year.

The most recent data available is for 2009. We use CBP data at the 4-digit industry level, so we

know the breakdown of number of employees and total payroll bill within a county for every 4-

digit industry.15 We place each of the 4-digit industries into one of four categories: non-tradable,

tradable, construction and other. We discuss the classification scheme in the next subsection. We

supplement the CBP data with hourly wage data from the annual American Community Survey

(ACS). ACS is based on a survey of 3 million U.S. residents conducted annually.

        As mentioned above, a key variable in the analysis is the leverage ratio of a county,

which is measured as the debt to income ratio as of 2006. Total debt in a county is measured

15
   County data at the 4 digit industry level is at times suppressed for confidentiality reasons. However, in these
situations the Census Bureau provides a “flag” that tells us of the range within which the employment number lies.
We take the mean of this range as a proxy for the missing employment number in such scenarios.

                                                        14
using consumer credit bureau data from Equifax and income is measured as total wages and

salary in a county according to the Statistics of Income by the IRS. For more information on

these data sources, see Mian and Sufi (2010) and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011).

B. Motivating Example

         Section 2 highlights the key prediction of the aggregate demand channel for the drop in

employment: the drop in employment in the non-tradable sector will be largest in high leverage

counties that experienced a larger decline in aggregate demand. On the other hand, the drop in

employment in the tradable sector will be uncorrelated with the county-level debt to income

ratio.

         We motivate the formal test for this hypothesis using the automobile sector as an

example. We know from Figure 1 and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) that areas of the country with

high debt to income ratios experienced a sharp relative drop in auto sales during and after the

recession. The auto sector allows us to test the aggregate demand channel given that it is divided

into two distinct sub-sectors. The tradable sub-sector that is involved in the manufacturing of

autos and the non-tradable retail sub-sector involved in the sale of autos.16

         Figure 3 plots the change in employment in the auto retail (left panel) and auto

manufacturing (right panel) against a county’s debt to income ratio as of 2006. Since county

population distribution is highly skewed we plot only the 450 counties with more than 50,000

households. The results are exactly in line with the aggregate demand channel predictions.

Columns 6 and 7 in Table 1 show that the relationship between change in auto retail employment

and household leverage is strongly negative and significant, while there is no relationship


16
  Automobile manufacturing consists of the following four digit industry codes: motor vehicle manufacturing
(3361), motor vehicle body and trailer manufacturing (3362), and motor vehicle parts manufacturing (3363).
Automobile retail consists of: Automobile dealers (4411), other motor vehicle dealers (4412), Automotive parts
accessories and tire stores (4413), and motor vehicle parts and supplies merchant stores (4231).

                                                        15
between manufacturing employment and household leverage. Instead, auto manufacturing

employment declined significantly across the entire country, as can be seen by the intercept in

the left panel of Figure 3.

       Figure 3 illustrates the core finding of this paper through a simple transparent example.

The negative shock to the demand for autos leads to a reduction in the automobile manufacturing

employment everywhere. However, the drop in retail employment is more closely tied with

economic geography: the drop in retail automobile sector employment is stronger in areas where

the drop in demand for automobiles is higher. Given that low leverage counties experienced only

a minor drop in demand for autos and minor job losses in the auto retail sector, we can

confidently ascribe the job losses in the auto manufacturing sector throughout the country to the

reduction in demand coming from high leverage counties. As we show below, this basic pattern

extends to employment in all sectors, not just autos.

       Another point to take away from this example is that automobile manufacturing

employment is only present in 1,528 counties, while automobile retail is present in almost every

county (3,009). This is a generic finding that we explore more below: Non-tradable industries are

more likely to be present everywhere, while tradable industries tend to be more concentrated

geographically.

C. Classifying industries into tradable and non-tradable categories

       Splitting employment into jobs producing tradable versus non-tradable goods is a crucial

part of our empirical strategy. This is not a trivial exercise. The difficulty is that many industries

produce goods that fit into both non-tradable and tradable categories. For example, some banking

services cater to local demand--a consumer may need a physical branch to deposit funds. Other

banking services cater to national or international demand--for example, investment banking for



                                                  16
large corporations. Given that many industries could be possibly categorized as producing both

tradable and non-tradable goods, subjectivity is a real problem in this setting.

         Our solution to this problem is two-fold. First, we use two independent classification

schemes that follow objective criteria that disallow any subjective judgment. We describe these

two methodologies below. Second, we carefully document these classification schemes and

provide full disclosure on which industries fall into each category. Given the problem of

subjectivity, our goal is to be as transparent as possible. As a side note, an advantage of our

methodology outlined in Section 1 is that it is relatively immune to error in classification: As

long as industries classified as “non-tradable” are legitimately non-tradable and the α used in the

calculations corresponds to this subset of industries, the overall methodology remains valid.

1. Retail and world trade based classification

         For our first classification scheme, we define a 4-digit NAICS industry as tradable if it

has imports plus exports equal to at least $10,000 per worker, or if total exports plus imports for

the NAICS 4-digit industry exceeds $500M.17 Non-tradable industries are defined as the retail

sector and restaurants. We also use a more restricted version of non-tradable industries that

includes only grocery retail stores and restaurants. A third category is construction, which we

define as industries related to construction, real estate, or land development. A large number of

industries do not fit neatly into one of these three categories. We treat these other industries as a

separate category we label as other. The shares of total employment as of 2007 for these four

categories are: tradable (11%), non-tradable (20%), construction (11%), and other (59%).

         Table 2 presents the top ten NAICS coded industries in each of our four categories based

on the fraction of total employment as of 2007, and Appendix Table 1 lists all 294 4-digit


17
   The industry level trade data for the U.S. is taken from Robert Feenstra’s website http://cid.econ.ucdavis.edu. The
trade data is based on 2006 numbers.

                                                          17
industries and their classification. Industries producing tradable goods are mostly manufacturing,

whereas non-tradable industries are concentrated in retail. The largest industries in the other

category are service oriented industries such as health care, education, and finance.18

2. Geographical concentration based classification

        An alternative is to classify industries as tradable and non-tradable based on an industry’s

geographical concentration. The idea is that the production of tradable goods requires

specialization and scale, so industries producing tradable goods should be more concentrated

geographically. Similarly, there are goods and services (such as vacation beaches and amusement

parks) that may not be tradable themselves, but rely on national demand rather than local

demand. For our empirical approach, these industries that are likely to be concentrated

geographically should be classified as tradable. In contrast, industries producing non-tradable

goods should be disperse given that all counties need such goods and services.

        Our measure of geographical concentration of an industry is based on the employment

share of the industry in each county. We use these shares to construct a geographical Herfindahl

index for each industry. Consistent with the intuition that geographic concentration captures

tradable and non-tradable goods production, we find a Herfindahl index of 0.018 for industries

that we classify as tradable in our first classification scheme, and a Herfindahl index of 0.004 for

industries we classify as non-tradable. This is a large difference in Herfindahl given that the

mean and standard deviation of Herfindahl index across industries is 0.016 and 0.023,

respectively.

        Table 3 lists the top 30 most concentrated industries and whether they are classified as

tradable according to our previous categorization. There are a number of new industries


18
  We exclude health care and education from our primary definition of non-tradables. However, our second method
of classification based on geographical concentration allows these sectors to be classified as non-tradables.

                                                      18
classified as tradable according to the geographical concentration measure. The new

classification is intuitive. For example, securities exchanges, sightseeing activities, amusement

parks, and internet service providers all show up as tradable under the new scheme. This is

sensible given that these activities cater to broader national level demand. Similarly, the bottom

30 industries include a number of industries that were not classified as non-tradable in our

previous classification scheme. For example, lawn and garden stores, death care services, child

care services, religious organizations, nursing care services are all industries that cater mostly to

local demand but were missed in our previous classification scheme.

       In short, geographical concentration based categorization of industries into tradable and

non-tradable is intuitive and avoids subjectivity in selection. Our second classification scheme

categorizes the top and bottom quartile of industries by geographical concentration as tradable

and non-tradable, respectively.

D. Summary statistics

       Table 4 presents summary statistics for our sample. The average debt to income ratio of a

county is 2.5 and there is a significant amount of variation. The standard deviation is 1.0 and the

spread between the 10th and 90th percentile is large. Employment from 2007 to 2009 drops by

an average of 5% across counties, which reflects the severity of the recession. Average wage

growth is positive from 2007 to 2009 at the mean, but negative at the 10th percentile. This wage

data is from the county business pattern data set and wage is computed by dividing total payroll

with the number of employees. As a result, it includes possible changes in the number of hours

worked. There are significant differences in the declines in employment across the four

categories of employment. The average decline in construction employment across counties is




                                                 19
12% during the recession. It is 12% for tradables, 2.5% for non-tradables, and 1.3% for the food

industry.

         The next set of variables in Table 4 comes from American Community Survey (ACS).

They are based on survey responses and enable us to measure reported hourly wages directly.

Since survey data is available at the individual response level, we can also construct various

percentiles of the wage distribution for a given county. Average hourly wage as of 2007 is $17

and average reported hourly wage growth is 2.9% from 2007 to 2009.



Section 4: Demand Shocks and Employment Losses

         In this section, we implement the methodology outlined in Section 2 to estimate the effect

of the aggregate demand shock related to household balance sheet weakness on aggregate

employment.

A. Demand shocks and employment losses in non-tradable and tradable Industries

         The left panel of Figure 4 presents the scatter-plot of employment losses in non-tradable

industries (excluding construction) from 2007 to 2009 against the 2006 debt to income ratio of

the county. There is a strong negative correlation. Even at the lowest end of the demand shock,

the predicted level of employment change is non-positive. As Proposition 1 explained, this is

important for our aggregate calculation.19 The thin black line in the left panel of Figure 4 plots

the non-parametric relationship between job losses in the non-tradable sector and county

leverage. The non-parametric relationship closely follows the OLS predicted value; linearity is a

reasonable assumption to explore the relationship between job losses and leverage.




19
  In our actual aggregate calculation, we are conservative and use the debt to income ratio at the 10th percentile of
the distribution as our control group.

                                                          20
        While job losses in the non-tradable sector are strongly negatively correlated with the

2006 debt to income ratio of the county, the right panel of Figure 4 shows no such relation

between leverage and job losses in the tradable sector. Instead, the OLS prediction has a negative

constant and is flat across the entire distribution. As we discuss in Section 2, this is exactly the

expected relation under the aggregate demand hypothesis given that the labor demand shock for

tradable goods production should be evenly distributed across the economy.

        Table 5 presents the regression coefficients relating employment growth in non-tradable

industries from 2007 to 2009 to the 2006 debt to income ratio of the county. The instrumental

variables estimate in column 3 implies that a one standard deviation increase in ex ante county

leverage is associated with a 3.1% drop in employment in the non-tradable sector. Alternatively,

moving from the 10th percentile of the leverage distribution to the 90th percentile is associated

with a 6.2% larger drop in employment in industries producing non-tradable goods.

        One concern is that counties with high debt to income ratio are somehow spuriously

correlated with the type of industries they specialize in. If these industries received a stronger

shock, then our results could be spurious. Column 4 includes as controls the share of

employment devoted to each sector as of 2007 and the coefficient of interest is the same. We

have experimented with introducing other industry controls at the county level – for example, the

share of employment at the 2-digit industry level. Our main result remains unaffected.

        Column 5 uses the alternative and stricter definition of non-tradables which includes only

industries related to retail grocery and restaurants. This alternative definition is a strict subset of

our earlier definition. The coefficient on debt to income is negative and statistically significant,




                                                   21
although it is slightly smaller than the column 2 estimate. The difference in magnitude reflects

the fact that demand for groceries is less elastic than other goods bought in retail stores.20

          Columns 6 and 7 report specifications relating job losses in the tradable sector to the

2006 debt to income ratio of a county. The coefficient is close to zero and precisely estimated.

The difference between the coefficients for tradable job losses in column 6 and that for non-

tradable job losses in column 1 is also statistically significant at the 1% level. The results in

columns 6 and 7 also show a statistically significant negative coefficient on the constant. This

reflects the fact that employment losses are evenly distributed across the entire country in

industries producing tradable goods.

          In order to quantify the tradable versus non-tradable results, it is useful to pick points in

the 2006 debt to income distribution and calculate the marginal impact of the demand shock

going from low to high leverage counties. Consider a county at the 10th percentile of debt to

income ratio (with a debt to income ratio of 1.5). Using the estimates from columns 4 and 7 of

Table 5, the predicted drops in non-tradable and tradable employment from 2007 to 2009 are

0.3% and 11.6% respectively.21 In contrast, the predicted employment drops in non-tradable and

tradable sectors for the 90th percentile county with debt to income ratio of 3.8 are 5.1% and

11.6% respectively. The fact that high leverage counties experience a sharp employment drop in

both tradable and non-tradable industries whereas low leverage counties experience an

employment drop only in tradable industries is what allows us to identify the effect of demand

shocks.




20
   Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) show that that the relative reduction in consumption in high leverage counties from
2007 to 2009 is smallest for groceries, which is consistent with a lower income elasticity.
21
   Predicted values are estimated at the sample mean of construction, non-tradable and tradable employment shares
in a county.

                                                        22
       Figure 5 and Table 6 repeat the analysis using the geographical concentration based-

definition of tradable and non-tradable industries. Despite being a completely different

classification scheme, the results are remarkably similar. The left panel of Figure 5 and columns

1 through 4 of Table 6 show that the relationship between job losses in non-tradable industries –

as defined by industries that are least concentrated geographically - and the debt to income ratio

as of 2006 is strongly negative. The right panel of Figure 5 and the results in columns 5 and 6 of

Table 6 show that the relationship between job losses in tradable industries – as defined by

industries that are most concentrated geographically – and debt to income as of 2006 is

completely uncorrelated.

B. Testing alternative explanations

       The decline in employment in industries producing non-tradable goods from 2007 to

2009 is concentrated in high leverage U.S. counties that simultaneously experience sharp relative

declines in credit limits, house prices, debt levels, and consumption. The decline in employment

in industries producing tradable goods is spread evenly across U.S. counties. These facts are

consistent with the aggregate demand hypothesis of high unemployment levels that we outline in

Section 2 above. Could our results be explained by alternative hypotheses? We discuss this

question below.

1. The uncertainty hypothesis

       A number of commentators and academics have put forth policy, regulatory, or business

uncertainty as an explanation for the decline in macroeconomic aggregates (e.g. Baker, Bloom,

and Davis (2011), Bloom (2009), Bloom, Foetotto, and Jaimovich (2010), Fernandez-Villaverde,

Guerron-Quintana, Kuester, and Rubio-Ramirez (2011), and Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek

(2010)). As we show in Section 2, in its most basic form, an increase in business uncertainty at



                                                23
the aggregate level does not explain the stark cross-sectional patterns in employment losses that

we observe in non-tradable and tradable industries across U.S. counties. There may be more

subtle versions of the uncertainty hypothesis that generate cross-sectional differences, but we

have not seen them articulated.

2. The construction-related structural unemployment hypothesis

       Another common explanation given for high unemployment is the displacement of

workers from real estate related “bubble” industries such as construction and mortgages. Since

job losses in these sectors are likely to be permanent once the bubble burst, it will take time for

these workers to get re-trained and absorbed in alternative industries. We refer to this as the

structural unemployment hypothesis.

       There are a number of reasons already shown why the structural unemployment

hypothesis is unlikely to explain our results. In the above results, we explicitly remove any

employment associated with the construction, real estate, or mortgages from our non-tradable

definition. Given this exclusion, the strong correlation between leverage and the decline in non-

tradable employment decline is unlikely to be driven by construction related shocks.

       However, perhaps our debt to income measure as of 2006 is correlated with the

construction sector shock, and a negative shock to construction indirectly affects other non-

tradable sector employment. Table 7 tests this concern by first correlating the 2006 debt to

income ratio across counties with the county-level share of employment in construction in 2007,

and the growth in construction related employment from 2000 to 2007. Columns 1 and 3 of

Table 7 show that both these measures of exposure to the construction sector in a county are

positively correlated with the 2006 debt to income ratio. How can we be sure that we are

capturing a demand effect and not a construction effect?



                                                 24
         One answer is in results shown above. In Tables 5 and 6, we include the share of workers

in construction as of 2007 as a control variable. The inclusion of this control does not affect the

results. In fact, the construction share of employment as of 2007 is barely correlated with job

losses in non-construction non-tradable industries when no other variables are included.22

         A second answer lies in our instrumental variables specification. Columns 2 and 4 of

Table 7 show that when we instrument the 2006 debt to income ratio using housing supply

elasticity, the predicted values of the debt to income ratio are not correlated with either the

construction share as of 2007 or the growth in the construction share from 2000 to 2007. In other

words, when we isolate the variation in the 2006 debt to income ratio that comes from housing

supply elasticity, the variation is uncorrelated with the construction sector.

         Recall that column 4 in Table 1 shows that the debt to income ratio as of 2006 is strongly

correlated with housing supply elasticity, with an R2 of 0.18. Why is the instrumented debt to

income ratio uncorrelated with the construction share and the growth in construction sector in

Table 7? The answer lies in the dual role played by the elasticity instrument. On one hand, less

elastic counties saw sharper increases in house prices during the boom. The increase in house

prices made credit more easily available due to higher collateral value therefore facilitating more

construction activity. On the other hand, less elastic counties have – by definition – a higher

marginal cost to expand the housing stock. The combination of these two opposing forces makes

housing elasticity uncorrelated with construction activity, but strongly correlated with the

accumulation of leverage due to the home equity borrowing effect.


22
  See the middle panel of Appendix Figure 1. When we estimate the corresponding weighted least squares
regression in column 1 of Table 5 using the construction share of employment as of 2007 instead of the debt to
income ratio as of 2006, the coefficient is -0.047 with a p-value of 0.373. The standard deviation of the construction
share weighted by total population is only 0.039. This implies both a very small and statistically weak effect of the
construction share on subsequent employment losses in non-construction non-tradable industries. In contrast, the
debt to income ratio as of 2006 does an excellent job predicting job losses in the construction sector. See the right
panel of Appendix Figure 1.

                                                          25
       More generally our results are not driven by a spurious correlation between household

leverage and exposure to an industry that happens to be disproportionately affected by the

recession. Inclusion of control variables for employment shares of all possible 2-digit industries

in county employment do not affect our results. Further, our motivating example using the auto

sector provides a “within-industry” test that confirms the broader tradable/non-tradable

differences in employment patterns.

3. The credit supply hypothesis

       Another possible explanation for high unemployment is based on counties experiencing

differential credit supply shocks depending on the severity of the house price collapse. Because

leverage as of 2006 is strongly correlated with subsequent house price declines and real estate

may be used as collateral for business credit, collateral-induced tightness in business credit might

reduce employment in high leverage counties.

       One problem with this alternative explanation is that it does not explain why job losses in

high leverage counties were concentrated in non-tradable industries. An explanation based on

credit supply would imply more job losses within high leverage counties in all industries--we

find no such effect in industries producing tradable goods.

       But a counter-argument is that the non-tradable sector may be more susceptible to credit

supply shocks. To address this issue, we take advantage of the CBP data which records

employment separately for establishments by various size categories. Table 8 shows that the

negative correlation between employment growth in non-tradable industries from 2007 to 2009

and the ex ante county leverage ratio is stronger in large establishments. Under the assumption

that smaller firms face tighter financial constraints, the results dispute a credit supply based

explanation.



                                                  26
C. Other labor market margins of adjustment: Wages and labor mobility

        Figures 2 through 5 show a very large decline in employment in high leverage counties

relative to low leverage counties. As discussed in Section 2.D, we now consider how the large

decline in employment in these areas affects wages and labor mobility.

        We begin with wages. In the absence of absolute wage rigidity, we should expect at least

some downward response of wages to the large decline in employment in high leverage counties.

In Table 9 and the left panel of Figure 6, we find evidence of this effect. In both the left panel of

Figure 6 and in columns 1 through 4 of Table 9, we use county level data on wages from the

Census County Business Patterns. We find that debt to income ratios as of 2006 have a negative

effect on total wage growth from 2007 to 2009. The coefficient in column 2 implies that a one

standard deviation increase in the 2006 debt to income ratio leads to 1% lower wage growth,

which is about 1/5 a standard deviation. The instrumental variables estimate in column 4 is twice

as large.

        The advantage of Census data is that it is based on actual IRS payroll data for current

employees and is therefore very accurate. The disadvantage is that it only tracks the wages per

employee and does not record the hours worked by an employee. As a result, the decline in

wages we find in Table 9 may be due to a decline in the number of hours worked by a given

employee, not by a lower wage to the employee.

        In columns 5 through 7, we use survey data from the American Community Survey on

hourly wages. The advantage of the ACS data is that it tracks hourly wages, not total wages per

employee. The disadvantage is that the ACS is based on survey data that is likely to be less

accurate than payroll data. Regardless, column 5 shows a similar negative effect of county




                                                 27
leverage as of 2006 on hourly wage growth. The similarity of the CBP and ACS results are

reassuring that the CBP result is not being driven by workers cutting the number of work-hours.

         The ACS also allows us to split the wage effect across the distribution of wages. The

right panel of Figure 6 shows a negative relation between wages at the 25th percentile of the

distribution and the 2006 debt to income ratio of a county. Columns 6 and 7 examine the

correlation between debt to income and wage growth at the 10th and 90th percentile of the wage

distribution. We find suggestive evidence that wages decline by more in the lower part of the

wage distribution.

         Another margin on which workers may adjust is mobility (Blanchard and Katz (1992)).

Facing extremely high unemployment rates, workers in high leverage counties may choose to

move out of the area. In the left panel of Figure 7, we utilize state level data on population from

the Census. From 2007 to 2009, population growth is in fact slightly positively correlated with

the 2006 debt to income ratio at the state level. In other words, despite the collapsing economy in

high debt to income states, the population is growing somewhat faster in these states.23

         Column 1 of Table 10 confirms this positive correlation and shows that it is statistically

significant at the 5% level. The specification in column 2 utilizes net migration in 2008 and 2009

as a fraction of population in 2007. Net migration helps eliminate the effect of population growth

driven by fertility differences. The point estimate remains positive but is not significantly

different than zero. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 10 help ensure that the employment declines in

high leverage areas are not due to people moving out of the area.

         An alternative check to ensure that our results are not driven by a decline in available

labor force in high leverage counties is to directly look at labor force growth between 2007 and

23
  We do not have county-level measures of population through 2009. It should be kept in mind that the positive
correlation of population growth with leverage is a continuation of a higher growth trajectory for population in high
leverage counties.

                                                         28
2009 at the county level. This information is provided by the BLS. The right panel of Figure 7

plots labor force growth from 2007 to 2009 in counties against the debt to income ratio as of

2006. There is a slightly positive relation but it is extremely noisy. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 10

show coefficients consistent with the scatter-plot in Figure 7: the correlation is positive but

statistically unreliable. The IV version of this regression is positive in column 4. In other words,

there is no evidence that high leverage counties experienced disproportionate losses in

population or labor force participation. If anything, there is some evidence that high leverage

areas continued to growth more strongly in terms of the labor force from 2007 to 2009.



Section 5: The Aggregate Calculation

A. Baseline calculation

       We can now apply the methodology outlined in section 1 and summarized by Proposition

1 to compute the aggregate loss in employment due to the aggregate demand shock related to

weak household balance sheets. The employment loss due to these demand shocks is given by

  ∑     ∆      , where ∆                |                |    .

       The relationship between non-tradable employment loss and 2006 leverage is almost

linear (see Figure 4). We can therefore use results from our main linear regression specification

(column 1 of Table 5) to estimate ∆         for each county. This is done by using the predicted

value for each county from column 1 of Table 5, and subtracting the predicted value of

employment losses for the county with the lowest leverage in 2006.

       In order to be conservative and also to avoid basing our estimate on potentially noisy

outliers in our sample distribution, we pick the 10th percentile of leverage distribution as our base

county. Therefore,         |    equals the predicted non-tradable employment losses for the


                                                   29
county that corresponds to the 10th percentile of cross-county 2006 leverage distribution. ∆       is

set to zero for all counties below the 10th percentile county.

       While this is also visually apparent from Figure 4, the predicted log change in non-

tradable employment for the 10th percentile county is negative and equals -0.0060. As stated in

Proposition 1, it is important for our calculation that our base county non-tradable employment

change be negative.

       We multiply the predicted percentage change in non-tradable employment for a given

county by the level of non-tradable employment in 2007 in that county to compute the predicted

change in number of non-tradable jobs. Summing this estimate across counties gives us an

estimate of 760 thousand jobs lost in the non-tradable sector due to the demand shock.

       In order to translate this number into total jobs lost across all sectors, we need to multiply

it by the inverse of the share of non-tradable sector, 1/ . Given a share of 19.6% of non-tradable

employment in total employment, we get an estimate of 3.92 million jobs lost across all sectors

due to the aggregate demand shock. The total number of jobs lost in our data between 2007 and

2009 equals 6.05 million jobs. As a result, our estimated jobs lost due to the demand shock

equals 64.7% of total jobs lost in the economy from 2007 to 2009.

       Another interesting parameter that we are able to estimate is the elasticity of employment

growth with respect to consumption growth during the recession. Using data on total

consumption based on MasterCard purchases from Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011), we find an

elasticity of employment growth with respect to consumption growth of 0.39. We obtain this

number from a second stage county-level regression of employment growth from 2007 to 2009

in the non-tradable sector on consumption growth in the county from 2007 to 2009, where

consumption growth is instrumented using housing supply elasticity.


                                                 30
       An additional question is in regard to the persistence of unemployment into 2010. The

CBP county-industry level data on employment are not available through 2010 at the time of this

writing. However, we can use county-level employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics

to get some sense of the answer to this question. The disadvantage is that we are unable to split

employment by non-tradable and tradable industries. Nonetheless, Appendix Figure 2 shows that

the relative employment drop in high leverage counties persists even into 2010. In fact, there is

evidence of a widening of the gap between high and low leverage counties in 2010. These results

suggest that the aggregate demand channel may also explain the persistence of unemployment

after the recession.

B. Robustness to alternative assumptions

       Our estimate for jobs lost due to demand shocks is likely to be an underestimate of the

true effect for two reasons. First, as is highlighted in Proposition 1, we do not include in our

estimate jobs lost due to demand shocks in the lowest end of county distribution. We have been

cautious in using only the 10th percentile as our base county. If we were to use the 5th percentile

county instead, which has predicted log change employment of -0.0017, then our estimated job

loss due to demand shocks would have been 4.45 million jobs or 73.4% of total jobs lost.

       Second, our methodology in Section 1 assumes that consumers cut back on tradable and

non-tradable goods proportionately. There is evidence that demand for industries not included in

the non-tradable definition such as durable goods and construction are more sensitive to a

negative demand shock related to weak household balance sheets. For example, Mian, Rao, and

Sufi (2011) show that the relative decline in durable goods purchases for leverage counties is

much larger than the relative decline for other goods. Incorporating a higher income elasticity of

demand for industries not included in the non-tradable sector would increase our estimate of jobs



                                                 31
lost. Based on these factors, we feel that our reported estimate - while already large and

significant - is likely to be an underestimate of the true employment losses due to demand shock.

         Our macro calculation could have been an overestimate of the true job losses in the

economy due to the aggregate demand shock if relative wage declines in high leverage counties

had attracted more jobs in the tradable sector. However, we see no evidence of that as the

relationship between employment declines in the tradable sector and county leverage is zero and

precisely estimated.24

         On a related note, when we extrapolate the effect on tradables using the non-tradable

estimate, we implicitly assume that the aggregate demand effect is similar for exports. This may

not be the case if one believes that the aggregate demand shock was limited to the United States..

Since the U.S. exports 8.4% of its GDP, assuming no demand effect on exporting sector would

reduce our aggregate employment loss number to (1-0.084)*64.7= 59.3% of total jobs lost.



Section 6: Conclusion

         Household debt in the United States reached unprecedented levels before the onset of the

recession. The extant literature strongly supports the view that the onset of the recession was

driven by a series of shocks to the household balance sheet. In counties with high levels of

leverage as of 2006, house prices declined by 30% from 2007 to 2010. Mian, Rao, and Sufi

(2011) show that the drop in consumption of all types of goods from 2007 to 2010 was much

more severe in high leverage counties.



24
  There remains a possible external adjustment mechanism via trade with the rest of the world. In particular, a
serious devaluation of the dollar may induce job creation in the overall export sector all across the U.S. However,
job gains in the export sector remain modest, and as the summary statistics in Table 4 show, between 2007 and
2009, job losses in the tradable sector were 4.9% and higher than losses in any other sector. The export-adjustment
margin is unlikely to be very meaningful for job creation during the 2007 to 2009 period.

                                                         32
       In this study, we estimate how these negative demand shocks affected employment levels

during the heart of the recession. Our main insight is that the relation between demand shocks

and employment losses in industries catering to local demand can be used to estimate the effect

of aggregate demand on aggregate unemployment. We estimate that 4 million of the 6.2 million

jobs lost between March 2007 and March 2009 were due to demand shocks. Based on this

analysis, we believe that weak household balance sheets and the resulting aggregate demand

shock are the main reasons for historically high unemployment in the U.S. economy.

       Alternative hypotheses such as business uncertainty and structural adjustment of the labor

force related to construction are less consistent with the facts. The argument that businesses are

holding back hiring because of regulatory or financial uncertainty is difficult to reconcile with

the strong cross-sectional relation between household leverage levels, consumption, and

employment in the non-tradable sector. This argument is also difficult to reconcile with survey

evidence from small businesses and economists saying that lack of product demand has been the

primary worry for businesses throughout the recession (Dennis (2010), Izzo (2011)).

       There is certainly validity to the structural adjustment argument given large employment

losses associated with the construction sector. However, we show that the leverage ratio of a

county is a far more powerful predictor of total employment losses than either the growth in

construction employment during the housing boom or the construction share of the labor force as

of 2007. Further, using variation across the country in housing supply elasticity, we show that the

aggregate demand hypothesis is distinct from the construction collapse view. Finally, structural

adjustment theories based on construction do not explain why employment has declined sharply

in industries producing tradable goods even in areas that experienced no housing boom.




                                                 33
                                           References

Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven Davis, 2011, "Measuring Economic Policy
Uncertainty," Chicago Booth Working Paper, October.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz, 1992, "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1: 1992, 1-75.

Bloom, Nicholas, 2009. "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica 77: 623-685.

Bloom, N., M. Foetotto, and N. Jaimovich, 2010. “Really Uncertain Business Cycles,” Stan-
ford University Working Paper.

Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. A. Guerron-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ramirez,
2011. “Fiscal Uncertainty and Economic Activity,” University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.

Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek, 2010. “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and In-
vestment Dynamics,” Boston University Working Paper, September.

Dennis, William J., 2010. "Small Business Credit in a Deep Recession," National Federation of
Independent Businesses Research Foundation, available at:
http://www.nfib.com/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=IPeviHUzXfE%3D&tabid=90&mid=3121

Eggertsson, Gauti and Paul Krugman, 2011. "Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap,"
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working Paper, February.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, 2011. "Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
Liquidity Trap," Chicago Booth Working Paper, July.

Hall, Robert E., 2011. "The Long Slump," American Economic Review 101: 431-469.

Izzo, Phil, 2011. "Dearth of Demand Seen Behind Weak Hiring," Wall Street Journal, July 18th.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, 2011. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and
the Economic Slump,” Chicago Booth Working Paper, November.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2009. "The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis," Quarterly Journal of Economics 124: 1449-1496.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2010. "Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to 2009," IMF
Economic Review 58: 74-117.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2011. "House Prices, Home Equity Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
Household Leverage Crisis," American Economic Review 101: 2132-2156.




                                                34
Midrigan, Virgiliu and Thomas Philippon, 2011. "Household Leverage and the Recession," NYU
Stern Working Paper, April.

Albert Saiz, 2011. "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.




                                             35
                                                                                    Figure 1
                                                            Household Balance Sheet Weakness and Aggregate Demand
This figure plots house prices, home equity limits, household borrowing, and auto sales for high and low household leverage counties in the U.S. from 2006 to
2010. High and low household leverage counties are defined to be the top and bottom quartile counties based on the debt to income ratio as of 2006. Quartiles are
weighted by the outcome variable in question as of 2006 so that both quartiles contain the same amount of the outcome variable as of 2006 (for house prices we
weight by population).


                       (normalized to 1 in 2006)                 House prices                                                           Auto Sales




                                                                                              (normalized to 1 in 2006)
                                                                                                 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4
                                            1
                            House prices




                                                                                                    Auto sales
                        .7    .8     .9




                                                   2005   2006    2007   2008   2009   2010                               2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010


                                                                  Durables                                                              Groceries
                       (normalized to 1 in 2006)




                                                                                              (normalized to 1 in 2006)
                                        1 1.1




                                                                                                         1 1.1 1.2
                           Durable purchase




                                                                                                     Groceries
                        .7 .8 .9




                                                                                               .8 .9
                                                   2005   2006    2007   2008   2009   2010                               2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010


                                                                           High leverage/inelastic counties, 2006
                                                                           Low leverage/elastic counties, 2006
                                                                                           Figure 2
                                                                  Aggregate Demand and Employment across Counties: All Industries
This figure presents a scatter-plot of county level employment growth from 2007Q1 to 2009Q1 against the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006. All
industries are included. The sample includes only counties with more than 50,000 households.



                                                        .1
                   County Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1
                                                        0
                                                        -.1
                                                        -.2




                                                              1   1.5      2      2.5     3         3.5       4     4.5   5         5.5   6
                                                                                              Debt to Income 2006
                                                                                                          Figure 3
                                                                                     Aggregate Demand and Employment across Counties
                                                                                   Motivating Example: Auto Retail and Auto Manufacturing
This figure presents scatter-plots of county level employment growth from 2007Q1 to 2009Q1 against the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006. The left
panel examines employment in the automobile retail sector and the right panel focuses on automobile manufacturing sector. The sample includes counties with
more than 50,000 households.


                                                                               Auto Retail                                                                                                    Auto Manufacturing
                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                    Auto Manufacturing Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1
                                                .2
      Auto Retail Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                -.2
                                                -.4




                                                                                                                                                                     -2




                                                      1   1.5   2   2.5    3      3.5   4       4.5   5   5.5   6                                                         1   1.5   2   2.5      3     3.5    4       4.5   5   5.5   6
                                                                          Debt to Income 2006                                                                                                   Debt to Income 2006
                                                                                                 Figure 4
                                                            Aggregate Demand and Employment across Counties: Non-Tradable and Tradable Industries
This figure presents scatter-plots of county level employment growth from 2007Q1 to 2009Q1 against the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006. The left
panel examines employment in non-tradable industries excluding construction and the right panel focuses on tradable industries. The sample includes only
counties with more than 50,000 households. The thin black line in the left panel is the non-parametric plot of non-tradable employment growth against debt to
income.


                                                                 Non-tradable (excluding construction)                                                                                       Tradable
                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                              .2
      Non-Tradable Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1
                                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                       Tradable Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1
                (excludes construction)




                                                                                                                                                              -.2
                                                 0
                                                 -.1




                                                                                                                                                              -.4
                                                 -.2




                                                                                                                                                              -.6




                                                       1   1.5     2   2.5    3     3.5    4       4.5   5   5.5   6                                                1   1.5   2   2.5    3     3.5    4       4.5   5   5.5   6
                                                                             Debt to Income 2006                                                                                        Debt to Income 2006
                                                                                                               Figure 5
                                                                                         Aggregate Demand and Employment across Counties:
                                                                                  Geographical Herfindahl-Based Non-Tradable and Tradable Industries
This figure presents scatter-plots of county level employment growth from 2007Q1 to 2009Q1 against the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006. The left
panel examines employment in non-tradable industries based on geographical herfindahl index and the right panel focuses on tradable industries based on the
same index. The sample includes only counties with more than 50,000 households.


                                                                                   Non-Tradable                                                                                                            Tradable
                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                            .5
      Non-Tradable Sector Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1




                                                                                                                            Tradable Sector Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1
                                                        .1




                                                                                                                               (based on high geographical concentration)
           (based on low geographical concentration)
                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                                            -.5
                                                        -.2




                                                              1   1.5   2   2.5    3     3.5    4       4.5   5   5.5   6                                                         1   1.5   2   2.5    3     3.5    4       4.5   5   5.5   6
                                                                                  Debt to Income 2006                                                                                                 Debt to Income 2006
                                                                                        Figure 6
                                                                    Aggregate Demand and Wage Growth across Counties
This figure presents scatter-plots of hourly wage growth from 2007Q1 to 2009Q1 against the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006. The left panel
examines all wages and the right panel examines wages at the 25th percentile of the distribution. The sample includes only counties with more than 50,000
households.


                                                               All Wages                                                                                           25th Percentile Wages
                                .3




                                                                                                                                               .2
                                .2




                                                                                                    25th Percentile Hourly Wage growth 07-09
        Wage growth 07Q1-09Q1




                                                                                                                                               .1
                                .1
                                0




                                                                                                                                               0
                                -.1




                                                                                                                                               -.1
                                -.2




                                      1   1.5   2   2.5    3      3.5   4       4.5   5   5.5   6                                                    1   1.5   2   2.5    3     3.5    4       4.5   5   5.5   6
                                                          Debt to Income 2006                                                                                            Debt to Income 2006
                                                                                                                     Figure 7
                                                                                                  Household Balance Sheet Weakness and Mobility
This figure presents scatter-plots of mobility from 2007 to 2009 against the debt to income ratio of the county/state as of 2006. The left panel utilizes state level
data from the Census on total population growth. The right panel uses labor force data from the county business patterns. The sample for the right panel includes
only counties with more than 50,000 households.


                                                                 Population growth (Census)                                                                                                    Labor force growth




                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                       UT
                                .04




                                           TX        WY
                                                                                                        CO
                                                                                                        AZ
                                                                            NC


                                                                       SC         GA         ID
                                .03




                                                                                                   WA
                                                                                                                NV




                                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                                LA




                                                                                                                                         Labor Force Growth 07-09
      Population Growth 07-09




                                                                                                       OR
                                                                             AK DE
        (based on Census)




                                                                                 DC
                                            OK                              NM               VA
                                .02




                                                           TN                                                                   CA
                                                                SD
                                                                                  MT
                                                  AR
                                                 KS NE
                                                     AL
                                                                                 MA MN            FL                 HI
                                                ND   KY         MO
                                                      IN
                                                                                            MD
                                .01




                                           MS                     IL




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                          IA
                                                           WI
                                                                CTNJ
                                                     PA
                                                     NY
                                                                             NH
                                           WV

                                                                OHVT
                                                                             ME
                                0




                                                                             RI
                                                                                                                                                                    -.05




                                                                       MI
                                -.01




                                       2                  2.5                3              3.5             4             4.5        5                                     1   1.5   2   2.5     3     3.5    4       4.5   5   5.5   6
                                                                                 Debt to Income 2006                                                                                            debt to income 2006
                                                                 Table 1
                                   Household Balance Sheet Weakness, Aggregate Demand, and Employment
This table presents regression coefficients relating employment growth in a county from 2007 to 2009 to the debt to income ratio of the county in 2006. The
specification "WLS" is weighted least squares where the weights are total number of households in the county. The instrumental variables specifications in
column 5 uses the housing supply elasticity of the county (Saiz (2011)) as an instrument for the debt to income ratio in the first stage, which is reported in
column 4. Standard errors are heterskedasticity robust.
                                                                                                                                           Motivating Example
                                          (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                   (6)                (7)
                                               Employment growth, 2007-2009               Debt to income,      Employment            Auto Retail           Auto
                                                                                                2006          growth, 2007-         Employment        Manufacturing
                                                                                                                   2009            growth, 2007-        Employment
                                                                                                                                        2009           growth, 2007-
                                                                                                                                                           2009

Debt to income, 2006                  -0.018**          -0.019**           -0.020**                              -0.020**           -0.036**             0.006
                                       (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.003)                               (0.006)            (0.004)            (0.025)

Housing supply elasticity (Saiz)                                                              -0.372**
                                                                                               (0.059)

Constant                                0.001             0.007              0.010             3.693**             0.010              -0.019           -0.319**
                                       (0.006)           (0.007)            (0.009)            (0.168)            (0.017)            (0.013)            (0.080)

Specification                           WLS               OLS                WLS                WLS                 IV                WLS                WLS
Sample                                  Full             > 50K             Elasticity         Elasticity         Elasticity           Full               Full
                                                       households          available          available          available

N                                          3,135             450              877                 877               877               3,009              1,528
R2                                         0.096            0.130            0.162               0.180             0.162              0.045              0.000
**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively
                                                                          Table 2
                                                                  Industry Categorization
This table presents the largest 10 industries in each category of goods produced. The % column gives the percentage of the entire 2007 labor force represented by
the industry in question. Please see the text for the methodology used to categorize each industry. See Appendix Table 1 for a complete list of industries and their
category.

                           Non-tradable Industries                                                              Tradable Industries
                         (19.6% of total employment)                                                        (10.7% of total employment)
                                                                         %         NAICS      Industry name                                                  %
 7221     Full-service restaurants                                      3.76        3261      Plastics product manufacturing                                0.60
 7222     Limited-service eating places                                 3.40        3231      Printing and related support activities                       0.53
 4451     Grocery stores                                                2.13        3363      Motor vehicle parts manufacturing                             0.52
 4521     Department stores                                             1.36        3116      Animal slaughtering and processing                            0.44
 4529     Other general merchandise stores                              1.12        3364      Aerospace product and parts manufacturing                     0.35
 4481     Clothing stores                                               1.06        3327      Machine shops; screw nut and bolt manufacturing               0.33
 4461     Health and personal care stores                               0.89        3345      Navigational and control instruments manufacturing            0.33
 4471     Gasoline stations                                             0.73        3344      Semiconductor and other electronic manufacturing              0.32
 7223     Special food services                                         0.49        3399      Other miscellaneous manufacturing                             0.31
 4511     Sporting goods hobby and music stores                         0.38        5112      Software publishers                                           0.29


                           Construction Industries                                                                 Other Industries
                         (11.2% of total employment)                                                        (58.5% of total employment)
NAICS     Industry name                                                  %          NAICS     Industry name                                                  %
 2382     Building equipment contractors                                1.62         6221     General medical and surgical hospitals                        4.31
 5413     Architectural engineering and related services                1.19         5511     Management of companies and enterprises                       2.60
 4441     Building material and supplies dealers                        1.00         5613     Employment services                                           2.56
 2381     Foundation structure and building contractors                 0.91         6211     Offices of physicians                                         1.79
 2383     Building finishing contractors                                0.78         5221     Depository credit intermediation                              1.77
 2361     Residential building construction                             0.75         7211     Traveler accommodation                                        1.54
 2362     Nonresidential building construction                          0.64         5617     Services to buildings and dwellings                           1.42
 5313     Activities related to real estate                             0.54         8131     Religious organizations                                       1.39
 2389     Other specialty trade contractors                             0.48         6231     Nursing care facilities                                       1.37
 5311     Lessors of real estate                                        0.45         6113     Colleges universities and professional schools                1.35
                                                Table 3
                     Industry Categorization Based On Geographical Concentration
This table lists the top and bottom 30 industries by geographical concentration. For each industry we compute Herfindahl
index based on the shares of employment for that industry across counties. The most concentrated (top 30) are likely to be
“tradable” in that they depend on national or international demand. If an industry needs to be physically present in an area
to provide its goods or services, then it is likely to be non-tradable and least concentrated (bottom 30). The indicator
variable for traded and non-traded reports the classification according to our other methodology reported in Table 2.

                    Herfindahl Top-30                                              Herfindahl Bottom-30

  Industry name                                     Traded?        Industry name                                   Non-
                                                                                                                   Traded?
  Securities and commodity exchanges                   0           Lawn and garden equipment stores                   0
  Pipeline transportation of crude oil                 0           Farm product raw material wholesalers              0
  Cut and sew apparel manufacturing                    1           Gasoline stations                                  1
  Motion picture and video industries                  0           Nonmetallic mineral mining and quarrying           0
  Agents and managers for artists athletes             0           Other general merchandise stores                   1
  Deep sea coastal and lakes transportation            0           RV parks and recreational camps                    0
  Cable and other subscription programming             0           Sawmills and wood preservation                     0
  Sound recording industries                           0           Florists                                           1
  Tobacco manufacturing                                1           Death care services                                0
  Independent artists writers and performers           0           General rental centers                             0
  Railroad rolling stock manufacturing                 1           Direct selling establishments                      0
  Scenic and sightseeing transportation other          0           Building material and supplies dealers             0
  Amusement parks and arcades                          0           Other motor vehicle dealers                        1
  Scenic and sightseeing transportation water          0           Nursing care facilities                            0
  Securities and commodity brokerage                   0           Automotive parts accessories and tire stores       1
  Internet Service Providers and Web Search            0           Logging                                            0
  Metal ore mining                                     1           Specialized freight trucking                       0
  Support activities for water transportation          0           Cement and concrete product manufacturing          0
  Apparel goods wholesalers                            0           Other wood product manufacturing                   0
  Other support activities for transportation          0           mental health and substance abuse facilities       0
  Monetary authorities- central bank                   0           Beer wine and liquor stores                        1
  Oil and gas extraction                               1           Community care facilities for the elderly          0
  Fishing                                              1           Child day care services                            0
  Apparel knitting mills                               1           Vocational rehabilitation services                 0
  Internet Publishing and Broadcasting                 0           Consumer goods rental                              0
  Pipeline transportation of natural gas               0           Electric power generation transmission             0
  Footwear manufacturing                               1           Plastics product manufacturing                     0
  Manufacturing magnetic and optical media             1           Religious organizations                            0
  Ship and boat building                               1           Animal food manufacturing                          0
  Textile furnishings mills                            1           Highway street and bridge construction             0
                                                                       Table 4
                                                                   Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the county-level data used in the analysis. Employment data are from the Census County Business Patterns, wage data
are from the American Community Survey, debt data are from Equifax, and income data are from the IRS. The last two columns are weighted by the number of
households in the county as of 2000.

                                                           N            Mean             SD             10th            90th        Weighted        Weighted
                                                                                                                                     mean             SD

Debt to income, 2006                                     3135           2.456           0.960           1.494          3.596          2.941           0.967
Number of households, 2000, thousands                    3135             37             111              2             73             370         620388.500
Labor force growth, 2007 to 2009                         3135           0.012           0.041          -0.035          0.055          0.013           0.029
Total employment, 2007, thousands                        3135             39             138              1              74            439             754
Employment growth, 2007 to 2009                          3135           -0.048          0.103          -0.157          0.057          -0.052          0.056
Average wage, 2007                                       3091           5.731           2.146          3.719           8.127          8.905           3.822
Average wage growth, 2007 to 2009                        3074           0.049           0.187          -0.090          0.196          0.028           0.074
Housing supply elasticity (Saiz)                          877           2.507           1.345          1.059           3.993          1.798           1.077

Non-tradable employment growth, 2007 to 2009             3132           -0.025          0.153          -0.158          0.118          -0.037          0.073
Food industry employment growth, 2007 to 2009            3132           -0.013          0.162          -0.154          0.142          -0.020          0.077
Tradable employment growth, 2007 to 2009                 3053           -0.121          0.380          -0.481          0.182          -0.116          0.187
Construction employment growth, 2007 to 2009             3126           -0.123          0.237          -0.401          0.139          -0.152          0.151
Other employment growth, 2007 to 2009                    3134           -0.017          0.123          -0.146          0.111          -0.025          0.065
Industry geographical herfindahl, 2007                    294           0.016           0.023          0.003           0.034           0.020          0.023

Hourly wage, 2007                                        3142           17.005          2.715          14.511         20.300          20.178          3.848
Hourly wage, 10th percentile, 2007                       3142           5.345           0.734          4.525          6.250           6.050           0.835
Hourly wage, 25th percentile, 2007                       3142           8.238           1.217          6.923          9.633           9.466           1.534
Hourly wage, median, 2007                                3142           20.441          3.631          17.094         24.583          24.512          5.235
Hourly wage, 75th percentile, 2007                       3142           30.717          5.660          25.641         36.813          37.517          8.827
Hourly wage, 90th percentile, 2007                       3142           12.997          2.137          11.058         15.385          15.326          2.961

Wage growth, 2007 to 2009                                3141           0.029           0.104          -0.108          0.154          0.014           0.076
Wage growth, 10th percentile, 2007 to 2009               3141           0.068           0.072          -0.022          0.155          0.051           0.054
Wage growth, 25th percentile, 2007 to 2009               3141           0.066           0.064          -0.009          0.153          0.054           0.047
Wage growth, median, 2007 to 2009                        3141           0.056           0.080          -0.044          0.163          0.044           0.056
Wage growth, 75th percentile, 2007 to 2009               3141           0.079           0.061          0.011           0.158          0.060           0.047
Wage growth, 90th percentile, 2007 to 2009               3141           0.048           0.067          -0.033          0.139          0.035           0.046
                                                         Table 5
                   Aggregate Demand and Unemployment across Counties: Non-Tradable And Tradable Industries
This table presents coefficients from regressions relating employment growth in a county from 2007 to 2009 to the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006.
We split employment into non-tradable and tradable industries. The specification "WLS" is weighted least squares where the weights are total number of
households in the county. The instrumental variables specification in column 3 uses the housing supply elasticity of the county (Saiz (2011)) as an instrument for
the debt to income ratio in the first stage. Standard errors are heterskedasticity robust.

                                          (1)            (2)               (3)               (4)                  (5)              (6)              (7)
                                          Employment growth, non-tradable industries, 2007-2009              Employment         Employment growth, tradable
                                                                                                             growth, food         industries, 2007-2009
                                                                                                              retail only,
                                                                                                              2007-2009

Debt to income, 2006                   -0.021**           -0.023**          -0.031**          -0.023**         -0.017**            0.007            -0.001
                                        (0.002)            (0.003)           (0.007)           (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.006)           (0.007)

Construction share, 2007                                                                       0.135**                                               0.029
                                                                                               (0.047)                                              (0.119)
Non-tradable share, 2007                                                                        -0.070                                               0.147
                                                                                               (0.046)                                              (0.118)
Tradable share, 2007                                                                            -0.035                                             -0.318**
                                                                                               (0.026)                                              (0.069)
Constant                                0.026**           0.033**           0.054**             0.034*          0.031**          -0.137**          -0.111**
                                        (0.006)           (0.009)           (0.019)            (0.016)          (0.006)           (0.016)           (0.038)

Specification                            WLS                OLS                IV               WLS              WLS               WLS               WLS
Sample                                   Full              > 50K            elasticity          Full             Full              Full              Full
                                                                            available

N                                           3,132              450             877               3,132           3,132             3,053             3,053
R2                                          0.078             0.081           0.087              0.085           0.047             0.001             0.018
**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively
                                                                   Table 6
                                             Aggregate Demand and Unemployment across Counties:
                                                  Using Concentration to Measure Tradability
This table presents coefficients from regressions relating employment growth in a county from 2007 to 2009 to the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006.
We use an alternative measure of non-tradable industries based on the concentration of employment across counties--low concentration industries are assumed to
be more non-tradable. Columns 1 through 4 examine industries in the bottom quartile based on concentration, columns 5 and 6 use a continuous measure of
concentration, and columns 7 and 8 examine industries in the top quartile based on concentration. Standard errors are heterskedasticity robust.
                                                         (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
Dependent variable                                                                      Employment growth, 2007-2009
Industries?                                                      Lowest concentration quartile industries                   Highest concentration quartile
                                                                                                                                       industries

Debt to income, 2006                                  -0.019**          -0.021**           -0.027**       -0.019**            0.010             0.003
                                                       (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.006)        (0.002)           (0.007)           (0.008)
Lowest Concentration Quartile Share, 2007                                                                   -0.000
                                                                                                           (0.000)
Highest Concentration Quartile Share, 2007                                                                                                      0.000
                                                                                                                                               (0.001)
Construction share, 2007                                                                                  -0.089**                            -0.401**
                                                                                                           (0.021)                             (0.088)
Non-tradable share, 2007                                                                                    0.035                               0.370*
                                                                                                           (0.037)                             (0.147)
Tradable share, 2007                                                                                      -0.168**                             -0.336*
                                                                                                           (0.041)                             (0.165)
Constant                                              0.018**            0.026**            0.043*         0.040**          -0.113**            -0.086
                                                      (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.018)        (0.011)           (0.023)           (0.049)
Specification                                          WLS                 OLS                 IV           WLS               WLS                WLS
Sample                                                  Full              >50K             Elasticity        Full              Full              Full
                                                                                           available
N                                                         3,134            450                877           3,134             3,067             3,067
R2                                                        0.090           0.132              0.151          0.110             0.002             0.023
**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively
                                                                    Table 7
                                               Household Balance Sheet Weakness and Construction
This table presents coefficients from regressions relating employment growth in a county from 2007 to 2009 to the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006.
We split employment into non-tradable and tradable industries. The specification "WLS" is weighted least squares where the weights are total number of
households in the county. The instrumental variables specification in columns 2 and 4 uses the housing supply elasticity of the county (Saiz (2011)) as an
instrument for the debt to income ratio in the first stage. Standard errors are heterskedasticity robust.

                                                       (1)                              (2)                    (3)                        (4)
                                                             Construction share, 2007                            Construction share growth,
                                                                                                                        2000-2007

Debt to income, 2006                                0.015**                         0.001                    0.102**                       0.020
                                                    (0.003)                        (0.005)                   (0.029)                      (0.044)

Constant                                            0.066**                        0.110**                   0.648**                      0.895**
                                                    (0.009)                        (0.014)                   (0.083)                      (0.118)

Specification                                         WLS                               IV                    WLS                           IV

N                                                         877                       877                        874                          874
R2                                                      0.151                      0.016                      0.090                        0.032
**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively
                                                             Table 8
                                  Aggregate Demand and Employment Growth in Non-Tradable Industries
                                                           By Firm Size
This table presents coefficients from regressions relating employment growth in non-tradable industries in a county from 2007 to 2009 to the debt to income ratio
of the county as of 2006. We split firms by the number of employees at the firm. The specification "WLS" is weighted least squares where the weights are total
number of households in the county. Standard errors are heterskedasticity robust.

                                                        (1)                (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)
Dependent variable                                                         Employment growth, non-tradable industries, 2007-2009
Number of employees at firm:                            1-4               5-9            10-19            20-49              50-99               100+
Share of total employment                               0.08              0.07            0.10             0.17               0.12               0.45

Debt to income, 2006                                 -0.010**           -0.008**            0.005          -0.012**          -0.023**          -0.052**
                                                      (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.005)           (0.005)

Constant                                               -0.016             0.014            -0.021*          0.006              -0.008          0.109**
                                                      (0.009)            (0.008)           (0.010)         (0.008)            (0.017)          (0.019)

Specification                                         WLS                WLS               WLS              WLS               WLS                WLS
Sample                                            Firms with 1-4     Firms with 5-9    Firms with 10-   Firms with 20-    Firms with 50-      Firms with
                                                    employees          employees       19 employees     49 employees      99 employees           100+
                                                                                                                                              employees

N                                                         3,125           3,102              3,064          2,898             2,259             1,913
R2                                                        0.010           0.003              0.001          0.009             0.010             0.057
**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively
                                                                  Table 9
                                              Aggregate Demand and Wage Growth across Counties
This table presents coefficients from regressions relating wage growth in a county from 2007 to 2009 to the debt to income ratio of the county as of 2006. The
specifications in columns 1 through 4 use total wages from the Census County Business Patterns data. The specifications in columns 5 through 7 use hourly
wage growth data from the American Community Survey. "WLS" is weighted least squares where the weights are total number of households in the county. The
instrumental variables specification in column 4 uses the housing supply elasticity of the county (Saiz (2011)) as an instrument for the debt to income ratio in the
first stage. Standard errors are heterskedasticity robust.

                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
                                                                                                                     Hourly wage growth, 2007 to 2009, ACS
Dependent variable                                             Total wage growth, 2007 to 2009, CBP                   Mean           10th           90th
                                                                                                                                   percentile     percentile

Debt to income, 2006                                  -0.006         -0.009**         -0.008*        -0.020**        -0.006**         -0.008**         -0.002
                                                     (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.002)

Constant                                             0.047**         0.057**          0.057**         0.093**         0.054**         0.038**         0.050**
                                                     (0.014)         (0.010)          (0.011)         (0.021)         (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.005)

Specification                                         WLS              OLS             OLS              IV             WLS              WLS             WLS
Sample                                                Full            > 50K           > 50K,          > 50K,           Full             Full            Full
                                                                                     elasticity      elasticity
                                                                                     available       available

N                                                        3,074          450              356            356            3,134           3,134            3,134
R2                                                       0.007         0.025            0.020                          0.017           0.010            0.001
**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively
                                                                 Table 10
                                       Household Leverage, Mobility, and Labor Supply across Counties
This table presents coefficients from regressions relating mobility and labor force participation in a county from 2007 to 2009 to the debt to income ratio of the
county as of 2006. The specifications in columns 1 through 2 use state level data on population and net migration from the American Community Survey. The
specifications in columns 3 through 6 use labor force data from the Census County Business Patterns. "WLS" is weighted least squares where the weights are
total number of households in the county. The instrumental variables specification in column 5 uses the housing supply elasticity of the county (Saiz (2011)) as
an instrument for the debt to income ratio in the first stage. Standard errors are heterskedasticity robust.

                                                         (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)
Dependent variable                                    Population          Net migration,                     Labor force growth, 2007-2009
                                                       growth,             2007-2009
                                                      2007-2009

Debt to income, 2006                                    0.005*                0.003                 0.001                0.001                0.009*
                                                        (0.002)              (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.004)

Constant                                                 0.002                -0.002              0.010**               0.010*                 -0.011
                                                        (0.007)              (0.006)              (0.003)               (0.004)               (0.012)

Specification                                           OLS                   OLS                   WLS                   OLS                   IV
Sample                                                  States                States                Full                 > 50K                > 50K

N                                                           51                  51                 3,135                  450                   356
R2                                                         0.085              0.041                0.002                 0.001
**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively
                                                 Appendix Table 1
                                              Industry Categorization
This table presents all of the 294 industries by category of goods produced (sorted by 4-digit code within a category). The
% column gives the percentage of the entire 2007 labor force represented by the industry in question. Please see the text
for the methodology used to categorize each industry.
                  Non-tradable Industries                                           Tradable Industries
     (Narrow Definition – Restaurants and Grocery)
NAICS Industry name                                        %    NAICS Industry name                                      %
                                                                          Forest nurseries and gathering of forest
   4451 Grocery stores                                    2.13     1132 products                                         0.00
   4452 Specialty food stores                             0.15     1141 Fishing                                          0.01
   4453 Beer wine and liquor stores                       0.13     2111 Oil and gas extraction                           0.10
   4461 Health and personal care stores                   0.89     2121 Coal mining                                      0.07
   4471 Gasoline stations                                 0.73     2122 Metal ore mining                                 0.03
                                                                          Nonmetallic mineral mining and
   4481 Clothing stores                                   1.06     2123 quarrying                                        0.10
   4482 Shoe stores                                       0.18     3111 Animal food manufacturing                        0.05
   4483 Jewelry luggage and leather goods stores          0.14     3112 Grain and oilseed milling                        0.05
           Sporting goods hobby and musical                               Sugar and confectionery product
   4511 instrument stores                                 0.38     3113 manufacturing                                    0.07
                                                                          Fruit and vegetable preserving and
   4512 Book periodical and music stores                  0.16     3114 specialty food manufacturing                     0.15
   4521 Department stores                                 1.36     3115 Dairy product manufacturing                      0.11
   4529 Other general merchandise stores                  1.12     3116 Animal slaughtering and processing               0.44
                                                                          Seafood product preparation and
   4531 Florists                                          0.08     3117 packaging                                        0.03
   4532 Office supplies stationery and gift stores        0.27     3118 Bakeries and tortilla manufacturing              0.25
   4533 Used merchandise stores                           0.12     3119 Other food manufacturing                         0.14
   4539 Other miscellaneous store retailers               0.23     3121 Beverage manufacturing                           0.12
   7221 Full-service restaurants                          3.76     3122 Tobacco manufacturing                            0.02
   7222 Limited-service eating places                     3.40     3131 Fiber yarn and thread mills                      0.04
   7223 Special food services                             0.49     3132 Fabric mills                                     0.07
                                                                          Textile and fabric finishing and fabric
   7224 Drinking places (alcoholic beverages)             0.31     3133 coating mills                                    0.04
                  Non-tradable Industries                          3335 Metalworking machinery manufacturing
           (remaining non-tradable industries)                                                                          3141
   4411 Automobile dealers                                1.05     3149 Other textile product mills                      0.07
   4412 Other motor vehicle dealers                       0.15     3151 Apparel knitting mills                           0.02
           Automotive parts accessories and tire
   4413 stores                                            0.41     3152 Cut and sew apparel manufacturing                0.14
                                                                          Apparel accessories and other apparel
   4421 Furniture stores                                  0.23     3159 manufacturing                                    0.01
   4422 Home furnishings stores                           0.27     3161 Leather and hide tanning and finishing           0.00
   4431 Electronics and appliance stores                  0.42     3162 Footwear manufacturing                           0.01
                  Tradable Industries                                            Tradable Industries
                       (continued)                                                    (continued)
NAICS    Industry name                                  %     NAICS    Industry name                              %
  3169   Other leather and allied product manuf.       0.02     3332   Industrial machinery manufacturing         0.12
                                                                       Commercial and service industry
  3221   Pulp paper and paperboard mills               0.12     3333   machinery manufacturing                    0.08
                                                                       Ventilation heating air-conditioning and
  3222   Converted paper product manufacturing         0.25     3334   refrigeration equipment manuf.             0.14
  3231   Printing and related support activities       0.53     3335   Metalworking machinery manufacturing       0.15
                                                                       Engine turbine and power transmission
  3241   Petroleum and coal products manuf.            0.09     3336   equipment manufacturing                    0.09
  3251   Basic chemical manufacturing                  0.15     3339   Other machinery manufacturing              0.25
         Resin synthetic rubber and artificial                         Computer and peripheral equipment
  3252   synthetic fibers manufacturing                0.08     3341   manufacturing                              0.09
         Pesticide fertilizer and other agricultural                   Communications equipment
  3253   chemical manufacturing                        0.03     3342   manufacturing                              0.14
  3254   Pharmaceutical and medicine manuf.            0.21     3343   Audio and video equipment manuf.           0.02
                                                                       Semiconductor and other electronic
  3255   Paint coating and adhesive manufacturing      0.06     3344   component manufacturing                    0.32
         Soap cleaning compound and toilet                             Navigational measuring electromedical
  3256   preparation manufacturing                     0.09     3345   and control instruments manufacturing      0.33
                                                                       Manufacturing and reproducing
  3259   Other chemical product manuf.                 0.10     3346   magnetic and optical media                 0.03
  3261   Plastics product manufacturing                0.60     3351   Electric lighting equipment manuf.         0.05
  3262   Rubber product manufacturing                  0.13     3352   Household appliance manufacturing          0.06
  3271   Clay product and refractory manuf.            0.05     3353   Electrical equipment manufacturing         0.12
  3272   Glass and glass product manufacturing         0.09     3359   Other electrical equipment manuf.          0.13
         Other nonmetallic mineral product
  3279   manufacturing                                 0.08     3361   Motor vehicle manufacturing                0.17
         Iron and steel mills and ferroalloy                           Motor vehicle body and trailer
  3311   manufacturing                                 0.10     3362   manufacturing                              0.13
         Alumina and aluminum production and
  3313   processing                                    0.06     3363   Motor vehicle parts manufacturing          0.52
         Nonferrous metal (except aluminum)                            Aerospace product and parts
  3314   production and processing                     0.06     3364   manufacturing                              0.35
  3315   Foundries                                     0.14     3365   Railroad rolling stock manufacturing       0.03
  3322   Cutlery and handtool manufacturing            0.05     3366   Ship and boat building                     0.13
         Boiler tank and shipping container                            Other transportation equipment
  3324   manufacturing                                 0.08     3369   manufacturing                              0.04
  3325   Hardware manufacturing                        0.04     3372   Office furniture manufacturing             0.12
  3326   Spring and wire product manufacturing         0.05     3391   Medical equipment manufacturing            0.27
         Machine shops; turned product; and
  3327   screw nut and bolt manufacturing              0.33     3399   Other miscellaneous manufacturing          0.31
  3329   Fabricated metal product manufacturing        0.24     5112   Software publishers                        0.29
         Agriculture construction and mining
  3331   machinery manufacturing                       0.18
                       Construction                                               Other Industries
NAICS    Industry name                                 %     NAICS    Industry name                              %
  1133   Logging                                      0.05     1131   Timber tract operations                    0.00
  2361   Residential building construction            0.75     1142   Hunting and trapping                       0.00
  2362   Nonresidential building construction         0.64     1151   Support activities for crop production     0.06
  2371   Utility system construction                  0.44     1152   Support activities for animal production   0.02
  2372   Land subdivision                             0.07     1153   Support activities for forestry            0.02
  2373   Highway street and bridge construction       0.28     2131   Support activities for mining              0.20
         Foundation structure and building                            Electric power generation transmission
  2381   exterior contractors                         0.91     2211   and distribution                           0.46
  2382   Building equipment contractors               1.62     2212   Natural gas distribution                   0.08
  2383   Building finishing contractors               0.78     2213   Water sewage and other systems             0.04
  2389   Other specialty trade contractors            0.48     2379   Other heavy and civil eng. construction    0.08
  3211   Sawmills and wood preservation               0.10     3274   Lime and gypsum product manuf.             0.02
  3212   Veneer plywood & eng. wood manuf.            0.10     3312   Steel product manuf                        0.04
  3219   Other wood product manufacturing             0.27     3321   Forging and stamping                       0.11
  3273   Cement and concrete product manuf.           0.20     3328   Coating engraving heat treating            0.12
  3323   Architectural and structural metals manuf.   0.34     3379   Other furniture related product manuf.     0.04
  3371   Furniture and kitchen cabinet manuf.         0.29     4231   Motor vehicle / parts wholesalers          0.30
  4233   Lumber / construction wholesalers            0.23     4232   Furniture / home furnishing wholesalers    0.13
  4441   Building material and supplies dealers       1.00     4234   Professional / comm. equip. wholesalers    0.58
  4442   Lawn and garden stores                       0.15     4235   Metal and mineral merchant wholesalers     0.14
  5311   Lessors of real estate                       0.45     4236   Electrical goods wholesalers               0.37
  5312   Offices of real estate agents and brokers    0.31     4237   Hardware plumbing /heating wholesalers     0.20
  5313   Activities related to real estate            0.54     4238   Machinery equipment wholesalers            0.60
  5413   Architectural engineering services           1.19     4239   Misc. durable goods wholesalers            0.30
                                                               4241   Paper product merchant wholesalers         0.15
                                                               4242   Drugs merchant wholesalers                 0.20
                                                               4243   Apparel piece goods wholesalers            0.17
                                                               4244   Grocery and related wholesalers            0.65
                                                               4245   Farm product raw material wholesalers      0.06
                                                               4246   Chemical / allied products wholesalers     0.12
                                                               4247   Petroleum wholesalers                      0.09
                                                               4248   Beer wine wholesalers                      0.15
                                                                      Miscellaneous nondurable goods
                                                               4249   merchant wholesalers                       0.32
                                                                      Wholesale electronic markets and agents
                                                               4251   and brokers                                0.29
                                                                      Electronic shopping and mail-order
                                                               4541   houses                                     0.23
                                                               4542   Vending machine operators                  0.05
                                                               4543   Direct selling establishments              0.17
                                                               4811   Scheduled air transportation               0.40
                                                               4812   Nonscheduled air transportation            0.04
                    Other Industries                                               Other Industries
                       (continued)                                                    (continued)
NAICS    Industry name                                  %     NAICS    Industry name                               %
  4831   Deep sea and great lakes transportation       0.05     5182   Data processing hosting services            0.32
  4832   Inland water transportation                   0.02     5191   Other information services                  0.05
  4841   General freight trucking                      0.83     5211   Monetary authorities- central bank          0.02
  4842   Specialized freight trucking                  0.40     5221   Depository credit intermediation            1.77
  4851   Urban transit systems                         0.05     5222   Nondepository credit intermediation         0.63
  4852   Interurban and rural bus transportation       0.02     5223   Activities - credit intermediation          0.29
                                                                       Securities and commodity contracts
  4853   Taxi and limousine service                    0.06     5231   intermediation and brokerage                0.45
  4854   School and employee bus transportation        0.18     5232   Securities and commodity exchanges          0.01
  4855   Charter bus industry                          0.03     5239   Other financial investment activities       0.35
  4859   Other transit and ground transportation       0.06     5241   Insurance carriers                          1.17
                                                                       Agencies brokerages and other insurance
  4861   Pipeline transportation of crude oil          0.01     5242   related activities                          0.74
  4862   Pipeline transportation of natural gas        0.03     5259   Other investment pools and funds            0.03
  4869   Other pipeline transportation                 0.01     5321   Automotive equipment rental                 0.17
  4871   Scenic and sightseeing transportation land    0.01     5322   Consumer goods rental                       0.20
  4872   Scenic and sightseeing trans. water           0.01     5323   General rental centers                      0.03
                                                                       Commercial and industrial machinery
  4879   Scenic and sightseeing trans. other           0.00     5324   and equipment rental and leasing            0.14
  4881   Support activities for air transportation     0.15     5331   Lessors of nonfinancial intangible assets   0.03
  4882   Support activities for rail transportation    0.03     5411   Legal services                              1.00
  4883   Support activities for water transportation   0.08     5412   Accounting tax and payroll services         1.02
  4884   Support activities for road transportation    0.07     5414   Specialized design services                 0.12
  4885   Freight transportation arrangement            0.18     5415   Computer systems design services            1.05
                                                                       Management scientific and technical
  4889   Other support activities for transportation   0.03     5416   consulting services                         0.84
                                                                       Scientific research and development
  4921   Couriers and express delivery services        0.45     5417   services                                    0.58
                                                                       Advertising public relations and related
  4922   Local messengers and local delivery           0.04     5418   services                                    0.38
                                                                       Other professional scientific and
  4931   Warehousing and storage                       0.59     5419   technical services                          0.50
         Newspaper periodical book and directory                       Management of companies and
  5111   publishers                                    0.59     5511   enterprises                                 2.60
  5121   Motion picture and video industries           0.26     5611   Office administrative services              0.40
  5122   Sound recording industries                    0.02     5612   Facilities support services                 0.16
  5151   Radio and television broadcasting             0.22     5613   Employment services                         2.56
  5152   Cable and other subscription                  0.04     5614   Business support services                   0.63
                                                                       Travel arrangement and reservation
  5161   Internet Publishing and Broadcasting          0.04     5615   services                                    0.21
  5171   Wired telecommunications carriers             0.56     5616   Investigation and security services         0.64
  5172   Wireless telecommunications carriers          0.25     5617   Services to buildings and dwellings         1.42
  5173   Telecommunications Resellers                  0.03     5619   Other support services                      0.28
  5174   Satellite telecommunications                  0.01     5621   Waste collection                            0.16
  5175   Cable and Other Program Distribution          0.22     5622   Waste treatment and disposal                0.05
                                                                       Remediation and other waste
  5179   Other telecommunications                      0.02     5629   management services                         0.10
         Internet Service Providers and Web
  5181   Search Portals                                0.07     6111   Elementary and secondary schools            0.69
                   Other Industries                                           Other Industries
                     (continued)                                                (continued)
NAICS   Industry name                               %      NAICS   Industry name                               %
                                                                   Other amusement and recreation
 6112   Junior colleges                             0.07    7139   industries                                  0.92
        Colleges universities and professional
 6113   schools                                     1.35    7211   Traveler accommodation                      1.54
        Business schools and computer and                          RV (recreational vehicle) parks and
 6114   management training                         0.06    7212   recreational camps                          0.04
 6115   Technical and trade schools                 0.10    7213   Rooming and boarding houses                 0.01
 6116   Other schools and instruction               0.26    8111   Automotive repair and maintenance           0.74
                                                                   Electronic and precision equipment
 6117   Educational support services                0.06    8112   repair and maintenance                      0.11
                                                                   Commercial and industrial machinery
                                                                   and equipment (except automotive and
 6211   Offices of physicians                       1.79    8113   electronic) repair and maintenance          0.17
                                                                   Personal and household goods repair and
 6212   Offices of dentists                         0.68    8114   maintenance                                 0.09
 6213   Offices of other health practitioners       0.51    8121   Personal care services                      0.51
 6214   Outpatient care centers                     0.59    8122   Death care services                         0.12
 6215   Medical and diagnostic laboratories         0.19    8123   Drycleaning and laundry services            0.32
 6216   Home health care services                   0.85    8129   Other personal services                     0.22
 6219   Other ambulatory health care services       0.23    8131   Religious organizations                     1.39
 6221   General medical and surgical hospitals      4.31    8132   Grantmaking and giving services             0.13
 6222   Psychiatric and substance abuse hospitals   0.19    8133   Social advocacy organizations               0.11
        Specialty (except psychiatric and
 6223   substance abuse) hospitals                  0.19    8134   Civic and social organizations              0.28
                                                                   Business professional labor political and
 6231   Nursing care facilities                     1.37    8139   similar organizations                       0.44
        Residential mental retardation mental
 6232   health and substance abuse facilities       0.47
 6233   Community care facilities for the elderly   0.58
 6239   Other residential care facilities           0.14
 6241   Individual and family services              0.92
        Community food and housing and
 6242   emergency and other relief services         0.15
 6243   Vocational rehabilitation services          0.29
 6244   Child day care services                     0.71
 7111   Performing arts companies                   0.12
 7112   Spectator sports                            0.11
        Promoters of performing arts sports and
 7113   similar events                              0.10
        Agents and managers for artists athletes
 7114   entertainers and other public figures       0.02
        Independent artists writers and
 7115   performers                                  0.04
        Museums historical sites and similar
 7121   institutions                                0.11
 7131   Amusement parks and arcades                 0.11
 7132   Gambling industries                         0.18
                                                                                                                  Appendix Figure 1
                                                                                                Household Leverage, Aggregate Demand, and Construction
The left panel replicates the left panel of Figure 3 from the analysis. The middle panel plots the employment losses from 2007 to 2009 in industries producing
non-tradable goods against the share of workers in the construction industry as of 2007. The right panel plots employment losses in the construction industry
against the debt to income ratio as of 2006.


                                                          Non-tradable against Debt to Income                                                                  Non-tradable against Construction Share                                                                                Construction against Debt to Income
                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2
     Non-Tradable Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1




                                                                                                              Non-Tradable Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Construction Employment Growth 07Q1-09Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                         .1
               (excludes construction)




                                                                                                                        (excludes construction)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4
                                                -.1




                                                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.6
                                                -.2




                                                                                                                                                         -.2




                                                      1     1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5   5   5.5   6                                                    .04   .06     .08   .1   .12   .14   .16   .18   .2   .22   .24                                                    1     1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5   5   5.5   6
                                                                        Debt to Income 2006                                                                                Construction share of employment, 2007                                                                                   Debt to Income 2006
                                                                     Appendix Figure 2
                                                               Employment Results through 2010
This figure plots total employment in high and low leverage counties from 2006 through 2010. High (low) leverage counties are defined to be those counties in
the top (bottom) quartile of the 2006 debt to income distribution, where quartiles are weighted by total population. The sample is restricted to counties with at
least 50,000 households. The data for this figure come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which is a different source than the data used in the analysis of the
paper. These data are not broken down by industry.



                                       1.02       1
                          normalized to 1 in 2006
                                   .98 .96
                                       .94




                                                      2006q3   2007q3            2008q3                 2009q3                 2010q3

                                                                            High leverage counties
                                                                            Low leverage counties
