                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE "OUT OF SAMPLE" PERFORMANCE OF LONG-RUN RISK MODELS

                                            Wayne E. Ferson
                                          Suresh K. Nallareddy
                                               Biqin Xie

                                         Working Paper 17848
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17848


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2012




We are grateful to an anonymous referee, Ravi Bansal, Jason Beeler, David P. Brown, Dana Kiku,
Ayse Imrohoroglu, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, Chris Jones, Sergei Sarkissian, Zhiguang Wang, Jianfeng
Yu, Guofu Zhou, and to participants in workshops at the University of British Columbia, Claremont
McKenna College, Florida International University, the University of California San Diego, the University
of North Carolina Charlotte, University of Notre Dame, Ohio State University, the University of Oregon,
the Oxford-Man Institute, Queens University, the University of Southern California, the University
of Utah, and the University of Washington for discussions and comments. We are also grateful to participants
at the 2010 Duke Asset Pricing Conference, the 2010 First World Finance Conference and the 2010
Conference on Financial Economics and Accounting. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Wayne E. Ferson, Suresh K. Nallareddy, and Biqin Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The "Out of Sample" Performance of Long-run Risk Models
Wayne E. Ferson, Suresh K. Nallareddy, and Biqin Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 17848
February 2012
JEL No. E21,E27,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the ability of long-run risk models to explain out-of-sample asset returns during
1931-2009. The long-run risk models perform relatively well on the momentum effect. A cointegrated
version of the model outperforms the classical, stationary version. Both the long-run and the short
run consumption shocks in the models are empirically important for the models’ performance. The
models’ average pricing errors are especially small in the decades from the 1950s to the 1990s. When
we restrict the risk premiums to identify structural parameters, this results in larger average pricing
errors but often smaller error variances. The mean squared errors are not substantially better than those
of the classical CAPM, except for Momentum.


Wayne E. Ferson                                     Biqin Xie
Department of Finance                               Leventhal School of Accounting
and Business Economics                              University of Southern California
University of Southern California                   3670 Trousdale Avenue, Los Angeles CA 90089
3670 Trousdale Parkway Suite 308                    biqinxie@usc.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
and NBER
ferson@marshall.usc.edu

Suresh K. Nallareddy
School of Accounting
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway Suite 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804TER
suresh.nallareddy.2011@marshall.usc.edu
                                                 1


1. Introduction


       The long-run risk model following Bansal and Yaron (2004) has been a phenomenal

success. A rapidly expanding literature finds the model useful for the equity premium puzzle,

size and book-to-market effects, momentum, long-term return reversals in stock prices, risk

premiums in bond markets, real exchange rate movements and more (see the review by Bansal,

2007). However, the evidence to date is based largely on calibration exercises and some in-

sample data fitting. If long-run risk models are to ultimately be useful for practical applications,

their performance in an out-of-sample setting is important. This paper provides an empirical

analysis of the models from this perspective.

       We study the "out-of-sample" performance of long-run risk models for explaining the

equity premium puzzle, size and book-to-market effects, momentum, reversals, and bond returns

of different maturity and credit quality. Comparing the fit out of sample allows us to evaluate

features of model performance that are important for practical applications. (As explained below,

we put "out-of-sample" in quotes to emphasize some qualifying remarks.) We examine both

stationary and cointegrated versions of the models using annual data for 1931-2009.

       Our first main result is that the overall performance of a cointegrated version of the long-

run risk model is better than the original, stationary version. Thus, we argue that the out-of-

sample performance justifies a more prominent role for cointegrated models in future research.

       We find that the long-run risk models perform relatively well in explaining the

Momentum Effect. At the same time, they perform poorly in explaining the relative returns to

low-grade corporate and long-term government bonds. These results point to the importance of

missing factors in the simple, long-run risk models.

       To evaluate the risk factors that drive the fit of the long-run risk models we examine
                                                  2


models that suppress the consumption-related shocks. We find that these models perform poorly,

indicating that the consumption shocks are important risk factors. The long-run risk models also

perform better than the simple consumption-based (CCAPM) model. Thus, both the short-run

consumption risk factor and the long-run risk factor are important ingredients in the models’

performance.

       We examine the impact of restricting the risk premiums on the long-run risk models’

factors to identify structural parameters of the model. Imposing consistency with economically

reasonable values of risk aversion and intertemporal substitution reduces the degrees of freedom,

and has the effect of increasing the average out-of-sample pricing errors substantially, while

sometimes reducing the pricing error variances. Compared to the classical Capital Asset Pricing

Model (CAPM, Sharpe, 1964) the restricted model’s overall performance is inferior.

       We examine the robustness of our findings to the method used to estimate the expected

risk premiums, to longer holding periods, time aggregation of consumption, to the measures of

returns, dividend yields and interest rates, to the sample period, to outliers in the data, and to

biases from lagged stochastic regressors. Holding the parameters fixed, the long-run risk models

perform better in the 1951-1990 period than in the decades before or in more recent data, but the

cointegrated models dominate in every subperiod.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the models and

Section 3 our empirical methods. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 presents our main

empirical results and Section 6 examines their robustness. Section 7 concludes.
                                                     3


2. The models

        We study stationary and cointegrated versions of long-run risk models. As the long-run

risk literature has expanded, papers have offered different versions of these models. Our goal is

not to test every model. Instead, we isolate and characterize the key features that appear in most

of the models.



2.1. Stationary models

        Our stationary model specification follows Bansal and Yaron (2004):



                        Δct = xt-1 + σt-1 εct                                                      (1a)

                         xt = μ + ρx xt-1 +  σt-1 εxt                                             (1b)

                         σt2 = σ + ρσ (σt-12 - σ) + εσt,                                           (1c)



where ct is the natural logarithm of aggregate consumption expenditures, Δ is the first difference

and xt-1 is the conditional mean of consumption growth. The conditional mean is the latent,

long-run risk variable. It is assumed to be a stationary but persistent stochastic process, with ρx

less than but close to 1.0. For example, in Bansal and Yaron (2004), ρx = 0.98; our average

estimate is 0.93. Consumption growth is conditionally heteroskedastic, with conditional

volatility σt-1, given the information at time t-1. The shocks {εct, εxt, εσt} are assumed to be

homoskedastic and independent over time, although they may be correlated.

        Bansal and Yaron (2004) show that in this model, the innovations in the log of the

stochastic discount factor are to good approximation linear in the three-vector of shocks ut =

[σt-1 εct,  σt-1εxt, εσt]. The linear function has constant coefficients. Because the coefficients in
                                                              4


the stochastic discount factor are constant, unconditional expected returns are approximately

linear functions of the unconditional covariances of returns with the shocks.1

         We focus on unconditional expected returns, because many of the empirical regularities

to which the long-run risk framework has been applied are cast in terms of unconditional

moments (e.g. the equity premium, the average size and book-to-market effects). This leaves

open the possibility that, like the CAPM and CCAPM in sample (e.g., Jagannathan and Wang,

1996; Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), the long-run risk approach works better in a conditional

form. We therefore also evaluate simple conditional versions of the models.



2.2. Cointegrated models

         The cointegrated model follows Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005), Bansal, Gallant,

and Tauchen (2007), and Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku (2009), assuming that the natural logarithms

of aggregate consumption and dividend levels are cointegrated:



                             dt = δ0 + δ1 ct + σt-1 εdt                                                                  (2a)

                             Δct = a + γ'st-1 + φc σt-1 εct  xt-1 + φc σt-1 εct                                         (2b)

                              σt2 = σ + ρσ (σt-12 - σ) + εσt,                                                            (2c)



where dt is the natural logarithm of the aggregate dividend level and st is a vector of state

variables at time t. Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku (2009) allow for time trends in the levels of


1
  Writing the log stochastic discount factor as mt+1 = Et(mt+1) - ut+1, the conditional expected excess returns are
approximately proportional to Covt{rt+1,  mt+1} = Et{rt+1,ut+1}, where Et(.) is the conditional expectation and Covt{.,.} is
the conditional covariance.        Unconditional expected returns are therefore approximately proportional to
E[Et{rt+1,ut+1}]=Cov(rt+1,ut+1). Since ut+1 has constant coefficients on the shocks, the coefficients may be brought
outside of the covariance operator.
                                                     5


dividends and consumption, but find that they don't have much effect, and we find a similar

result.

          We allow for the possibility that the volatility shock is a priced risk, as in the stationary

model. Constantinides and Ghosh (2012) show that in this version of the model, the innovations

in the log stochastic discount factor are approximately linear in the heteroskedastic shocks to

consumption growth, the state variables st and the cointegrating residual, σt-1 εdt. The

coefficients in this linear relation are constant over time. Therefore, unconditional expected

excess returns are approximately linear in the covariances of return with these shocks.



3. Empirical methods

          The finance literature uses three main approaches to evaluate asset pricing models:

calibration, in-sample estimation and out-of-sample fit. These approaches are not mutually

exclusive. Long-run risks models have been extensively calibrated with great success. With

calibration, values for the parameters of the model are chosen, and the model is solved at these

parameter values for the prices of financial assets. The model-generated series of prices and

returns are examined to see if their moments match key moments of actual asset prices and

returns.

          With estimation, the model parameters are chosen to fit a panel of economic series and

asset returns, to minimize a statistical criterion. Standard errors for the parameter estimates

quantify their precision. Statistical hypothesis tests about the parameters may be conducted and

the residuals of the model are examined to assess the fit to the sample. Estimation typically

challenges a model in more dimensions at once than calibration. For example, a calibrated

parameter value may not be the value that maximizes the likelihood, indicating that more is
                                                             6


going on in the data than was captured by the calibration. Estimation sacrifices the clarity of a

calibration experiment for this kind of information. Long-run risk models are estimated by

Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2010) and Constantinides and Ghosh (2012), among others.

        The practical utility of an asset pricing model ultimately depends on its ability to fit out-

of-sample returns, as most practical applications are, in some sense, out of sample. For example,

firms want to estimate costs of capital for future projects, portfolio and risk managers want to

know the expected compensation for future risks, and academic researchers will want to make

risk adjustments to expected returns in future data. Many of these applications rely on out-of-

sample estimates for the required or ex ante expected return, where the model parameters must

be chosen on the basis of available data.

        This perspective leads naturally to the mean squared pricing error (MSE) criterion for

model evaluation. A model that delivers the correct (conditional) mean of the future return

minimizes the (conditional) MSE. That is, δ minimizes Et{(rt+1- δ)2} when δ=Et(rt+1), where Et(·)

is the conditional expectation at time t. We use the out-of-sample MSE to compare the models’

performance.

        We are also interested in the two components of the MSE, the expected pricing error or

bias and the error variance. Let rt 1  Et (r t 1 )   t 1 , where εt+1 is independent of time-t

information, and let  ( ˆ ) be the prediction of a model at the estimated parameters ˆ , where 

are the true parameters of the model. The out-of-sample pricing error is:

                      vt 1  rt 1   (ˆ)
                                                                                                       (3)
                             t 1  [ Et (rt 1 )   ( )]  [ ( )   (ˆ)]

The expected error E(vt+1) reflects a model’s average error at its true parameter values (the

second term above) plus parameter estimation error (the third term). For the nonlinear models
                                                          7


examined here, the third term in Eq. (3) will not average to zero, even if E (ˆ)   , and the

average pricing errors are affected by both model error and parameter estimation errors.

        The variance of the pricing errors, vt 1 , may be used to focus on the relative effects of

parameter estimation error when comparing models. Using Eq. (3), the variance of the pricing

error is:

              var(vt 1 )  E{(vt 1  E (vt 1 )) 2 }
                                                                                                             (4)
                2  var[Et (rt 1 )]  var[ (ˆ)]  2 E{[ Et (rt 1 )  E (r )][ (ˆ)  E ( (ˆ))]},

where  2 is the variance of the unexpected return,  t 1. The  2 term is likely to be dominant in

Eq. (4) when applied to stock returns. Thus, the prediction error variance may be a low power

statistic. However, comparing two models on the same return we examine the difference between

two Eq. (4)s, and the first two terms drop out of the comparison. Thus, the largest source of noise

may be avoided by comparing two models’ variances on the same asset.

        Our out-of-sample analysis is further motivated by a central feature of long-run-risk

models: a small, highly persistent component in consumption and/or dividends – the long-run

risk component. This persistent component is modeled either as stationary or as cointegrated.

Latent components in stock returns that are stationary but persistent exacerbate problems with

spurious regression and data snooping (Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin, 2003) and may induce

lagged stochastic regressor bias (Stambaugh, 1999). These issues may also arise in long-run risk

models, in which case the in-sample fit may appear overly optimistic. An out-of-sample analysis

can alert us to these issues.

        To evaluate out-of-sample fit, we use a traditional “rolling” estimation. We estimate the

model parameters over an initial period and predict returns for the next year. The estimation

period is rolled forward by one year and the process is repeated. Because the long-run risk
                                                           8

models may need long samples to estimate the parameters with precision, we also examine the

in-sample fit, using the full sample of data.2



3.1. The reliability and power of the methods

         It is crucial for the interpretation of the results that the empirical methods are reliable

enough to distinguish between models in the face of finite samples and data issues such as time

aggregation and noise. We approach this concern from several angles. In the robustness section

we examine variations on the approach to address time aggregation, autocorrelation, the length

of the asset holding period, finite sample biases, the number of test assets, the method for

identifying the stochastic volatility in the model, the measures of the price/dividend ratio and

risk-free rate.

         We also use simulations to evaluate the methods. A referee simulates data assuming that

the stationary long-run risk model is the true model. We compare the results from simulations

that assume that the CAPM is the true model. The distributions of the average pricing errors

shift by significant amounts between the two cases, suggesting that our approach has statistical

power. For example, when the LRRS model generates the data the average pricing errors we

observe for the CAPM in the actual data are far out in the tail of the empirical distribution and

would therefore reject the CAPM. In contrast, when the CAPM generates the data the average

pricing errors we observe for the CAPM in the actual data are not statistically significant. The

pricing error MSE differences between the CAPM and LRRS model present very tight empirical

distributions in the simulations, further indicating statistical power.


2
 In earlier versions of the paper we used an alternative, “step around” approach where we estimate the models’
parameters using all of the available data outside of the evaluation period. The results are broadly similar to the full
sample estimation reported here, and are available by request to the authors.
                                                     9

        A formal evaluation of power requires a series of simulations under both the null and

alternatives, and is beyond the scope of this paper. However, we conduct simulations where the

null hypothesis is that the population value of a t-test for the difference between the prediction

errors for two models is zero. An advantage of this approach is that the t-statistic is pivotal,

which improves the performance of the bootstrap. We generate the empirical distributions for the

difference statistics under the null by resampling from the mean-centered sample statistics. We

generate samples with the same sizes as those used in the actual tests. While these simulations

do not explicitly model time aggregation or other sources of noise, they implicitly capture the

variance that such factors generate in the test statistics.

        Using empirical p-values from these simulations, our test statistics have the power to

discriminate between the various models. For example, in Table 1 below, we find that the

average pricing errors of the stationary long run risk model are significantly different from those

of the CAPM in eleven out of the fourteen cases. In Table 3 the MSE pricing errors of the

stationary long run risk model and the CAPM are significantly different in two cases. In Table

5, where we examine nested models and the Two-state model is the benchmark, the long-run risk

models are significantly different (at the 10% level) from the benchmark model in 27 out of the

42 cases. All of these are examples with rolling estimation, so our approach has power even

with the shorter, rolling samples.



3.2. Stationary model estimation

        For the stationary model we estimate the following equations:

                        u1t = Δct - [a0 + a1 rft-1 + a2 ln(P/D)t-1]                                (5a)

                            Δct - xt-1
                                                            10

                            u2t = u1t2 - [b0 + b1 rft-1 + b2 ln(P/D)t-1]                                               (5b)

                                 u1t2 - σt-12

                            u3t = xt - d - ρx xt-1                                                                     (5c)

                            u4t = σt2 - k - ρσ σt-12                                                                   (5d)

                            u5t = rt - μ - β(u1t,u3t,u4t)                                                              (5e)

                            u6t = λ - [β'V(r)-1β]-1β'V(r)-1rt,                                                         (5f)

where rt is an N-vector of asset returns in excess of a proxy for the risk-free rate and V(r) is the

covariance matrix of the excess returns. The system is estimated using the Generalized Method

of Moments (GMM, see Hansen, 1982). The moment conditions are E{(u1t,u2t)  (1, rft-1,

ln(P/D)t-1)}=0, E{u3t (1, xt-1)}=0, E{u4t (1, σt-12)}=0, E{u5t (1,u1t,u3t,u4t)}=0 and E{u6t}=0. The

system is exactly identified.3

         The state vector in the model is the risk-free rate and aggregate price/dividend ratio: st =

{rft, ln(P/D)t}. Eqs. (5a) and (5b) reflect the fact, as shown by Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2010)

and Constantinides and Ghosh (2012), that the conditional mean of consumption growth and the

conditional variance can be identified as affine functions of these state variables.

         From the system (5) we identify the priced heteroskedastic shocks that drive the

stochastic discount factor. Comparing systems (1) and (5), we have:



                            u1t = σt-1 εct, u3t = φ σt-1 εxt, u4t = εσt.                                                (6)



In Eq. (5e), β is an N x 3 matrix of the betas of the N excess returns in rt with the priced shocks,


3
  This implies, inter alia, that the point estimates of the fitted expected returns are the same when the covariance matrix
of the excess returns, V(r), is estimated, as we do, in a separate step or estimated simultaneously in the system. The
standard errors of the coefficients would not be the same, but we don't use them in our analysis.
                                                            11

{u1t, u3t, u4t}.4

         Eq. (5f) identifies the three unconditional risk premiums, λ. These are the expected

excess returns on the minimum variance, orthogonal, mimicking portfolios for the shocks to the

state variables (see Huberman, Kandel, and Stambaugh, 1987, or Balduzzi and Robotti, 2008).

We refer to these risk premium estimates as the GLS risk premiums. We also present results for

simpler OLS risk premiums, where we set V(r) equal to the identity matrix5. The OLS risk

premiums are not as efficient, asymptotically, as the GLS risk premiums. However, they might

be more reliable in small samples6.

         For a given evaluation period the fitted expected excess return is the estimate of β

multiplied by the estimate of λ, where the estimates use data for the nonoverlapping estimation

period. We denote the model in system (5) as the LRRS model in the tables below.



3.3. A restricted, stationary model

         The reduced forms in system (5) are sufficient to generate out-of-sample return

predictions. However, the coefficients are functions of the deeper structural parameters of the

model. Restricting the coefficients allows us to recover estimates of these parameters, and by

reducing the number of parameters to be estimated, may improve the efficiency of estimation

and the out-of-sample performance. On the other hand, if the restrictions are inconsistent with


4
  We recover the stochastic volatility from the squared consumption innovations in Eq. (5b). In the model the
volatility shocks also drive the volatility of the expected growth shocks, u3t. We also conduct experiments,
discussed below, where we recover the volatility from these residuals.
5
  The covariance matrix of the residuals from regressing the excess returns on the factors could alternatively be used
here, but the risk premium estimates would be numerically identical to those using the covariance matrix of the
returns.
6
 Since we form the mimicking portfolios using only the seven excess returns, they are not the maximum correlation
portfolios in a broader asset universe. This means that the risk premium estimates might "overfit" the test asset returns.
                                                            12

the data they could hurt the out-of-sample performance.

         Constantinides and Ghosh (2012) find rejections of long-run risk models when the deeper

structure is imposed. They use the unconditional means, variances, autocovariances and higher

moments of consumption and dividend growth to identify the structural parameters.

         Our restricted models focus on the risk premiums and the predicted required returns. In

particular, we leave Eqs. (5a - 5d) unchanged, append one more moment condition to identify

1 , and replace (5e) and (5f) with:

                                     u5t  u32t   2u12t                                                      (7e)

                                     u6t  rt  rt { u1t  3u3t  4u 4t },                                  (7f)

                                     where:

                                      is the coefficient of risk aversion,

                                                                    2
                                                        0.5[(       )  (1 A1 ) 2 ]
                                                                  
                                     4  (1   )1{                                   }  (1   ) 1 A2 ,
                                                                  (1  1  )

                                     1  exp{E ln( P / D)} /[1  exp{E ln( P / D}],

                                          1 
                                             , and
                                             1
                                          1
                                              

                                      is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.

The new moment restrictions are E (u5t )  E (u6t )  0 . Since the error terms u1t , u3t , and u4t are

mean zero, Eq. (7f) specifies the expected risk premiums as

E (r )   cov(r , u1 )  3 cov(r , u3 )  4 cov(r , u4 ) . Note that with N=7 assets in (7f), the moment



We explore this issue by varying the number of test assets below.
                                                          13

condition (7e) and the three parameters { ,  , } the system is now overidentified with 5 degrees

of freedom7. With these restrictions we do not compare OLS with GLS estimation of the risk

premiums. We refer to this restricted version of the model as RLRRS in the tables below.

          Fig. 1 presents time-series plots of the estimates of the utility function parameters { , } ,

the risk aversion and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, from the RLRRS model using

rolling estimation. In the estimation we penalize the GMM criterion function to force

economically reasonable values of the parameters, that is  > 0 and  > 1. 8 The figure shows

that the estimates of the elasticity of substitution stay just above 1.0 and are stable in the rolling

estimation. The risk aversion parameter fluctuates more, with values between about one and

three, averaging near two. Thus, the model fits returns with economically reasonable parameter

values.



3.4. Cointegrated model estimation

          The cointegrated models are estimated using the following system of equations:

                           u1t = dt - δ0 - δ1 ct                                                                  (8a)

                           u2t = Δct - [a0 + a1 rft-1 + a2 ln(P/D)t-1 + a3 u1t-1]                                 (8b)

                                Δct - xt-1


7
  It would be possible to go further, restricting the coefficients in (5a – 5d) as in Constantinides and Ghosh (2012).
Since this part of the system is exactly identified, we prefer to leave it in reduced form. This way we do not rely to
as great an extent on the model-implied predictability and higher moments of consumption and dividend growth,
which Constantinides and Ghosh find to be mispecified. Our approach focuses more on information about risk
premiums.
8
 The GMM moment conditions may be multiplied by any smooth function of the parameters. We use sums of
exponential functions, chosen to get large as  approaches zero from above or as  approaches 1.0 from above.
Using iterated GMM with an optimal weighting matrix, the scaling functions cancel out of the final minimized
value criterion function. A similar approach is used in Ferson and Constantinides (1991).
                                                          14

                           u3t = rft - [g0 + g1 rft-1 + g2 ln(P/D)t-1 + g3 u1t-1]                                 (8c)

                           u4t = ln(P/D)t - [h0 + h1 rft-1 + h2 ln(P/D)t-1 + h3 u1t-1]                            (8d)

                           u5t = rt - μ - β(u1t,u2t,u3t,u4t)'                                                     (8e)

                           u6t = λ - [β'V(r)-1β]-1β'V(r)-1rt,                                                     (8f)



In the cointegrated model there are four priced shocks, as shown by Constantinides and Ghosh

(2012), as the cointegrating residual becomes a new state variable. Identification and estimation

are similar to the stationary model. We refer to this version of the model as LRRC in the tables

below.

         The GMM estimator of the cointegrating parameter δ1 is superconsistent and has a

nonstandard limiting distribution, as shown by Stock (1987). This implies that the u1t-1 shock

estimates used in (8b-8e) may be more precise than standard estimates. This may contribute to

our finding that the cointegrated model performs better than the stationary model. For example,

we find that time-series plots of estimated rolling-window cointegration parameters appear

smoother than rolling-window estimates of the autoregression coefficient for expected

consumption growth.

         Both the stationary and cointegrated long-run risk models follow the literature in using a

risk-free rate and log price/dividend ratio as state variables. It is natural to ask whether the

ability of the long-run risk models to fit returns is driven by the choice of these two state

variables.9 We assess the importance of the state variables for the models' explanatory power by


9
  Campbell (1996) uses the innovations in lagged predictor variables, including a dividend yield and interest rates,
as risk factors in an asset pricing model. Ferson and Harvey (1999) find that regression coefficients on lagged
conditioning variables, including a risk-free rate and dividend yield, are powerful cross-sectional predictors of stock
returns. Petkova (2006) argues that innovations in lagged predictors, including a risk-free rate and dividend yield,
subsume much of the cross-sectional explanatory power of the size and book-to-market factors of Fama and French
(1993).
                                                    15

suppressing the consumption-related risk factors. If the risk-free rate and dividend yield are the

main drivers of the ability of the model to fit returns, then the models without consumption

should perform well. Given the smaller number of parameters to estimate, these "2-State-

Variable" models might be expected to perform even better out of sample than the full models.



3.5. A restricted cointegrated model

       Our restricted version of the cointegrated long-run risk model (denoted RLRRC) follows

a similar approach as the RLRRS model. The Eqs. (8a – 8d) are left unchanged. A moment

condition to identify 1 is included. The variance Eq. (5b) is included in the system but this now

includes the lagged cointegrating residual with coefficient b3, this is used along with (7e) and

5(c) to identify φ in Eq. (6). The coefficients {a1, a2, a3} from (8b) and {b1, b2, b3} from (5b) are

embedded in the restrictions on the risk premiums, as derived by Constantinides and Ghosh

(2012). We replace Eqs. (8e) and (8f) with:

                                u6t  rt  rt {u 2t  c3u3t  c4u 4t  c5u1t },              (9)

                                where c3  (  1) 1[ A1a1  A2b1 ],

                                 c4  (  1) 1[ A1a2  A2b2 ], and

                                 c5  (  1)1[ A1a3  A2b3 ].

The equations above (9) in the system are exactly identified, and the final equation provides N=7

moment conditions to identify the parameters { 1 , } , leaving 5 degrees of freedom.



3.6. Estimating the CAPM

       The classical CAPM is compared to the long-run risk models and we estimate it in a
                                                 16

similar way for comparability. We use Eq. (5a), where the excess return of the market portfolio

replaces the consumption growth rate to define the shocks, u1t. Eq. (5e), with only these shocks,

delivers the market betas and a simplified Eq. (5f) delivers the market risk premium as the cross-

sectional regression slope of excess returns on market betas. Under GLS, a cross-sectional

regression recognizes the market excess return as the efficient risk premium estimator (Shanken,

1992), so we use the average of the market excess return over the estimation period to estimate λ

in the GLS case.



3.7. Econometric issues

       Our evidence is subject to a data snooping bias, to the extent that the variables in the

model have been identified in the previous literature through an unknown number of searches

using essentially the same data. As the number of potential searches is unknown, this bias

cannot be quantified. To the extent that such a bias is important, the models would be expected

to perform worse in actual practice than our evidence suggests. Furthermore, we use revised

data that would not be available in real time. These issues explain the qualification in the

introduction and the title. An ideal out of sample exercise would in our view use fresh data.

       The estimation is subject to finite sample biases. The risk-free rate and dividend yield

state variables are modeled as autoregressions and the variables are highly persistent. Stambaugh

(1999) shows that the finite sample bias in regressions using such variables can be substantial.

We address finite sample bias by applying a correction developed by Amihud, Hurvich, and

Wang (2009). These results are discussed below and our implementation is described in an

Appendix, available by request to the authors.

       Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin (2003) find that predictive regressions using persistent but
                                                   17

stationary regressors are susceptible to spurious regression bias that can be magnified in the

presence of data snooping. The spurious regression bias affects the standard errors and t-ratios

of predictive regressions, but not the point estimates of the coefficients. Since our focus is the

out-of-sample performance based on the point estimates, spurious regression bias should not

affect our estimates of the models' predictions. However, it could complicate the statistical

evaluation of the pricing errors, because the standard errors may be inconsistent in the presence

of the autocorrelation. We address autocorrelation in the pricing errors using a block bootstrap

approach as described below.

        Consumption data are time-aggregated, meaning that the reported figures are the

averages of the levels during the period. Time aggregation in consumption causes (1) a spurious

moving average structure in the time-series of the measured consumption growth (Working,

1960); (2) biased estimates of consumption betas (Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger, 1989)

and (3) biased estimates of the shocks in the long-run risk model. Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron

(2010) show that under time aggregation of a "true" monthly model, if the risk-free rate and

dividend yield state variables are measured at the end of December, for example, regressions like

(5a) and (5b) can still identify the true conditional mean, xt-1, and conditional volatility, σt-1.

However, the error terms do not reveal the true consumption shocks.

        The moving average structure may be addressed by the choice of weighting matrices used

in estimation, and the use of block bootstrap methods in evaluating the test statistics. We conduct

experiments with quarterly data, as described below, to assess biased consumption shocks. The

bias in consumption betas, as derived by Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger, is proportional

across assets and therefore our risk premium estimates will be biased in the inverse proportion.

For return attribution we examine the products of the betas and the risk premiums. The two
                                                  18

effects should cancel out, leaving the predicted expected returns unaffected.



3.8. Statistical tests

        We study the models' pricing errors, focusing on their time-series averages and the mean

squared pricing errors (We also have examined the mean absolute deviations, which lead to

similar inferences as the MSEs). To evaluate the statistical significance of the differences

between the pricing errors for the different models, we use two approaches. The first approach

follows Diebold and Mariano (1995). Let et be a vector of pricing errors for period-t returns,

stacked up across K-1 models and let e0t be the pricing error of the reference model. Let dt =

g(et) - g(e0t)1, where 1 is a K-1 vector of ones and g(.) is a loss function defined on the pricing

errors. For example, g(.) can be the mean squared error. Let d = Σtdt / T be the sample mean of

the difference. Diebold and Mariano (1995) show that          T (d  E (d t )) converges in distribution

to a normal random variable with mean zero and covariance, Σ, that may be consistently

estimated by the usual HAC estimator: T-1 Σt Στ w(τ) (dt - d)(dt-τ - d).' The appropriate

weighting function w(τ) and number of lags depend on the context.

        Because the asymptotic distributions may be inaccurate we present bootstrapped p-values

for the tests. Here we resample from the sample values of the mean-centered dt vector with

replacement (or sample a block with replacement) and construct artificial samples with the same

number of observations as the original. Constructing the test statistic on each of 10,000 artificial

samples, the empirical p-value is the fraction of the artificial samples that produce a test statistic

as large or larger than the one we find in the actual data.
                                                         19


4. Data

We focus on annual data for several reasons. First, much of the evidence on long-run risk

models uses annual consumption data. Second and related, annual consumption data are less

affected by problems with seasonality (Ferson and Harvey, 1992) and other measurement errors.

The annual consumption data are real nondurables plus real services expenditures from the

National Income and Product Accounts, divided by the total U.S. population10. We also use not

seasonally-adjusted quarterly consumption data, sampled annually, in experiments11.

         The asset return data in this study are standard. We use the returns of common stocks

sorted according to market capitalization and book-to-market ratios to study the size and value-

growth effects. These are the extreme value-weighted decile portfolios provided on Ken

French's web site. We also use the extreme value-weighted deciles for momentum winners and

losers and for long-term reversal losers and winners, also from French. The market portfolio

proxy is the CRSP value-weighted stock return index.

         When returns are measured in excess of a risk-free rate (the equity and term premium),

we use a one-month Treasury bill return as the risk-free rate. We also use a risk-free rate as a

state variable. To avoid using the same data on both sides of a regression, we use the lagged

three-month Treasury yield as the state variable. In theory, we should use an ex ante real risk-

free rate. We conduct experiments, described below, with an alternative proxy that involves

inflation data. Inflation is measured using the U.S. Consumer Price Index from NIPA table 2.3.4.


10
   Nondurable goods expenditures are from NIPA Table 2.3.5, line 8 divided by the price deflator in Table 2.3.4,
line 8. Services expenditures are from Table 2.3.5, line 13 divided by Table 2.3.4, line 13. The sum of the two is
divided by the population in Table 2.1, line 39.
11
  We obtain not seasonally-adjusted quarterly consumption data from NIPA table 8.2, available during 1947-2004.
Nondurable goods expenditures from line 6 of table 8.2 is divided by the price deflator in line 8 of Table 2.3.4.
Services expenditures from line 13 of Table 8.2 is divided by the price deflator in line 13 of Table 2.3.4. The sum
of the two is divided by the population in line 39 of Table 2.1 to get real per capital consumption.
                                                20

       We include bond returns that differ in maturity and credit quality. The short term bond

return is the one-month Treasury bill, rolled over each month during the year. The long-term

Government bond splices the Ibbotson Associates 20 year US Government bond return series for

1931-1971, with the CRSP greater than 120 month US Government bond return after 1971.

High grade corporate bond returns are those of the Lehman US AAA Credit Index after 1973,

spliced with the Ibbotson Corporate Bond series prior to that date. High-yield bond returns

splice the Blume, Keim, and Patel (1991) low grade bond index returns for 1931 to 1990, with

the Merrill Lynch High Yield US Master Index returns after that date. All of the returns are

continuously-compounded annual returns, although we conduct experiments with arithmetic

returns as well.

       The second state variable is the log price/dividend ratio. In calculating the price/dividend

ratio, the stock price is the real price of the S&P Composite Stock Price Index, and the dividend

is the real dividends accruing to the Index. These data are from Robert Shiller’s website. Given

that stock buybacks represent a significant component of corporate payouts, and that total payout

(dividends plus repurchases minus issuances) yield beats dividend yield in explaining returns

(Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts, 2007), we also use an alternative measure of the

price/dividend ratio that accounts for share repurchases and equity issuances. We obtain these

data from Michael Roberts’ website.


       Table 1 presents summary statistics of the basic asset return data. We focus on the seven

excess returns summarized in the table, which reflect the equity premium, the firm size effect

(Small-Big), the book-to-market effect (Value-Growth), the excess returns of momentum

winners over losers (Win-Lose), the excess returns of long-term reversal losers over winners
                                                 21

(Reversal), the excess returns of low over high-grade corporate bonds (Credit Premium) and the

excess returns of long-term over short-term Treasury bonds (Term Premium).




5. Empirical results

5.1. Average pricing errors

       We use traditional rolling estimation with a 36-year rolling window, and the evaluation

period is the subsequent year. (We also examine 24-year rolling windows to check sensitivity to

the window length.) We compare the performance of the long-run risk models with three

alternative models. The first is the market-portfolio based CAPM of Sharpe (1964). The second

is a simple consumption-beta model following Rubinstein (1976) and Breeden, Gibbons, and

Litzenberger (1989). The third model is a "2-State-Variable" model in which the consumption-

related shocks of the long-run risk models are turned off. The two state variables are the risk-

free rate and log price/dividend ratio. We also include the restricted versions of the stationary

(RLRRS) and cointegrated (RLRRC) long-run risk models described above.

       Table 1 presents the average excess returns and average pricing errors from the rolling

step-ahead analysis over the 1967-2009 period, and Table 2 presents the full-sample results for

1931-2009. The A panels use OLS risk premiums and the B Panels use GLS (the restricted

model are presented in the OLS panels). Tables 1 and 2 include the results of Diebold-Mariano

(1995) tests for the differences between the average pricing errors of the various models and

those of the CAPM. Empirical p-values are presented (in parentheses) for two-sided tests of the

null hypothesis that the model in question performs no differently than the CAPM.

       The first important point to make is that the tests for equal average pricing errors have

power to discriminate between models. In Table 1 there are 70 cases where a model is compared
                                                22

to the CAPM, and 51 cases produce empirical p-values for the null of equal pricing error that are

below 5%. We don’t show the p-values in Table 2, but with the longer sample most of the

differences are statistically significant.

        The consumption-beta model (CCAPM) performs about as well as the classical CAPM in

rolling estimation, with smaller average pricing errors on Momentum, Value-Growth and

Reversals, but larger errors on the Size Effect and Credit Premium. However, in the full sample

estimation the CCAPM performs much worse than the CAPM for all of the strategies excepting

Momentum.

        The long-run risk models under rolling estimation produce economically and statistically

significantly smaller average pricing errors than the CAPM in most cases. The cointegrated

model (LRRC) has the smallest overall errors, improving on the stationary model (LRRS) for the

Equity Premium, Size Effect and Momentum. Zurek (2007) finds that a stationary long-run risk

model explains about 70% of the momentum effect, with time-varying betas on the expected

consumption growth shock. We get smaller percentages here with the unconditional models, but

still an impressive performance in explaining the Momentum Premium.

        The average pricing error of the LRRC model on the Credit Premium is relatively large.

In the full sample both long run risk models overshoot the credit premium by several times its

raw magnitude. The fit improves somewhat under GLS estimation, because GLS gives more

weight to fitting the low volatility assets when estimating the risk premiums. However, the cost

is degraded performance on the Equity Premium and Size Effect under GLS.

        It should not be surprising that the long-run-risk models examined here leave large

pricing errors for the Credit Premium. The original model of Bansal and Yaron (2004) is

designed to capture a few key features of the equity markets. Subsequent work has introduced
                                                 23

additional factors for credit risks. Chen (2010) and Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2008)

find that when countercyclical default probabilities (induced by time-varying volatility or asset

values) and recovery rates in default are allowed to interact with countercyclical risk aversion, a

long-run risk model can be calibrated to match credit spreads. Endogenizing the leverage choice

and optimal default boundary, Bharma, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010) find that the dynamics of a

cross-section of firms is important for calibrating to credit spreads. Perhaps the simple models

examined here fail because they are missing these factors.

       The poor performance on the Credit Premium and the strong performance on Momentum

are an interesting combination. Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and Phillipov (2007) find that the

Momentum Effect is concentrated among firms with low credit ratings. This suggests that

additional empirical work on models elaborated for credit risks may prove fruitful.

       The long run risk models also fit poorly on the Term Premium under OLS, and similar

concerns about the simplicity of the basic models arise here. In particular, inflation risks are

likely important for bond pricing. See Eraker (2008), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2010) and

Hasseltoft (2008) for long run risk models with stochastic inflation.

       The long-run risk models do not fare as well in full-sample estimation as they do in the

step-ahead analysis. Under OLS they still display the smallest overall average pricing errors,

and the LRRC model does slightly better than the LRRS model. But the low overall averages

under OLS include the large negative pricing errors for the Credit Premium, and the CAPM

performs significantly better than the LRRS model for four of the seven assets.

       It is interesting and perhaps unexpected that the long-run risk models’ performance

deteriorates under full-sample estimation. Holding the parameters fixed over a long time period

could be an important misspecification that rolling estimation avoids. Alternatively, it could be
                                                        24

that the long-run risk models perform better in the more recent period that is evaluated under the

rolling method. We evaluate these alternatives below.

        The 2-State-Variable model is examined in column 7 of tables 1 and 2. Under rolling

estimation its average pricing error performance is the worst among all the preceding models, for

almost all of the assets, and especially so with GLS risk premiums. In full-sample estimation the

2-State-Variable model performs slightly better, but is still dominated by the long-run risk

models. This shows that the strong average pricing error performance of the long-run risk models

is not solely driven by the two state variables. The consumption risk factors are important for its

performance.

        The improved performance of the 2-State-Variable Model in full-sample estimation is

interesting in view of the degraded performance of the long-run risk models in the full sample.

This suggests that using more data to estimate the part of the model that uncovers the state

variable shocks – which involves highly persistent series – may be more of a benefit than

allowing those coefficients to drift over time with rolling estimation.

        The results for the restricted versions of the long-run risk models are in the far right

columns of tables 1 and 2. In terms of average pricing errors the restricted models perform

markedly worse than their reduced-form counterparts, and worse than the CAPM except on

Momentum. Their performance is similar in the full sample and rolling estimation. Requiring the

prices of covariance risk to match economically reasonable values of the utility function

parameters pulls the risk premiums away from values that fit the average excess returns.12 Of

course, the poor performance of the restricted models may not be entirely surprising. Given data


12
  Tables 1 and 2 use continuously-compounded annual excess returns. We also run the analysis with simple
arithmetic excess returns. None of the conclusions change, and the relative performance of the cointegrated long-
run risk model slightly improves.
                                                25

issues such as time aggregation and the imperfect proxies for objects in the model, like the risk-

free rate and dividend-price ratio, forcing the restrictions on the risk premiums may be expected

to hurt the fitted models’ performance. We assess the effects on pricing error variances in the

next section.


5.2. Mean squared pricing errors

       We are interested in the precision of the models’ predictions as well as the average errors.

Tables 3 and 4 present the differences in the mean squared pricing errors (MSE) from those of

the CAPM. The MSE errors for each model are presented as a percentage of the MSE errors of

the CAPM, whose MSEs are shown in the left-most columns of the tables. The empirical p-value

in parentheses tests the hypothesis that the MSE differences are zero. These are based on two-

sided tests of the null hypothesis.

       As described above, the MSE may be decomposed as the mean pricing error squared plus

the error variance. We find that the error variance is the dominant component in almost every

instance, excepting Momentum. When the CAPM confronts Momentum the mean error and the

error variance contribute nearly equal shares to the MSE. Thus, with this exception we interpret

the MSE results as indicating mainly the effects of parameter estimation error on the pricing

accuracy.

       Table 3 presents results using rolling estimation. In contrast to the tests in Table 1 there

are fewer significant differences between the MSEs of the CAPM and the other models, but there

are some significant differences. The long-run risk models outperform the CAPM in explaining

Momentum on the basis of MSEs. All of the models, except the 2-State-Variable model under

OLS, significantly outperform the CAPM on the Momentum effect. The 2-State-Variable model
                                                26

is significantly worse than the CAPM in explaining the Value-Growth premium and, under GLS,

the Size Effect, Reversals and the Term Premium.

        The fact that there are fewer significant differences in the MSEs, compared with the

average pricing errors, is not simply a lack of statistical power. The differences in the MSEs are

economically small. For example, the MSE differences for Momentum become statistically

significant when they are about 20% of the CAPM value, which corresponds to an MSE

difference of about 2% per year. For the Value-Growth Premium, an MSE difference of only

0.2% per year is statistically significant.

        In the full sample estimation of Table 4 more of the MSE differences are statistically

significant. All of the models beat the CAPM on the Momentum Effect, but the CAPM

significantly outperforms the long-run risk models in explaining the Value-Growth effect and

Reversals, on an MSE basis. In these cases, while the MSE differences are statistically

significant they are economically small.

        The right-hand columns of tables 3 and 4 present the MSE differences for the restricted

long-run risk models. With a few exceptions the results are similar to, but slightly worse on

average, than those for the models without the parameter restrictions. This reflects the fact the

while the restrictions increase the bias and the average pricing errors, they improve estimation

efficiency by reducing the number of parameters, and the error variance benefit shows up in the

MSEs. In the case of Momentum the bias effect exerts itself again in the MSEs, and the

restricted versions of the long-run risk models perform substantially worse than their unrestricted

counterparts on Momentum.

        It makes sense that the long-run risk models don’t substantially outperform the CAPM on

a MSE basis, with the exception of Momentum. With that exception, the MSEs are driven by
                                                             27

the effects of the parameter estimation error variance. With more parameters to estimate than the

CAPM, the long-run risk models’ MSE performance is more impacted by estimation error. We

address this issue with formal tests in the next section.



5.3. Testing nested models

         The MSE results are relatively more favorable to the restricted long-run risk models and

to simpler models like the CAPM and the CCAPM than are the average pricing errors.

However, Clark and West (2007) show that a model with more parameters than a “true” model is

expected to have larger MSEs out of sample because the noise in estimating the parameters that

should really be set to zero will contribute to the error variance. Thus, the mean squared errors

of the long-run risk models could be inflated relative to the simpler models they nest. Clark and

West propose an adjustment to the difference between two models' mean squared pricing errors

to account for this effect. Let E1t be the predicted value from model 1 which is the more

parsimonious model and MSE1 is its mean squared pricing error. E2t is the prediction from the

more complex model 2 and MSE2 is its mean squared pricing error. The test examines MSE1 -

[MSE2 - Σt(E1t - E2t)2/T]. The third term adjusts for the difference in expected MSE under the

null and a one-sided test is conducted. The null hypothesis is that the two models have the same

pricing error and the alternative is that the more complex model has smaller pricing error. If we

suppress the adjustment term, we obtain the Diebold-Mariano test as a special case.13

         Table 5 presents Clark-West tests for the long-run risk models using rolling estimation,

where the benchmark models are the CCAPM and the 2-State-Variable Model. (We don’t use

13
   Following Clark and West (2007), we implement the tests with the adjustment terms as follows. Let: Ft = (rt - E1t)2 -
[(rt - E2t)2 - (E1t - E2t)2], where rt is the return being predicted. We construct a t-statistic for the null hypothesis that
E(Ft)=0 and conduct a one-sided test using bootstrap simulation as described above.
                                                 28

the restricted long-run risk models as benchmarks, because Table 3 shows that even without the

adjustment they perform slightly worse than their unrestricted long-run risk counterparts.) When

the t-statistics are negative it means that the more complex model performs worse than the

simpler model, even after the adjustment. When the 2-State-Variable model is the benchmark

model (the C and D panels) the t-statistics are almost always positive, and the long-run risk

models significantly outperform the 2-State-Variable model. The unrestricted models perform

significantly better than the 2-State model on four to six of the seven assets and the restricted

long-run risk models outperform on five of the seven assets. This is not a surprising result given

our previous findings on the poor performance of the 2-State model, but it demonstrates that the

Clark-West tests have statistical power.

       In Table 5 panels A and B, the CCAPM is the benchmark model and the unrestricted

long-run risk models never significantly outperform the CCAPM on an adjusted MSE basis.

However, the restricted models perform substantially better than the CCAPM for four of the

seven assets. Before the adjustment for the larger number of parameters the restricted LRR

models do not seem to perform better than the CCAPM (Table 3). Thus, we can reject the

simpler CCAPM in favor of the long-run risk models when we restrict the risk premiums to be

consistent with reasonable utility function parameters and adjust for the larger number of

parameters.

       If we think of the long-run risk models as essentially combining elements of the CCAPM

and the 2-State model, then Table 5 says that both aspects are significant for the MSE

performance. The consumption side of the models in particular, is crucial for fitting the asset

returns, as the long-run risk models substantially outperform the 2-State model that leaves out

the consumption risk factors. The restricted versions of the LRR models outperform the
                                                 29

CCAPM, showing that the long-run risk factors are also important.



5.4. Comparison of subperiods

        In the previous sections we find differences in the results using full-sample versus rolling

estimation. The differences could be related to in-sample versus step-ahead fit, or to the different

evaluation periods. We run the rolling analysis again, removing data from the pre-World War II

period and find that the long-run risk models perform even better. Thus, some of the improved

performance of the long-run risk models in the rolling, step-ahead analysis likely reflects the

different sample periods. But we would like to know if this is due to parameter estimation or if it

reflects a better fit in different historical periods at the same parameter values. In this section we

hold the model parameters fixed and vary the evaluation period. We use estimation over the full

sample to obtain the parameters. This allows the models to base the parameter estimates on a

long time series; but of course, the predictions would not be feasible in practice. Table 6 presents

the results.

        The format of Table 6 is similar to the previous tables, except that we compare four,

approximately 20 year evaluation periods and show results for an equally-weighted portfolio of

the test assets. All of the models perform at their worst in the first subperiod, 1931-50, by any

measure. All of the models perform best during the two middle periods, 1951-70 and 1971-90,

and their performance deteriorates again during 1991-2009. Thus, poor performance in the pre-

World War II period is not unique to the long-run risk models, and all the models are challenged

by recent economic times.

        Confirming the importance of the subperiods, we conduct another experiment where we

hold the evaluation period fixed, using the 1967-2009 period as in Table 1 and 3, and change the
                                                  30

parameter values. We consider the full-sample parameter estimates, estimates using 1967-2009

data, and the rolling estimates of table 1 and 3. We find much less variation in the models’

performance with the different parameter estimates than across the subperiods in Table 6 (Tables

of these results are available by request).

       Under OLS the average pricing error performance of the unrestricted long-run risk model

in Panel A is dramatically better during the two middle periods. While the CAPM also performs

better during these periods, the differences are much less dramatic. This suggests that the

improved relative average pricing error performance of the long-run risk models under rolling

estimation is likely attributable to the different evaluation periods.

       The restricted long-run risk models are the worst performing models in each subperiod

and experience a relatively small improvement in average pricing errors during the middle

periods. We saw above that their relative performance in rolling estimation was not improved,

compared with full-sample estimation. Imposing the parameter restrictions destroys the long-run

risk models’ ability to fit the average returns so well during the 1951-1990 period.

       Panel B summarizes the MSEs under OLS estimation. The MSEs of the CAPM are

dramatically larger during the first subperiod, 1931-50. During this period all of the models

outperform the CAPM on an MSE basis, except for the restricted long-run risk models. This

seems different from the previous tables, where except for Momentum the CAPM performs

about as well as the LRR models on a MSE basis. While the average pricing error performance

of all the models deteriorates during the most recent twenty year period, the MSEs present a

different pattern. The CAPM MSEs increase slightly compared with the prior 40 year period, but

the long-run risk models’ MSEs drop to about 60% of those of the CAPM, from larger fractions

in the previous periods.
                                                                    31

           The poor MSE performance of the CAPM in Table 6 reflects the impact of Momentum

on the equally-weighted portfolio. Momentum is a high volatility return, and the average pricing

error of the CAPM on momentum is very large, as we observed above. The combined effects

have a large influence on the MSE of the portfolio.

           In Panels C and D of Table 6 we summarize the results across the assets using a “GLS

portfolio.” GLS estimation transforms the TxN data matrix of excess returns, r, using rV (r ) 1/ 2 ,

where V (r ) is the full sample covariance matrix. This is scaled to a set of seven portfolio weights

that sum to 1.0.14 The GLS portfolio gives a weight of only 12.3% to the Momentum strategy

and the results are very different.

           With the relatively small weight that the GLS portfolio applies to Momentum, and the

larger weights on the Value-Growth, Credit and Term premiums, the average pricing error

results appear more favorable to the CAPM. On an average pricing error basis the CAPM is

consistently the second best model, underforming only the unrestricted cointegrated model. The

relative MSE performance across the models is now fairly stable over the subperiods.



5.5 Outliers

           The poor performance of the models in the first twenty-year subperiod of Table 6

suggests the influence of outliers during the Great Depression of the 1930s. We examine the

absolute pricing errors that exceed three standard errors, for each asset-model combination. The

year 1931 is an outlier for the Equity Premium under four of the models. The year 1933 is an

outlier for Reversals under all seven models. Momentum and the Credit Premium generate



                                           1 / 2
14
     The N-vector of weights is rV ( r )            (1 /rV (r ) 1 / 2 1) , where 1 is an N-vector of ones and / indicates element-
by-element division. Listed in the same order as the assets in Table 1, the weight vector takes the values (0.014,
0.002, 0.207, 0.123, 0.269, 0.255, 0.129)’.
                                                  32

outliers in those years and in the years 1937, 1973, 2008, and 2009. The year 1982 is an outlier

for the Term Premium under the CCAPM. Removing these outlier years results in a larger

average pricing error for all the models during the first subperiod, where the outliers are

negative. The MSE for the CAPM is reduced from 2.46% to 1.71%. The long-run risk model

MSEs improve, changing from 84-86% of the CAPM’s MSEs to 70-72% when the outliers are

removed. The restricted versions of the models perform slightly worse than before.

               There are no outliers in the second subperiod. In the third subperiod removing

1973 and 1982 lowers the average pricing errors by 30-60 basis points for all of the models, and

the CAPM’s MSE drops slightly to 0.59%, but the relative MSE performance of the models is

unchanged. A similar effect is observed when 2008 and 2009 are removed from the fourth

subperiod.



5.6. Conditional models

       Conditional models arguably better reflect the economic structure of long-run risk models.

For example in the models market yields, expected consumption, consumption variances and other

quantities are affine functions of the state variables and thus vary over time. In our estimation using

equation systems (5) and (7), everything above the last two equations is conditioned on the lagged

risk-free rate and dividend yield. In this section we explore conditional versions of the models. A

priori, conditional models may empirically perform better or worse than unconditional models.

While conditional models use more information to generate required returns, Ghysels (1998) and

Simin (2008) find that conditional beta pricing models do not outperform simpler models in an out-

of-sample context.

       The conditional models assume that the expected risk premiums are affine functions of the
                                                   33

conditioning variables, but the betas are held fixed, consistent with Gibbons and Ferson (1985) and

Campbell (1987). Constant betas imply zero covariances between betas and risk premiums, and that

could be important for capturing a cross section of average portfolio returns sorted according to the

Size Effect (e.g. Chan and Chen, 1988) or the Value-Growth Effect (e.g. Santos and Veronesi,

2006). However, Ferson and Harvey (1991) show that time-varying risk premiums are much more

important than time-varying betas for capturing variation in expected returns over time. In rolling

estimation the betas are allowed to vary over time in an unstructured way.

        To estimate the conditional models we replace the specification for  in Eqs. (5f) and (7f)

with affine functions of the state variables: the lagged dividend yield and risk-free rate in (5f) and

including the lagged cointegrating residual in (7f). The error terms are orthogonal to a constant and

the lagged predictors. The fitted values of the risk premiums are evaluated at the most recently

available values of the lagged predictors when forming the fitted expected excess returns. The same

procedure is used for the CCAPM, the 2-State model and the CAPM.

        Recall that in the CAPM the GLS risk premium estimate is simply the expected market

portfolio excess return. In the GLS case we use the predicted value from a regression of the market

excess return on the lagged risk-free rate and dividend yield as the market risk premium estimator.

For the conditional versions of the restricted long-run risk models we impose that the error terms u6t

in (7f) and (9) are orthogonal to the same lagged variables. This implicitly allows time-varying

conditional covariances without restricting their functional forms.

        The average pricing error results for the conditional models are summarized in Table 7. The

CCAPM performs better in its conditional form on most of the asset returns and by almost 50 basis

points overall. For the other models the comparison is mixed across the assets and the overall results

are similar to the models with unconditional risk premiums. Conditioning affects the pricing errors
                                                   34

of the restricted cointegrated long-run risk model more than the stationary model, but the impact

differs across the assets with no clear pattern.

        We also examine the MSE pricing errors of the conditional models. The CAPM performs

better on Momentum in its conditional form. The comparisons between the other models and the

CAPM are broadly similar to those for the unconditional models. It should not be surprising that our

main results are robust to the conditional model extensions. Rolling estimation of the

“unconditional” models in Table 1 allows ad-hoc time variation in the parameters, and we find that

the rolling and conditional model risk premium estimates are highly correlated. For example, the

correlation between the rolling estimates in Table 1 with those in Table 7 for the short-run and long-

run consumption risk premiums are 0.89 and 0.79, respectively.

        In summary, many of our findings are robust to the use of conditional models. The long-run

risk models perform better than the CAPM in terms of average pricing errors but not in terms of the

MSEs. The cointegrated long-run risk model outperforms the stationary version and does especially

well on Momentum. GLS estimation improves the fit to the low volatility returns at the expense of

the higher volatility returns. The 2-State-Variable model performs significantly worse than the long-

run risk models, indicating that the long-run risk factors are important ingredients for the models’

out-of-sample fit.



5.7 Return Decompositions

        To gain more insight into the economics behind the model evaluations, we examine the

results of the rolling estimation in more detail. In particular, we study the rolling betas and risk

prices associated with the various factors in the models. Previous studies provide similar
                                                         35

analyses based on calibrated models and in-sample estimation.15 Our main goal is to study the

out-of-sample performance, so we do not present the details of these exercises, but summarize

here the main observations (tables of these results are available by request).

           In general, we find that both the short and long-run consumption factors carry positive

risk prices. The equity-based portfolios all feature positive consumption betas, and Momentum

has a relatively large consumption beta. Both short and long-run consumption risks contribute

substantial positive amounts to the winner-loser portfolio in the LRRS model, and the sum of the

consumption-related shocks determines more than 50% of the fitted momentum return in the

LRRC model. The size effect and Value-Growth portfolios feature positive short and long-run

consumption betas in the LRRS model and positive short-run consumption risk betas in the

LRRC model.

           Cointegration typically appears to improve the model specification, leading to more

economically appealing decompositions, consistent with Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku (2009) and

our out-of-sample results. Comparing the LRRS and LRRC models also leads to an interesting

characterization of the Small-Big, Value-Growth and Reversal strategies. These are all in some

sense, “contrarian” strategies. In the LRRS model, volatility risk appears important for their

determination. However, introducing the cointegrating residual factor in the LRRC model

reveals that these strategies feature a negative exposure to shocks that raise dividends above their

cointegrating trend. Such shocks are “good news”, as indicated by a positive estimated risk

premium.




15
     See, for example, Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) and Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku (2009).
                                                  36


6. Robustness

        This section describes a number of experiments to evaluate the robustness of our main

results. Additional tables are available in an unpublished appendix, by request to the authors.



6.1. Autocorrelation

        We conduct experiments to assess the impact of autocorrelation in the pricing errors on

the statistical tests. The first-order autocorrelations of the pricing errors are similar across the

models and usually smaller than 10%, except in a couple of cases. With a sample of 79, the

approximate standard error of the autocorrelations is about 11%. Autocorrelated pricing errors

reflect some persistent misspecification of the models. Time aggregation of the consumption data

is one likely source of such misspecification. In the case of the size effect, some of the

autocorrelation (0.41, the largest example) is likely spurious, resulting from stale pricing of the

smallest firms.

        We repeat some of the tests in tables 1-4 using a block bootstrap approach with block

lengths of 2 and 4. A block size of two accommodates an MA(1) error structure, as would be

implied by time aggregation. We find little effect on the empirical p-values in tables 2 and 4. The

effect is greater in tables 1 and 3 with the shorter, rolling samples. The p-values for the average

pricing error differences get larger, and five cases that were significant at the 5% level in Panel

A (and the same number in Panel B) of Table 1 are no longer significant at the 10% level. The

restricted cointegrated model seems to be the most affected. In Table 3 the p-values get smaller

when the block bootstrap is used. Five MSE differences that were not significant at the 10%

level in this table become significant under the block bootstrap with 4 lags.
                                                37


6.2. Earnings and price momentum

       Chordia and Shivakumar (2006) attribute much of the Price Momentum Effect that we

examine above (PMOM) to earnings momentum, which is significantly related to various

economic risk variables. This raises the possibility that the explanatory power of the long-run

risk models for PMOM works through earnings momentum (EMOM). Following their approach

we sort stocks into EMOM portfolios on the basis of the most recently-reported standardized

unexpected earnings (SUEs). They use SUE deciles but don’t cross-sort on PMOM; we cross-

sort on PMOM and EMOM.

       Like Chordia and Shivakumar (2006) we find that the average EMOM premium is larger

than the PMOM premium. EMOM largely subsumes PMOM, but EMOM is not subsumed by

PMOM in the two-way sorts, which also reveal that EMOM is stronger among momentum

winners than among momentum losers.

       If a model works primarily through EMOM, we would expect that it would perform well

on EMOM, but not as well on any remaining PMOM effect when EMOM is controlled for. We

focus on the LRRC model and find that this does not appear to be the case. The average pricing

errors are larger fractions of the original effects for PMOM, within an EMOM sort, than they are

for EMOM. Thus, we find no evidence that the explanatory power of the LRRC model for

Momentum is driven by earnings momentum.



6.3. Time aggregation

       The consumption data are time aggregated, which leads to a spurious moving average

component in consumption growth, biased consumption betas and biased shocks in the

consumption-related risk factors. The latter issue is the most difficult to address. We obtain
                                                 38

some information on the impact of time aggregation by using higher frequency data, sampled at

the end of each year. Jagannathan and Wang (2007) find that consumption-based models work

better on data sampled from the last quarter of each year. We use quarterly, not seasonally

adjusted data for 1948-2004. By sampling the not seasonally adjusted data in the last quarter of

each year we avoid the strong seasonality in consumption expenditures and the smoothing biases

in data that are seasonally adjusted by the Commerce Department (see Ferson and Harvey,

1992).

         In terms of average pricing errors, the performance of the consumption beta model is

improved by the use of the higher-frequency consumption data. The relative performance of the

classical CAPM and the long-run risk models is similar to what we observed before, in terms of

average pricing errors. The MSEs show the CAPM and the cointegrated long-run risk model

delivering the best and similar performances. Thus, the main findings are robust to the

alternative consumption data.



6.4. Longer-horizon returns

         Previous studies find that consumption-based asset pricing models do a better job fitting

longer-horizon returns (e.g. Daniel and Marshall, 1997; Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-

Jorgensen, 2009). We examine two-year and three-year returns, compounding the returns but

maintaining the assumption that the decision interval in the model is one year. The CCAPM and

2-State-Variable model deliver the largest pricing errors, similar in size to the raw returns. The

cointegrated long-run risk model delivers the smallest errors for two of the seven assets and in no

case does it perform the worst. The advantage of the CAPM under GLS is not apparent here.

Two-year returns produce similar results.
                                                 39

       We also examine the MSEs. Under OLS risk premiums, the consumption beta model

performs better, in relative terms, on the longer-horizon returns. The cointegrated model

generally outperforms the stationary long-run risk model. Using GLS risk premiums, the CAPM

wins for four to five out of seven assets on a MSE basis. Thus, overall the conclusions are

similar to those from the previous tables.



6.5. The effects of bias correction

       We examine models in which we apply versions of the bias correction procedure

developed by Amihud, Hurvich, and Wang (2009) to the coefficients on the highly persistent

variables. In the stationary version of the long-run risk model the bias corrections have a trivial

impact, and the average pricing errors are typically identical to one basis point per year. In the

cointegrated model the bias corrections have a larger impact. For example, under OLS the

average pricing errors are smaller by as much as 0.4-0.5% per year for four of the seven assets.

Thus, bias-corrected estimation appears to be useful, and we recommend that future work

estimating cointegrated long-run risk models apply bias corrections.



6.6. Sensitivity to the number of test assets

       The risk premiums are estimated using the seven test assets, but the maximum correlation

portfolio in a larger set of assets delivers different risk premiums. With fewer assets we likely

“overfit” the risk premiums. (Intuitively, with the same number of assets as risk premiums the

unrestricted models reduce to using the sample mean of each asset to predict the expected

return.) We increase the number of assets to 31 by adding Size deciles 2 to 9, Book-to-Market

deciles 2 to 9, and Momentum deciles 2 to 9. As expected, the pricing errors on the original
                                                40

seven assets get larger for all the models except the CAPM, although only slightly larger for the

consumption CAPM, but the differences are not large enough to change the previous

impressions.



6.7. Alternative price/dividend measures

       The “true” price/dividend ratio envisioned by the long-run risk models is not observable,

and the standard measures use trailing corporate dividends to smooth out seasonality. The use of

annual data helps mitigate some of the concerns about seasonality, but the “true” aggregate

dividend is hard to measure. Given that share repurchases represent an important component of

payouts (Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts, 2007), we examine an alternative

price/dividend measure that accounts for share repurchases and equity issuances. Using this

alternative price/dividend measure, the models’ pricing errors on average get larger with the

exception of the 2-State-Variable model, but the changes do not substantially alter the previous

impressions. The improved performance of the 2-State-Variable model likely reflects the

improved predictive ability of the alternative price/dividend measure.



6.8. Alternative risk-free rate measures

       Our main results use a nominal, three-month Treasury rate as the risk-free rate state

variable. This is not the real, ex ante yield envisioned in the models. Measuring returns in excess

of the risk-free rate reduces or eliminates concerns about real versus nominal returns, but not

about the risk-free rate used as a state variable. We conduct experiments to evaluate the

sensitivity of our findings to the state variable. Following Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009), a real

risk-free rate is estimated as the annualized yield on the 3-month treasury bill minus the trailing
                                                41

12-month realized annual inflation. Overall, the results using this proxy are similar to the results

using the three-month treasury yield as the state variable.



6.9. Alternative variance identification

       An alternative version of the LRRS model identifies the stochastic volatility from the

squared residuals of the expected consumption, or fitted xt process instead of the unexpected

consumption growth. Under OLS the alternative variance model performs slightly worse on the

Size and Value-Growth effects and on the Term Premium, but slightly better on the rest and the

overall average pricing error is identical. The MSE’s are virtually identical to the previous

version of the model. Under GLS the alternative variance model performs worse on the Equity

Premium, Momentum, the Credit and Term Premium but much better on the Size Effect. The

MSEs of the alternative variance model are slightly smaller overall under GLS estimation.



7. Conclusions

       This study examines the ability of long-run risk models to fit out-of-sample returns. The

question of the out-of-sample fit is important because asset pricing models are almost always

used in practice in an out-of-sample context. We examine stationary and cointegrated versions of

long-run risk models using annual data for 1931-2009.

       The long-run risk models perform well in capturing the Momentum Effect. The

performance of the cointegrated version of the long-run risk model is markedly better than the

stationary version. While the long-run risk models often deliver smaller average pricing errors

than the CAPM, the mean squared pricing errors (MSEs) are not significantly better in economic

terms, except in explaining momentum. However, the long-run risk models do perform
                                                 42

significantly better than models that suppress their consumption-related shocks. Holding the

parameters fixed, the models perform better during 1951-1990 than in the decades before or

after. Sampling not seasonally adjusted consumption data in the last quarter of the year improves

the fit, consistent with Jagannathan and Wang (2007). Bias corrected regressions improve the

performance of cointegrated versions of the models but have little effect on stationary versions.

Restricting the models with economically reasonable preference parameters increases the

average pricing errors, but often improves the error variances.

       Our results suggest several areas for future research. Cointegrated versions of the long-

run risk models have received less attention in the literature than stationary versions. Our results

suggest that cointegrated models deserve more attention. We examine only the most basic

versions of the long-run risk models, and they perform relatively poorly in explaining credit

spread returns and excess long-term bond returns. Recent papers have refined the models,

incorporating inflation and credit risk dynamics to achieve success in calibrating to term

premiums and credit spreads. More empirical work on these refined models is clearly warranted.

For example, the simple long-run risk models turn in a strong performance in explaining

Momentum. Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and Philipov (2007) find that momentum is

concentrated in low credit risk stocks. This suggests that refined versions of long run risk models

with credit risks should perform well in empirical tests. In our view, the practical importance of

long-run risk models is yet to be fully established, and will depend on their performance in

future empirical estimation and tests.



References
Amihud, Y., Hurvich, C., Wang, Y., 2009. Multiple-predictor regressions: hypothesis testing.
     Review of Financial Studies 22, 413-434.
                                                43

Avramov, D., Chordia, T., Jostova, G., Philipov, A., 2007. Momentum and credit rating. Journal
     of Finance 62, 2503-2520.
Balduzzi, P., Robotti, C., 2008. Mimicking portfolios, economic risk premia, and tests of multi-
     beta models. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26, 354-368.
Bansal, R., 2007. Long run risks and financial markets. The Review of the St. Louis Federal
     Reserve Bank 89, 1-17.
Bansal, R., Dittmar, R., Kiku, D., 2009. Cointegration and consumption risks in asset returns.
     Review of Financial Studies 22, 1343-1375.
Bansal, R., Dittmar, R., Lundblad, C., 2005. Consumption, dividends, and the cross section of
     equity returns. Journal of Finance 60, 1639-1672.
Bansal, R., Gallant, R., Tauchen, G., 2007. Rational pessimism, rational exuberance and asset
      pricing models. Review of Financial Studies 74, 1005-1033.
Bansal, R., Shaliastovich, I., 2010. A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles in bond
     and currency markets. Unpublished working paper. Duke University.
Bansal, R., Kiku, D., Yaron, A., 2009. An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks models for
     asset prices. NBER working paper series.
Bansal, R., Kiku, D., Yaron, A., 2010. Risks for the long run: Estimation and inference.
     Unpublished working paper. Duke University.
Bansal, R., and Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
     puzzles. Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
Bharma, H., Kuehn, L., Stebulaev, I., 2010. The levered equity risk premium and credit spreads:
     a unified framework. Review of Financial Studies 23, 645-703.
Blume, M., Keim, D., Patel, S., 1991. Returns and volatility of low-grade bonds 1977-1989.
     Journal of Finance 46, 49-74.
Boudoukh, J., Michaely, R., Richardson, M. P., Roberts, M. R., 2007. On the importance of
     measuring payout yield: implications for empirical asset pricing. Journal of Finance 62,
     877-915.
Breeden, D., Gibbons, M., Litzenberger, R., 1989. Empirical tests of the consumption CAPM.
     Journal of Finance 44, 231-262.
Campbell, J., 1987. Stock returns and the term structure. Journal of Financial Economics 18,
      373- 399.
Campbell, J., 1996. Understanding risk and return. Journal of Political Economy 104, 298-345.
Chan, K. C., Chen, N., 1988. An unconditional asset-pricing test and the role of firm size as an
                                                44

     instrumental variable for risk. Journal of Finance 43, 309-325.
Chen, H., 2010. Macroeconomic conditions and the puzzles of credit spreads and capital
     structure. Journal of Finance 65, 2171-2212.
Chen, L., Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R., 2009. On the relation between the credit spread
     puzzle and the equity premium puzzle. Review of Financial Studies 22, 3367-3409.
Chordia, T., Shivakumar, L., 2006. Earnings and price momentum. Journal of Financial
     Economic 80, 627-656.
Clark, T., West, K., 2007. Approximately normal tests for equal predictive accuracy in nested
      models. Journal of Econometrics 138, 291-311.
Constantinides, G., Ghosh, A., 2012. Asset pricing tests with long-run risks in consumption
     growth. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1, 96-136.
Daniel, K., Marshall, D., 1997. The equity premiums puzzle and the risk-free rate puzzle at long
      horizons. Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 452-484.
Diebold, F., Mariano, R., 1995. Comparing predictive accuracy. Journal of Business and
     Economic Statistics 13, 253-265.
Eraker, B., 2008. Affine general equilibrium models. Management Science 54, 2068-2080.
Fama, E., French, K., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of
    Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Ferson, W., Constantinides, G., 1991. Habit persistence and durability in aggregate consumption:
     empirical tests. Journal of Financial Economics 29, 199-240.
Ferson, W., Harvey, C., 1991. The variation of economic risk premiums. Journal of Political
     Economy 99, 385-415.
Ferson, W., Harvey, C., 1992. Seasonality and consumption-based asset pricing. Journal of
     Finance 47, 511-552.
Ferson, W., Harvey, C., 1999. Conditioning variables and cross-section of stock returns. Journal
     of Finance 54, 1325-1360.
Ferson, W., Sarkissian, S., Simin,T., 2003. Spurious regressions in financial economics? Journal
    of Finance 58, 1393-1414.
Gibbons, M., Ferson, W., 1985. Testing asset pricing models with changing expectations and an
     unobservable market portfolio. Journal of Financial Economics 14, 216-236.
Ghysels, E., 1998. On stable factor structures in the pricing of risk: do time-varying betas help or
     hurt? Journal of Finance 53, 549-573.
Jagannathan, R., Wang, Y., 2007. Lazy investors, discretionary consumption and the cross-
                                                45

     section of equity return. Journal of Finance 62, 1623-1661.
Jagannathan, R., Wang, Z., 1996. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected
     returns. Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.
Hasseltoft, H., 2011. Stocks, bonds and long-run consumption risks. Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Hansen, L., 1982. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.
     Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.
Huberman, G., Kandel, S., Stambaugh, R., 1987. Mimicking portfolios and exact arbitrage
     pricing. Journal of Finance 42, 1-9.
Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2001. Consumption, aggregate wealth and expected stock returns.
     Journal of Finance 56, 815-849.
Malloy, C., Moskowitz, T., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2009. Long-run stockholder consumption risk
     and asset returns. Journal of Finance 64, 2427-2479.
Newey, W., West, K., 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
     autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Petkova, R., 2006. Do the Fama-French factors proxy for innovations in predictive variables?
     Journal of Finance 61, 581-612.
Rubinstein, M., 1976. The valuation of uncertain income streams and the pricing of options. Bell
     Journal of Economics and Management Science 7, 407-425.
Santos, T., Veronesi, P., 2006. Labor income and predictable stock returns. Review of Financial
     Studies 19, 1-44.
Shanken, J., 1992. On the estimation of beta-pricing models. Review of Financial Studies 5, 1-
     33.
Sharpe, W., 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk.
     Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.
Simin, T., 2008. The (poor) predictive performance of asset pricing models. Journal of Financial
     and Quantitative Analysis 43, 355-380.
Stambaugh, R., 1999. Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-421.
Stock, J., 1987. Asymptotic properties of least squares estimators of cointegrating vectors.
     Econometrica 55, 1035-1056.
Working, H., 1960. Note on the correlation of first differences of averages in a random chain.
     Econometrica 28, 916-918.
Zurek, P., 2007. Momentum and long-run risks. Unpublished working paper. Wharton.
                                                46

Table 1: Average Out-of-Sample Pricing Errors

Average excess returns and out-of-sample pricing errors (actual minus prediction) are shown
based on rolling estimation during 1967-2009, using a window length of 36 years. The
continuously-compounded returns are in annual percent, and measured in excess of a one-month
Treasury bill return. CCAPM is the simple consumption beta model. CAPM is the Capital Asset
Pricing Model. LRRC is the cointegrated long-run risk model and LRRS is the stationary long-
run risk model. 2-State-Variable is the model with only shocks to the two state variables (the
risk-free rate and log price/dividend ratio). RLRRC is restricted version of the cointegrated long-
run risk model and RLRRS is restricted version of the stationary long-run risk model. The p-
values in parentheses are for two-sided Diebold-Mariano (1995) test of the null hypothesis that
the model in question performs no differently than the classical CAPM. The empirical p-values
are based on 10,000 simulation trials. p-values of 10% or less are in bold face.

Premium:       Mean Excess                              Average Pricing Errors
               Returns     CCAPM      CAPM     LRRC        LRRS      2-State-Variable   RLRRC    RLRRS
Panel A: OLS Risk Premiums

Equity Premium    3.88        2.45    2.48       0.76       0.88           3.22          4.01    12.20
                             (0.97)            (0.00)      (0.01)         (0.21)        (0.00)   (0.08)
Small-Big         2.50        2.07    1.21       0.22       2.06           2.64          2.65     3.22
                             (0.26)            (0.07)      (0.18)         (0.00)        (0.00)   (0.03)
Value-Growth      6.47        1.64    5.51      3.31        1.65           5.95          6.35     5.13
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.04)        (0.00)   (0.67)
Win-Lose          17.95      12.10    18.30     7.66        9.58          16.97         17.80    12.20
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)   (0.08)
Reversal          5.39        0.92    5.14      -1.46      -0.02           4.68          5.39     4.66
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.14)        (0.08)   (0.56)
Credit Premium    0.58        0.81    0.09       2.43       0.80           0.16          0.59     1.45
                             (0.03)            (0.00)      (0.12)         (0.70)        (0.00)   (0.08)
Term Premium      1.82        1.22    1.86       0.02      -0.01           1.50          1.81     4.55
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.15)        (0.05)   (0.62)
Average           5.51        3.03    4.94       1.85       2.13           5.02          5.51     6.20
Panel B: GLS Risk Premiums

Equity Premium    3.88        2.12    -2.14      1.52       1.71           4.40          n.a.     n.a.
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)
Small-Big         2.50        1.55    -1.05     1.24        3.11           7.18
                             (0.00)            (0.01)      (0.00)         (0.00)
Value-Growth      6.47        1.40    5.16      3.00        2.04           8.48
                             (0.00)            (0.01)      (0.00)         (0.00)
Win-Lose          17.95      12.10    19.80     7.52       10.11          13.40
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)
Reversal          5.39        0.04    5.39      -0.95       0.22           8.24
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)
Credit Premium    0.58        0.58    -0.69      0.79       0.53           0.87
                             (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)
Term Premium      1.82        1.32    1.36       0.73       1.11           1.83
                             (0.85)            (0.00)      (0.36)         (0.01)
Average           5.51        2.73    3.98      1.98        2.69           6.34
                                                47

Table 2: Full Sample Average Pricing Errors, 1931-2009

Average excess returns and out-of-sample pricing errors (actual minus prediction) are shown
based full sample estimation during 1931-2009. The number of observations is 79. The
continuously-compounded returns are in annual percent, and measured in excess of a one-month
Treasury bill return. CCAPM is the simple consumption beta model. CAPM is the Capital Asset
Pricing Model. LRRC is the cointegrated long-run risk model and LRRS is the stationary long-
run risk model. 2-State-Variable is the model with only shocks to the two state variables (the
risk-free rate and log price/dividend ratio). RLRRC is restricted version of the cointegrated long-
run risk model and RLRRS is restricted version of the stationary long-run risk model.

 Premium:       Mean Excess                          Average Pricing Errors
                Returns     CCAPM     CAPM      LRRC     LRRS 2-State-Variable RLRRC      RLRRS
 Panel A: OLS Risk Premiums

 Equity Premium 5.87          2.91     3.73      -3.15    -2.31       1.86        6.03      5.73

 Small-Big      4.65          5.93     3.67      0.83      0.03       3.94        5.00      4.65

 Value-Growth   4.51          5.33     3.84      4.95      5.92       8.66        4.87      4.54

 Win-Lose       15.69         7.71     16.60     7.10      6.89       11.80      15.10     15.40

 Reversal       5.28          10.20    5.16      6.08      6.35       4.13        5.79      5.43

 Credit Premium 1.14          -2.14    0.27      -4.22    -3.93       2.92        1.18      1.00

 Term Premium   1.69          2.12     1.61      -1.76    -1.90       -3.70       1.82      1.69

 Average        5.55          4.58     4.98      1.40      1.58       4.23        5.68      5.49
 Panel B: GLS Risk Premiums

 Equity Premium 5.87          2.84     0.00      -0.46     1.36       4.70        n.a.      n.a.

 Small-Big      4.65          5.96     1.95      6.37      6.49       10.90

 Value-Growth   4.51          5.35     2.67      5.53      7.81       9.86

 Win-Lose       15.69         7.52     18.20     6.17      4.86       6.54

 Reversal       5.28          10.30    4.95      9.27     10.40       11.00

 Credit Premium 1.14          -2.22    -1.24     -1.85    -0.98       3.43

 Term Premium   1.69          2.13     1.47      -0.77    -0.45       -0.67

 Average        5.55          4.55     4.00      3.47      4.21       6.54
                                                48

Table 3: Out-of-Sample MSEs Relative to the CAPM (%)

MSEs relative to the CAPM (%) are presented based on rolling estimation during 1967-2009,
using a window length of 36 years. The relative MSE pricing error is calculated as 100(1+
ln(Model MSE /CAPM MSE)). The continuously-compounded returns are in annual percent, and
measured in excess of a one-month Treasury bill return. CCAPM is the simple consumption beta
model. CAPM is the Capital Asset Pricing Model. LRRC is the cointegrated long-run risk
model and LRRS is the stationary long-run risk model. 2-State-Variable is the model with only
shocks to the two state variables (the risk-free rate and log price/dividend ratio). RLRRC is
restricted version of the cointegrated long-run risk model and RLRRS is restricted version of the
stationary long-run risk model. The p-values in parentheses are for two-sided Diebold-Mariano
(1995) tests of the null hypothesis that the model in question performs no differently than the
classical CAPM. The empirical p-values are based on 10,000 simulation trials. p-values of 10%
or less are in bold face.

       Premium:                                      MSE relative to CAPM (%)
                      CAPM MSEs CCAPM LRRC            LRRS 2-State-Variable RLRRC   RLRRS
       Panel A: MSE relative to CAPM (%), OLS

       Equity Premium    3.88        91.8    104.0     95.0       99.5      97.8    308.0
                                    (0.30)  (0.68)    (0.54)     (0.95)    (0.64)   (0.48)
       Small-Big           5.21     102.0    100.0    100.0      102.0     100.0    106.0
                                    (0.75)  (0.92)    (0.98)     (0.61)    (1.00)   (0.42)
       Value-Growth        4.13      87.1     99.4     97.5      105.0     100.0    101.0
                                    (0.16)  (0.90)    (0.75)     (0.01)    (0.95)   (0.80)
       Win-Lose            9.78      78.9     76.7     82.5       97.5      96.9    194.0
                                    (0.00)  (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.32)    (0.00)   (0.63)
       Reversal            4.43     105.0    104.0    106.0      105.0     101.0     98.9
                                    (0.59)  (0.67)    (0.48)     (0.06)    (0.46)   (0.70)
       Credit Premium      1.34      93.0    105.0    107.0      103.0      97.0    127.0
                                    (0.31)  (0.64)    (0.44)     (0.11)    (0.18)   (0.58)
       Term Premium        1.02      93.7     97.0    103.0      103.0      99.6    229.0
                                    (0.14)  (0.66)    (0.72)     (0.55)    (0.39)   (0.62)
       Panel B: MSE relative to CAPM (%), GLS

       Equity Premium    3.88       92.9    107.0      92.4      101.0      n.a.     n.a.
                                   (0.44)   (0.44)    (0.44)     (0.91)
       Small-Big         5.28       93.4    106.0      94.1      117.0
                                   (0.40)   (0.50)    (0.63)     (0.10)
       Value-Growth      4.09       85.1    108.0     103.0      121.0
                                   (0.17)   (0.37)    (0.76)     (0.01)
       Win-Lose          10.20      78.0     70.3      77.4       84.3
                                   (0.00)   (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.03)
       Reversal          4.46      104.0    115.0     110.0      120.0
                                   (0.73)   (0.22)    (0.37)     (0.00)
       Credit Premium    1.33       94.0    103.0     104.0      105.0
                                   (0.31)   (0.71)    (0.58)     (0.19)
       Term Premium      0.99       98.1    101.0     105.0      108.0
                                   (0.61)   (0.86)    (0.23)     (0.01)
                                                49

Table 4: Full Sample MSEs Relative to the CAPM (%), 1931-2009

MSEs relative to the CAPM (%) are based on full sample estimation during 1931-2009. The
relative MSEs for a model is calculated as 100(1+ln(Model MSE/MSE CAPM)). The number of
observations is 79. The continuously-compounded returns are in annual percent, and measured in
excess of a one-month Treasury bill return. CCAPM is the simple consumption beta model.
CAPM is the Capital Asset Pricing Model. LRRC is the cointegrated long-run risk model and
LRRS is the stationary long-run risk model. 2-State-Variable is the model with only shocks to
the two state variables (the risk-free rate and log price/dividend ratio). RLRRC is restricted
version of the cointegrated long-run risk model and RLRRS is restricted version of the stationary
long-run risk model. The p-values in parentheses are for two-sided Diebold-Mariano (1995) tests
of the null hypothesis that the model performs no differently than the classical CAPM. The
empirical p-values are based on 10,000 simulation trials. p-values of 10% or less are in bold
face.
   Premium:                                          MSE relative to CAPM (%)
                    CAPM MSEs CCAPM         LRRC      LRRS 2-State-Variable RLRRC     RLRRS
   Panel A: MSE relative to CAPM (%), OLS

   Equity Premium      4.30        98.7      99.1      98.0       97.6       105.0    104.0
                                  (0.15)    (0.90)    (0.76)     (0.23)      (0.03)   (0.04)
   Small-Big           5.41       104.0      97.6      97.5      100.0       102.0    102.0
                                  (0.07)    (0.39)    (0.48)     (0.13)      (0.09)   (0.11)
   Value-Growth        4.38       103.0     102.0     105.0      113.0       102.0    101.0
                                  (0.04)    (0.06)    (0.04)     (0.01)      (0.06)   (0.07)
   Win-Lose            7.94        68.2      66.6      66.1       81.1        93.8     95.1
                                  (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)   (0.00)
   Reversal            5.13       114.0     102.0     103.0       98.1       101.0    101.0
                                  (0.00)    (0.03)    (0.02)     (0.06)      (0.03)   (0.03)
   Credit Premium      1.42       103.0     112.0     110.0      106.0       101.0    101.0
                                  (0.48)    (0.13)    (0.18)     (0.23)      (0.59)   (0.63)
   Term Premium        0.69       103.0     101.0     101.0      115.0       101.0    100.0
                                  (0.04)    (0.93)    (0.88)     (0.25)      (0.06)   (0.07)
   Panel B: MSE relative to CAPM (%), GLS

   Equity Premium      4.16       102.0     100.0     100.0      105.0        n.a.     n.a.
                                  (0.53)    (0.91)    (0.77)     (0.31)
   Small-Big           5.31       106.0     107.0     107.0      120.0
                                  (0.13)    (0.11)    (0.10)     (0.01)
   Value-Growth        4.30       105.0     105.0     112.0      119.0
                                  (0.08)    (0.07)    (0.02)     (0.01)
   Win-Lose            8.49        60.9      57.7      55.0       58.5
                                  (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
   Reversal            5.11       115.0     111.0     115.0      117.0
                                  (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
   Credit Premium      1.44       102.0     101.0      99.6      107.0
                                  (0.20)    (0.24)    (0.41)     (0.42)
   Term Premium        0.68       103.0      97.7      97.1       97.5
                                  (0.05)    (0.71)    (0.58)     (0.67)
                                                                     50

Table 5: Clark-West Tests on Out-of-Sample MSEs

Clark-West (2007) tests on out-of-sample MSEs are presented based on rolling estimation during 1967-2009. The number of
observations in the evaluation period is 43. In panels A and B the benchmark model is the CCAPM. In panels C and D the benchmark
model is the 2-State-Variable Model. The t-statistics examine the one-sided tests of the null hypothesis that the two models have the
same mean squared pricing error. The alternative hypothesis is that the more complex model has smaller error. The empirical p-values
are based on 10,000 simulation trials. p-values of 10% or less are in bold face. The continuously-compounded returns are in annual
percent, and measured in excess of a one-month Treasury bill return. LRRC is the cointegrated long-run risk model and LRRS is the
stationary long-run risk model. 2-State-Variable is the model with only shocks to the two state variables (the risk-free rate and log
price/dividend ratio). RLRRC is restricted version of the cointegrated long-run risk model, and RLRRS is restricted version of the
stationary long-run risk model. Panel A and C results are based on OLS risk premium estimates. Panel B and D results are based on
GLS risk premium estimates.

Panel A: OLS Estimation. The Benchmark Model is the CCAPM.

           Equity Premium       Small-Big         Value-Grow          Win-Lose           Reversal         Credit Premium     Term Premium
           t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value
  LRRC     -0.99     0.87     0.63      0.27     -1.38     0.93     0.69      0.33     1.00      0.15     -0.68     0.77     0.21      0.40
  LRRS     -0.21     0.59     0.72      0.23     -1.39     0.94     -0.34     0.67     0.38      0.36     -1.36     0.97     -0.09     0.53
 RLRRC     -0.82     0.78     1.41      0.08     -0.70     0.75     -2.56     0.99     1.32      0.09     0.09      0.51     -0.92     0.81
  RLRRS     0.97     0.08     1.59      0.06     0.53      0.26     -1.48     0.99     1.63      0.04     -0.66     0.79     0.95      0.08




Panel B: GLS Estimation. The Benchmark Model is the CCAPM.

           Equity Premium       Small-Big         Value-Grow          Win-Lose           Reversal         Credit Premium     Term Premium
           t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value
  LRRC     -0.78     0.79     -0.74     0.72     -1.49     0.94     1.28      0.16     -0.21     0.57     -0.86     0.86     0.00      0.48
  LRRS      0.64     0.25     0.37      0.34     -2.84     1.00     0.43      0.38     -0.28     0.58     -1.43     0.97     -0.77     0.78
                                                                    51

Panel C: OLS Estimation. The Benchmark Model is 2-State-Variable Model.

          Equity Premium       Small-Big         Value-Grow          Win-Lose           Reversal         Credit Premium     Term Premium
          t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value
  LRRC    -0.14     0.55     0.97      0.17     1.97      0.04     3.51      0.00     1.20      0.12     0.87      0.16     1.43      0.06
  LRRS     1.59     0.06     0.94      0.18     1.78      0.04     3.47      0.00     0.74      0.23     0.49      0.31     1.25      0.10
 RLRRC     0.63     0.23     0.75      0.28     1.26      0.04     0.32      0.34     1.67      0.04     2.67      0.00     1.06      0.10
 RLRRS     1.07     0.07     0.35      0.39     1.31      0.03     -0.96     0.92     1.54      0.01     -0.15     0.62     1.12      0.07




Panel D: GLS Estimation. The Benchmark Model is 2-State-Variable Model.

          Equity Premium       Small-Big         Value-Grow          Win-Lose           Reversal         Credit Premium     Term Premium
          t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value   t-stat   p value
  LRRC    -0.15     0.57     1.92      0.02     2.19      0.02     2.92      0.00     1.95      0.02     1.52      0.08     2.37      0.01
  LRRS     2.41     0.01     2.74      0.00     2.54      0.00     2.10      0.02     2.14      0.02     1.53      0.07     1.21      0.12
                                                  52

Table 6: Comparison of Subperiods

Pricing errors for portfolios of the seven test assets are compared, estimating the model parameters
using the full sample and evaluating the pricing errors over subperiods. The returns are continuously-
compounded annual percents. CCAPM is the simple consumption beta model. CAPM is the Capital
Asset Pricing Model. LRRC is the cointegrated long-run risk model and LRRS is the stationary
long-run risk model. 2-State-Variable is the model with only shocks to the two state variables (the
risk-free rate and log price/dividend ratio). RLRRC is restricted version of the cointegrated long-run
risk model and RLRRS is restricted version of the stationary long-run risk model. The MSE relative
to the CAPM is calculated as 100x[1+ln(model MSE/CAPM MSE)].

        Premium:                                           Subperiods
                                  1931-1950        1951-1970       1971-1990    1991-2009
        Panel A: OLS
        Average Pricing Errors of Equally-weighted Portfolio

        CCAPM                       6.13               3.17           3.75         5.19

        CAPM                        6.81               3.53           4.10         5.54

        LRRC                        3.16               -0.11          0.40         2.06

        LRRS                        3.38               0.12           0.69         2.23

        2-State-Variable            5.97               2.74           3.29         5.01

        RLRRC                       7.39               4.23           4.84         6.29

        RLRRS                       7.20               4.04           4.63         6.11

        Panel B: OLS
        CAPM MSE                    2.46               0.52           0.71         0.77

        MSEs of Equally-Weighted Portfolio Relative to the CAPM (%)

        CCAPM                       94.1               95.3           95.8         92.7

        LRRC                        85.8               72.7           77.4         60.7

        LRRS                        84.3               72.9           79.0         58.9

        2-State                     96.8               89.0           93.7         94.3

        RLRRC                       102.1              109.0          108.0        110.0

        RLRRS                       101.0              106.0          105.0        107.0
                                          53



Premium:                                          Subperiods
                          1931-1950       1951-1970       1971-1990   1991-2009
Panel C: GLS
Average Pricing Errors of GLS Portfolio

CCAPM                       5.70               2.48         4.39        5.58

CAPM                        5.45               1.88         3.76        4.58

LRRC                        5.02               1.53         3.49        4.21

LRRS                        5.77               2.61         4.54        4.84

2-State-Variable            7.90               4.46         6.39        7.14

RLRRC                       6.41               2.93         4.86        6.29

RLRRS                       6.23               2.74         4.65        6.11

Panel D: GLS
CAPM MSE                    2.13               0.47         0.88        0.85

MSEs of GLS Portfolio Relative to the CAPM (%)

CCAPM                      100.0               106.0       106.0        107.0

LRRC                        99.2               95.7         99.3        104.0

LRRS                       101.0               107.0       108.0        110.0

2-State                    114.0               130.0       127.0        136.0

RLRRC                      105.0               110.0       110.0        113.0

RLRRS                      104.0               108.0       108.0        111.0
                                               54

Table 7: Average Pricing Errors and MSEs of the Conditional Models, 1967-2009

Average excess returns, out-of-sample pricing errors (actual minus prediction), and MSEs
relative to the CAPM (%) are shown based on rolling estimation of the conditional models
during 1967-2009, using a window length of 36 years. The continuously-compounded returns are
in annual percent, and measured in excess of a one-month Treasury bill return. CCAPM is the
simple consumption beta model. CAPM is the conditional Capital Asset Pricing Model. LRRC
is the cointegrated long-run risk model and LRRS is the stationary long-run risk model. 2-State-
Variable is the model with only shocks to the two state variables (the risk-free rate and log
price/dividend ratio). The p-values in parentheses are for two-sided Diebold-Mariano (1995) test
of the null hypothesis that the model in question performs no differently than the classical,
unconditional CAPM. The empirical p-values are based on 10,000 simulation trials. p-values of
10% or less are in bold face.
Premium:                                       Average Pricing Errors
         Unconditional CAPM CCAPM     CAPM     LRRC       LRRS 2-State-Variable RLRRC   RLRRS
Panel A: OLS Risk Premiums

Equity Premium    2.48        2.20     3.84     2.03     1.72        4.62       4.04    19.70
                             (0.72)   (0.14)   (0.62)   (0.44)     (0.00)      (0.00)   (0.08)
Small-Big         1.21        1.71     1.60    -0.62     2.43        2.28       2.70     3.87
                             (0.64)   (0.43)   (0.20)   (0.39)     (0.27)      (0.00)   (0.07)
Value-Growth      5.51        0.88     5.22     2.18     2.08        5.11       6.29     3.96
                             (0.00)   (0.24)   (0.01)   (0.00)     (0.41)      (0.00)   (0.63)
Win-Lose         18.30       10.90    18.10     4.58     8.47      17.70       17.80     7.21
                             (0.00)   (0.52)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.40)      (0.00)   (0.08)
Reversal          5.14        -0.17    4.97    -4.55     -1.79       3.58       5.43     4.02
                             (0.00)   (0.10)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.06)      (0.04)   (0.57)
Credit Premium    0.09        0.77     0.29     3.29     0.73       -0.03       0.58     2.23
                             (0.13)   (0.24)   (0.00)   (0.25)     (0.58)      (0.00)   (0.07)
Term Premium      1.86        1.07     2.21     0.98     -0.51       2.19       1.81     7.01
                             (0.01)   (0.00)   (0.07)   (0.00)     (0.33)      (0.04)   (0.62)
Average           4.94        2.48     5.18     1.13     1.88        5.06       5.52     6.86

Panel B: GLS Risk Premiums

Equity Premium    -2.14       2.27     -0.03    2.82     3.02       5.49        n.a.     n.a.
                             (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)
Small-Big         -1.05       1.47     -0.15    0.35     4.57       5.22
                             (0.00)   (0.04)   (0.25)   (0.00)     (0.00)
Value-Growth      5.16        1.53      5.14    3.70     3.18       8.39
                             (0.00)   (0.92)   (0.32)   (0.12)     (0.00)
Win-Lose         19.80       12.20    19.20     5.57     8.89      14.30
                             (0.00)   (0.04)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)
Reversal          5.39        0.03      5.24   -3.74     -1.04      6.33
                             (0.00)   (0.07)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.19)
Credit Premium    -0.69       0.59     -0.32    1.66      1.47      1.22
                             (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)
Term Premium      1.36        1.28      1.68    0.91     0.62       1.86
                             (0.72)   (0.00)   (0.23)   (0.20)     (0.05)
Average           3.98        2.77      4.39    1.61     2.96       6.12
                                                55




Premium:                                  MSE relative to unconditional CAPM (%)
  Unconditional CAPM MSEs CCAPM         CAPM      LRRC        LRRS 2-State-Variable RLRRC   RLRRS
Panel C: MSE relative to unconditional CAPM (%), OLS

Equity Premium     3.88       92.7     117.0    123.0     110.0       108.0        97.9     431.0
                             (0.41)    (0.10)   (0.04)    (0.39)      (0.45)      (0.65)    (0.49)
Small-Big          5.21      107.0     106.0    117.0     123.0       108.0       100.0     119.0
                             (0.35)    (0.19)   (0.16)    (0.10)      (0.36)      (0.97)    (0.36)
Value-Growth       4.13       89.3     100.0    105.0     109.0       101.0       100.0     127.0
                             (0.33)    (0.97)   (0.63)    (0.46)      (0.79)      (0.95)    (0.33)
Win-Lose           9.78       76.1     101.0     88.3      81.8       101.0        96.7     284.0
                             (0.00)    (0.72)   (0.67)    (0.05)      (0.85)      (0.00)    (0.63)
Reversal           4.43      114.0      98.7    122.0     120.0       111.0       101.0     104.0
                             (0.24)    (0.20)   (0.13)    (0.11)      (0.14)      (0.43)    (0.13)
Credit Premium     1.34       95.6     102.0    133.0     116.0       105.0        97.1     171.0
                             (0.52)    (0.53)   (0.18)    (0.20)      (0.12)      (0.19)    (0.58)
Term Premium       1.02       96.9     103.0    120.0     112.0       112.0        99.5     343.0
                             (0.69)    (0.13)   (0.04)    (0.32)      (0.06)      (0.24)    (0.61)
Panel D: MSE relative to unconditional CAPM (%), GLS

Equity Premium     3.88       92.8     112.0    123.0     110.0       104.0        97.4     456.0
                             (0.46)    (0.24)   (0.10)    (0.50)      (0.79)      (0.78)    (0.36)
Small-Big          5.28       95.9     103.0    101.0     120.0        99.7        98.4     114.0
                             (0.59)    (0.43)   (0.89)    (0.26)      (0.97)      (0.81)    (0.41)
Value-Growth       4.09       87.0     100.0    118.0     118.0       117.0       102.0     145.0
                             (0.24)    (0.99)   (0.20)    (0.17)      (0.08)      (0.73)    (0.29)
Win-Lose          10.20       78.2      99.6     79.6      78.0        86.5        93.0     296.0
                             (0.00)    (0.79)   (0.42)    (0.03)      (0.02)      (0.00)    (0.63)
Reversal           4.46      108.0      98.7    125.0     119.0       109.0       101.0     113.0
                             (0.49)    (0.16)   (0.13)    (0.13)      (0.23)      (0.55)    (0.19)
Credit Premium     1.33       95.6     101.0    120.0     110.0       105.0        98.2     186.0
                             (0.41)    (0.73)   (0.33)    (0.41)      (0.20)      (0.51)    (0.51)
Term Premium       0.99       98.7     103.0    116.0     114.0       114.0       103.0     372.0
                             (0.76)    (0.09)   (0.11)    (0.16)      (0.03)      (0.12)    (0.10)
                                                 56

Figure 1: Time-Series Plots of { , } from Rolling Estimation of the RLRRS Model

Time-series plots of the utility function parameters { , } , the risk aversion and the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) from rolling estimation of the RLRRS model. The
estimation period is 1967-2009 and the window length is 36 years.




            Time-series Plots of Risk Aversion and the Intertemporay Elasticity of
                 Substitution from Rolling Estimation of the RLRRS Model


   3


  2.5


   2

                                                                                    Risk Aversion
  1.5
                                                                                    IES

   1


  0.5


   0



                                          Year
