                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990:
             REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION

                                                Gabriel Chan
                                               Robert Stavins
                                               Robert Stowe
                                              Richard Sweeney

                                            Working Paper 17845
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w17845


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         February 2012




   We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of participants in a research workshop and policy roundtable
   in May 2011, as well as the comments and edits some provided on an earlier draft of this paper (described
   as a "policy brief" within). Their expertise and experience made the project possible. (Comments made
   by participants in the workshop were not intended for attribution, and specific insights are not referenced
   in the paper. For a list of participants, see inside the back cover.) We also thank Marika Tatsutani,
   who edited the paper and provided valuable substantive insights, and Bryan Galcik, who designed
   and produced the document. Finally, we are grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, which provided
   generous support for the workshop and for the preparation of this study. The views expressed herein
   are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Harvard Kennedy School, Harvard
   University, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2012 by Gabriel Chan, Robert Stavins, Robert Stowe, and Richard Sweeney. All rights reserved.
   Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
   that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The SO2 Allowance Trading System and the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990: Reflections
on Twenty Years of Policy Innovation
Gabriel Chan, Robert Stavins, Robert Stowe, and Richard Sweeney
NBER Working Paper No. 17845
February 2012
JEL No. Q52,Q53,Q55,Q58

                                             ABSTRACT

The introduction of the U.S. SO2 allowance-trading program to address the threat of acid rain as part
of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 is a landmark event in the history of environmental regulation.
The program was a great success by almost all measures. This paper, which draws upon a research
workshop and a policy roundtable held at Harvard in May 2011, investigates critically the design,
enactment, implementation, performance, and implications of this path-breaking application of economic
thinking to environmental regulation. Ironically, cap and trade seems especially well suited to addressing
the problem of climate change, in that emitted greenhouse gases are evenly distributed throughout
the world’s atmosphere. Recent hostility toward cap and trade in debates about U.S. climate legislation
may reflect the broader political environment of the climate debate more than the substantive merits
of market-based regulation.


Gabriel Chan                                        Robert Stowe
Kennedy School of Government                        Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University                                  Harvard University
79 JFK Street                                       79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
gabe_chan@hksphd.harvard.edu                        robert_stowe@harvard.edu

Robert Stavins                                      Richard Sweeney
JFK School of Government                            Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University                                  rich_sweeney@hksphd.harvard.edu
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@harvard.edu
Preface

       In 2009, the U.S. Congress considered but ultimately failed to enact legislation aimed at limiting
U.S. greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions.1 Over several months of often contentious debate, millions of
Americans were introduced to the phrase “cap and trade,” a regulatory approach that first came to promi-
nence in the 1990s as the centerpiece of a national program to address the threat of acid rain by limiting
emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO2), primarily from electric power plants.


         The 1990 SO2 cap-and-trade program was conceived by the administration of President George H.
W. Bush and was widely viewed as a success. Yet cap and trade became a lightning rod for congressional
opposition to climate legislation from 2009 through 2010. Some of that hostility reflected skepticism
about whether climate change was real and, if it was, whether humans played a key role in causing it.
A larger group of opponents in Congress worried about the proper role of government and the costs of
combating climate change, particularly given the lack of commitments for action by the large emerging
economies of China, India, Brazil, Korea, South Africa, and Mexico. The congressional debate touched
only lightly on the relative merits of various policy options to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions. Thus, cap
and trade may not have been defeated on its merits (or demerits), but rather as collateral damage in the
larger climate policy wars.


        Congress (to the extent it did assess policy alternatives to cap and trade), as well as the broader
community of analysts and observers in the late 2000s, raised a number of substantive questions about the
merits of this policy instrument as a means for responding to a major environmental policy challenge of
the sort posed by climate change (Peace and Stavins 2010):

         •     Cap and trade is part of a larger class of policy approaches to alleviating pollution and managing natural
               resources that rely on market mechanisms.2 How do the costs of such a market-based approach com-
               pare with traditional regulatory policies to reduce pollution?
         •     Can market-based policies—and the markets they create—be trusted to reduce emissions? That is, are
               they environmentally effective?




1   The bill under consideration at that time, the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009, was the last in a series considered over several years.
    Sponsored by Representatives Henry Waxman (D-California) and Edward Markey (D-Massachusetts), the bill passed the U.S. House of Representa-
    tives but failed to win sufficient support in the Senate. No legislation was enacted, and by 2010, both Congress and the White House had aban-
    doned efforts to pass federal climate legislation. For text of and information on the bill and its legislative context, see: www.govtrack.us/congress/bill.
    xpd?bill=h111-2454.

2   The principal market-based alternative to cap and trade is a tax on emissions (see text box). For a comprehensive discussion of market-based environmen-
    tal policy, see Stavins (2003).



                                                                      HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 1
          •     What are the distributional impacts of market-based environmental policies; who are the winners and
                losers?
          •     How well does a cap-and-trade system stimulate technological innovation, as compared with an en-
                vironmental policy that sets performance standards, specifies technologies for reducing pollution, or
                both?



        In May 2011, the Harvard Environmental Economics Program hosted a two-day research work-
shop and policy roundtable in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to reflect on these and other questions in light
of twenty years of experience implementing the SO2 cap-and-trade program, established under Title IV
of the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of 1990.3 Also known as the Acid Rain Program and the SO2
allowance-trading system, Title IV represented the first large-scale application of cap and trade to control
pollution—in the United States or any other country.4


        This policy brief synthesizes the main conclusions and insights that emerged from the May 2011
workshop and roundtable, which included economists and legal experts who had conducted extensive
research on the SO2 allowance-trading system, as well as leaders of non-governmental organizations and
former government officials who had guided the formulation and passage of the CAAA.5 Participants
discussed the SO2 cap-and-trade program’s design, implementation, performance, and legacy—and its
implications for the issues that emerged in recent congressional debates about U.S. climate policy. This
policy brief draws on their analysis and on supplementary evidence.6




3    For the text of the amendments and other information see www.epa.gov/airmarkets/progsregs/arp.

4    The largest emissions trading program in the world is now the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), a greenhouse-gas, cap-and-trade
     system that was implemented in 2005 and whose design was influenced by the U.S. SO2 program.

5    See the list of participants inside the back cover.

6    For background on and analysis of the SO2 allowance-trading program, see generally Ellerman, et al. (2000) and Stavins (1998).



2 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
1. Introduction

          In 1990, the U.S. Congress passed and President George H.W. Bush signed into law amendments
to the Clean Air Act, which included a path-breaking, market-based approach to addressing the threat of
acid rain. The SO2 allowance-trading program established under the 1990 Amendments was the world’s
first large-scale pollutant cap-and-trade system. This policy brief examines the design, enactment, imple-
mentation, and performance of that system, with an eye toward identifying lessons learned for future ef-
forts to apply cap and trade to other environmental challenges, including global climate change. The first
section provides background on the Acid Rain Program and summarizes data and analysis on its benefits.
Subsequent sections examine key questions regarding cost, environmental effectiveness, market perfor-
mance, distributional implications, and effects on technology innovation. We then examine the political
context of the formulation, enactment, and implementation of the SO2 allowance-trading system. Finally,
in the conclusion, we briefly reflect on implications for climate change policy.



2. The Acid Rain Program: Background and Benefits

         By the late 1980s, there was growing concern that acid rain was damaging aquatic ecosystems,
forests, and buildings in the northeastern United States and southeastern Canada. Acid rain is the result of
SO2 and, to a lesser extent, nitrogen oxides (NOx) reacting in the atmosphere to form sulfuric and nitric
acids, which are deposited on the Earth’s surface through either precipitation or dry processes. Flue gas
emissions from coal-fired, electric-power plants were (and remain) the primary source of SO2 emissions
and a major source of NOx emissions in the United States.


        The stated purpose of Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of 1990 was to reduce
total annual SO2 emissions in the United States by ten million tons relative to 1980, when total U.S. emis-




                                                HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 3
sions were about 25.9 million tons.7 The program mandated an allowance-trading system8 and specified
that this goal would be accomplished in two phases. Phase I (1995–1999) required significant emissions
reductions from the 263 most polluting coal-fired electric generating units, almost all located east of the
Mississippi River.9 Phase II, which began in 2000, placed an aggregate national emissions cap of 8.95 mil-
lion tons per year on approximately 3,200 electric generating units—nearly the entire fleet of coal-fired
plants in the continental United States (Ellerman et al. 2000, 6–7; NAPAP 2005, 6–7). This cap—affect-
ing almost exclusively the power sector—represented an approximately 50 percent reduction from 1980
levels, when power-sector emissions were about 17.5 million tons.


         The SO2 allowance-trading program had a number of features that would subsequently become
common to virtually all cap-and-trade systems. (See box on cap and trade.) At the beginning of the pro-
gram, the government (freely) allocated allowances, denominated in tons of SO2 emissions, to power
plants covered by the law, according to formulas contained in the legislation and elaborated upon by
regulation. If annual emissions at a regulated facility exceeded the allowances allocated to that facility, the
facility owner could either buy allowances or reduce emissions, whether by installing pollution controls,
changing the mix of fuels used to operate the facility, or by scaling back operations. If emissions at a regu-
lated facility were reduced below its allowance allocation, the facility owner could sell the extra allowances
or bank them for future use; these opportunities created incentives to find ways to reduce emissions at the
lowest cost.


        By contrast, most air pollution regulations prior to the 1990 CAAA took a much more prescrip-
tive approach, either by setting uniform emission limits on classes of emitters or by specifying the type of
pollution-control equipment to be installed. Such requirements are relatively inflexible, imposing the same
abatement path upon a range of heterogeneous facilities and ignoring the fact that the costs of compliance
might vary widely across individual facilities depending on the age, technology characteristics, operating
conditions, and quality of fuel used. This type of inflexible environmental regulation came to be known by
the somewhat pejorative term “command-and-control,” invoking visions of Soviet-style planning.


         The environmental objective of the Acid Rain Program was to reduce emissions of SO2 and NOx,
but its effectiveness in achieving these objectives should be distinguished from the benefits of the program


7    The legislation itself did not specify a target year. For SO2 emissions data, see U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National Emissions Inventory
     Air Pollutant Emissions Trends Data; “1970–2011 Average annual emissions, all criteria pollutants in MS Excel – October 2011,” tab “SO2.” For
     power-plant emissions, see line “FUEL COMB. ELEC. UTIL.” www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/trends/index.html.

8    We use the phrases “allowance trading” and “cap and trade” interchangeably. The CAAA also mandated a smaller quantity of power-sector NOx reduc-
     tions, but the NOx program did not allow for allowance trading and is not addressed in this brief.

9    A number of additional units that were to be regulated only in Phase II opted-in early for Phase I.



4 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
(intended or not). The intended benefits of the program were associated with reduced acidification of
aquatic ecosystems, primarily in the Northeast. However, subsequent assessments of the program found
that by far the greatest benefits were in the form of avoided health damages from reduced levels of airborne
fine particles derived from SO2 emissions.10 Estimates of these health benefits vary widely, but they appear
to be on the order of $50 billion per year by 2010. This compares with estimated program costs (see be-
low) on the order of $0.5 billion (Burtraw 1998; NAPAP 2005, 64; Shadbegian, Gray, and Morgan 2005;
U.S. EPA, Office of Air and Radiation 2011).11


3. Cost

        A key question concerns cost—specifically, how the costs of achieving environmental objectives
through cap and trade compare with those of a “counterfactual” (hypothetical alternative) command-and-
control regulatory approach. Indeed, policy makers asked this question during discussions in the late
1980s about a new program for SO2 emissions reduction. They proceeded on the basis of projections12 and
economic theory suggesting that cap and trade would be much less costly, relative to traditional, prescrip-
tive regulatory approaches.13


         Extensive analysis has demonstrated over the subsequent twenty years that these projections were
largely correct. A summary of economic research addressing this question and presented in the workshop
identified a range of 15–90 percent savings, compared to counterfactual policies that specified the means
of regulation in various ways and for various portions of the program’s regulatory period.14


       In addition to being less costly than traditional command-and-control policies would have been,
the program’s costs were significantly below estimates generated by government and industry analysts in
the debate leading up to the passage of the CAAA. In 1990, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

10   Though the program’s SO2-emissions-reductions targets were achieved, and there has been an observed, significant reduction in acid precipitation in the
     Northeast, it takes much longer to reverse the acidification of ecosystems, which is the environmental harm that inspired the legislation in the first place
     (NAPAP 2005, 58–64). However, health benefits will dominate ecological benefits regardless of the time required for ecosystem recovery.

11   Attempts to quantify the benefits of the Acid Rain Program have generally not included all improvements to ecosystems, both because these are much
     more difficult to estimate and because they are much smaller than human health benefits—by at least an order of magnitude. See especially Burtraw
     (1998). More than a decade after passage of the CAAA, Banzhaf, et al. (2006) found that the benefits of ecosystem recovery in the Adirondacks justified
     the costs of the acid rain program, notwithstanding the substantially greater public health benefits. For a detailed analysis of costs and health benefits
     associated with recent policies intended to replace the SO2 allowance-trading system, see Schmalensee and Stavins (2011).

12   These projections were largely the result of modeling conducted by ICF, a consulting firm retained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. See,
     e.g., references in Burtraw and Palmer (2003).

13   Costs referenced in this section include those to industry for complying with the program and to government for administering the program.

14   See, among others, Carlson, et al. (2000); Ellerman, et al. (2000, 253–295); Keohane (2003).



                                                                       HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 5
What is cap and trade?




         T     he fundamental motivation for any government policy to reduce emissions is that pollution
               imposes costs on society (related to health and environmental quality) that are not borne by
         polluters—“external costs.” These costs to society must be “internalized” or made the responsibility
         of the polluter, if the polluter is to have an incentive to abate. A cost-effective system of regulation
         would be one in which the costs incurred are minimized, relative to other systems of regulation
         with commensurate environmental results.

         Several basic features are common to all cap-and-trade programs. First, government decides on
         the total (aggregate) quantity of emissions to be allowed under the program for a stated time pe-
         riod (usually per year)—that is, the “cap.” Next, government creates allowances (or “permits”),
         denominated in quantities of the pollutant in question. The total number of allowances issued is
         equal to the cap.

         At the start of the program, allowances may be given to the entities subject to the program (firms,
         facilities) for free or sold for a price (usually through an auction)—or some combination. A regu-
         lated entity must hold and surrender to the government at the end of each compliance period
         allowances equivalent to that entity’s actual emissions during the period. If a firm does not hold
         sufficient allowances, it is subject to penalties or other enforcement actions. In the case of the SO2
         program, these penalties were, for the first time, specified in the statute, set at levels significantly
         higher than the anticipated compliance costs, and imposed automatically, thus providing certainty
         with regard to consequences for noncompliance.

         Firms may buy allowances on the market to meet their compliance obligations, or they may choose
         to reduce their emissions. For companies holding too few allowances, the choice to abate or buy
         allowances would depend on the cost of compliance versus the price (or anticipated price) of pur-
         chasing allowances.*1 Because each individual company (or facility) has the flexibility to choose the
         course of action that costs it the least to achieve compliance, investment in abatement technology
         or procedures would flow to where it was least costly to reduce emissions. (The marginal cost of
         abatement becomes equalized across all entities.) In aggregate, the mandated environmental target
         is achieved at lowest cost; this is why cap and trade is generally considered a cost-effective form of
         regulation.




*   Covered entities that hold too many allowances would make precisely the same calculation about whether to abate; if the cost of abatement (per ton) is
    lower than the price of allowances, the firm with a surplus will abate and have more allowances to sell on the market (for a higher price than it costs to
    abate).
(EPA) estimated the cost of implementing the Acid Rain Program (with allowance trading) at $6.1 bil-
lion. In 1998, the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), an industry organization, and Resources for
the Future (RFF), an independent think tank, estimated that total implementation costs would be $1.7
and $1.1 billion respectively (based in part on actual figures for the first few years of the program; NAPAP
[2005, 13]). (See Figure 1.)


Figure 1




        Several factors explain the large decline in the cost estimates. Power-plant operators in the eastern
states benefited from increased access to—and falling prices of—low-sulfur coal from the Powder River
Basin (PRB) in Wyoming and Montana, due to the deregulation of the railroads in the 1980s, which
reduced transportation costs (Ellerman et al. 2000, 82–89). For many facilities this made fuel switching
less expensive than installing scrubbers.15 (The primary technology for reducing SO2 emissions is flue-gas
desulfurization, and equipment employing this technology is commonly known as a “scrubber.” Scrubbers

15   Of the 263 Phase I units, 136 (52 percent) pursued fuel switching or blending. These units accounted for 59 percent of Phase I emissions reductions;
     scrubbers were installed at 27 (10 percent) of the units, accounting for 28 percent of the emissions reduction (Lange and Bellas 2005, 547).



                                                                     HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 7
remove SO2 from a boiler’s flue gas stream before the gas enters the atmosphere.) At the same time, coal-
mine operators elsewhere in the country responded to PRB competition and changing fuel demands by ex-
ploiting medium-sulfur coal seams. Coal from these seams would produce emissions just above the limit of
1.2 pounds of SO2 per millon BTUs16 set by the Clean Air Act of 1970 for new plants, but not enough in
excess of that limit to be worth scrubbing. Finally, technological innovation in both scrubbers and power
plants (some of it prompted by the trading program itself, as discussed below) reduced costs over this time
period, primarily through better management of the fuel mix. Taken together, these developments made
it possible for electric utilities to achieve greater SO2 reductions through fuel switching, relative to more
expensive investments in new equipment.17

         While the costs of the SO2 allowance-trading system were low, other evidence suggests that they
were not as low as they could have been, in the sense that they did not achieve the theoretical least-cost
abatement solution for a cap-and-trade system. One study suggests that costs remained $280 million (51
percent) and $339 million (59 percent) higher than the least-cost solution in 1995 and 1996, respectively
(Carlson et al. 2000, 1295–1296, 1318). Factors that kept costs above the theoretical minimum18 were,
first, provisions in the CAAA that encouraged early scrubbing to limit impacts on high-sulfur coal produc-
ers, and second, lack of information about marginal abatement costs and other crucial factors on the part
of market participants. In the early years, power-plant operators may have lacked the information (and as-
sociated experience and confidence) to take full advantage of the flexibility that the SO2 allowance-trading
system offered. Third, in the early years of the program, utilities were subject to economic regulation at the
state level that had the effect of distorting or constraining their responses to market-based federal environ-
mental regulation (Arimura 2002; Bohi and Burtraw 1992). Some faced uncertainty over whether state
regulators would approve the inclusion of costs incurred to purchase emissions allowances, in those states
that allowed costs to be recovered from electric ratepayers. Similarly, there were interactions between the
SO2 system and other federal regulations, such as New Source Review and New Source Performance Stan-
dards, which may have created inefficiencies in how the program operated. Finally, there was considerable
policy uncertainty, particularly in Phase II, when regulators and policy makers were considering further
reductions in the national SO2 cap, as is discussed below.

16   British Thermal Units—a measure of the quantity of heat.

17   Some analysts have suggested that because the reduction in fuel costs would have occurred anyway—and would have reduced the costs of a command-
     and-control SO2 program as well—then the cost savings attributed to the SO2 allowance-trading program (relative to a command-and-control system)
     should be adjusted downward (Carlson et al. 2000, 1314). However, a prescriptive regulatory approach (such as a policy that required the installation
     of scrubbers at all power plants) might have prevented utilities from taking advantage of these alternative compliance options.

18   That marginal abatement costs still varied across facilities, even after the SO2 cap-and-trade system was implemented, is evidence that the cap-and-
     trade system did not always yield cost-effective mitigation outcomes; some utilities ended up paying more on a dollar-per-ton basis to comply with the
     program than others. Analysts disagree, though, on the significance of these variations, largely depending on whether they are compared with much
     larger heterogeneity in abatement costs prior to the SO2 allowance trading system or with the ideal convergence of marginal costs in a cost-minimizing
     outcome.



8 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
        In sum, the SO2 allowance-trading system’s actual costs, even if they exceeded the cost-effective
ideal for a cap-and-trade system, were much lower than would have been incurred with a comparable
traditional regulatory approach, and were much lower than the trading system’s predicted costs. There
is broad agreement that the SO2 allowance-trading system provided a compelling demonstration of the
cost advantages of a market-based approach. It is important to elaborate on this conclusion, however, by
examining two ancillary issues that have significant cost implications: uncertainty and the problems of
combining policy approaches.


Cost-Uncertainty and Cap and Trade

       Firms desire certainty (low variance) in regulatory requirements and compliance costs, the latter
being facilitated by flexibility in the means to comply. A regulatory instrument that offers a predictable
compliance regime and greater cost certainty19 will usually enable companies to take advantage of longer-
term investments that may reduce costs over time. Cost certainty is especially important for the electric
power industry, whose capital assets (physical facilities) are long-lived.


        Compared with an emissions tax (see box) or technology-standards-based, command-and-control-
style regulations, a cap-and-trade system offers individual firms less certainty about abatement costs, be-
cause the price of allowances fluctuates with market conditions. Firms that make incorrect predictions
about allowance prices (or, alternatively, marginal abatement costs) are less likely than competitors with
better foresight to select an optimal compliance strategy. However, ancillary policy-design elements of the
SO2 allowance-trading system mitigated this uncertainty. Banking provisions gave firms the flexibility to
save (“bank”) allowances from one compliance period for use in a future compliance period, thus effec-
tively smoothing price fluctuations (Burtraw and Mansur 1999). Another program feature that required
EPA to auction small percentages of the total allowance pool “facilitated both the price discovery process
and the development of the allowance market” (Schmalensee et al. 1998, 66). This allowed firms to fore-
cast allowance prices more accurately.


         The difficulty of predicting program costs and benefits suggests that it may have been desirable
to build more capacity for adaptation into the SO2 system—including with regard to the cap. Instead of
legislating a fixed cap on emissions in years well beyond the planning horizon of decision makers at the
beginning of the program, the 1990 Amendments could have given EPA authority to adjust the SO2 cap in
future years as the science evolved and as better information on real-world control costs became available.
Alternatively, the 1990 Amendments could have implemented a rule-based adjustment process that might


19   Or at least, in the case of regulated electric utilities, greater ability to recover costs through rate increases.



                                                                            HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 9
have been easier for firms to anticipate. For example, Burtraw, Palmer, and Kahn (2010) discuss the role of
a reserve price in the revenue-neutral auction that, if triggered, could have tightened the cap automatically
when abatement costs turned out to be lower than expected.


         Tension exists between providing regulatory certainty over long periods of time (which is desirable
from the standpoint of reducing costs) and allowing for flexibility to adjust program goals (which may be
desirable from the standpoint of maximizing net program benefits over time).20 In striking that balance,
the 1990 Amendments may have leaned too heavily towards providing certainty at the cost of allowing
for flexibility to adjust the policy as understanding of both science and markets improved. This prefer-
ence undoubtedly also reflected a certain amount of distrust of the EPA on the part of Congress, with a
corresponding unwillingness to cede to EPA the right to set program requirements in the future without
congressional input and approval. The inability of the Acid Rain Program to adjust ultimately led to its
demise, as is discussed below.


Exclusion of Command-and-Control Add-Ons

        An important feature of the SO2 allowance-trading program was what was not included in the
program. Despite widespread skepticism about the cost and environmental effectiveness of a cap-and-
trade system, the 1990 CAAA largely avoided imposing supplementary mandates for SO2 abatement,
whether through specific pollution control technology requirements or performance standards for indi-
vidual plants.21 This enabled the system to capture the efficiency gains of allowing flexibility in the methods
of abatement used by different firms and making it possible for firms with high abatement costs to trade
with firms that faced low abatement costs.


        When the SO2 allowance-trading program was introduced, power plants around the country had
widely different emissions profiles. Older coal-fired plants in the East tended to have high SO2 emissions,
while the relatively newer power plants in the West and Southwest generally had much lower emissions—


20   As one workshop participant noted, resetting the SO2 cap would have also required future adjustments to the allocation of free allowances under the
     cap. This would have been politically contentious and could have created an additional source of uncertainty for affected firms. This problem could be
     alleviated in the future by defining free allocations as a percentage of the cap rather than as a specific number of tons. This practice is routine in fisheries
     management, which utilizes similar mechanisms known as Individual Transferable Quotas (ITQs). Over the past fifteen years, proportional adjustments
     to the 1990 allocations have been proposed in unpassed legislation (Acid Deposition Control Act, 1997 [U.S. EPA, Office of Air and Radiation 2000],
     and Clear Skies Act, 2002 [www.epa.gov/clearskies]) and in finalized regulations (Clean Air Interstate Rule [2005; www.epa.gov/cair] and Cross-State
     Air Pollution Rule [CSAPR, 2011; www.epa.gov/airtransport]). The latter rules resulted in a significant reduction in SO2 emissions (beyond Title IV);
     their impact on allowance prices was complex and is discussed below.

21    More recently, however, new regulations, especially CAIR and CSAPR (see note above), have contained plant-level requirements that have sharply
     curbed, to the point of virtually eliminating, emissions trading in SO2.



10 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
in part because they were built after the introduction of stringent EPA standards regulating newly-con-
structed facilities (New Source Performance Standards), and because they burned primarily lower sulfur
coal from mines in the West.


         Largely because of this heterogeneity, had the 1990 CAAA included a technology (most likely
scrubber) mandate, aggregate compliance costs would have been much greater. Technology mandates
would also have constituted an obstacle to firms reducing emissions further than was either required by
regulation or was otherwise financially reasonable.22 Absent a requirement to invest in a specific manner to
comply with a technology mandate, plant operators who discovered new, cost-effective abatement oppor-
tunities had an incentive to implement them so that they could bank or sell the excess allowances (which
were then worth more than the avoided emissions as a result of taking advantage of these new opportuni-
ties). There is significant evidence of such “over-compliance” under the SO2 allowance-trading program (as
discussed in a later section on the effectiveness of the program’s banking provisions).


4. Environmental Effectiveness
          Environmental effectiveness refers to the degree to which a policy achieves its objective. In the case
of a cap-and-trade program, the question is whether emissions are kept at (or below) the cap. Can cap-and-
trade systems (compared with command-and-control regulation) be relied on to produce desired levels of
emissions reductions? If the answer were no, cap and trade would probably be a poor policy choice regard-
less of its cost advantages.


          In exploring this question, it is important to make a distinction, relevant to all environmental
policy, between the stringency or ambition of the program—that is, whether the goal set for emission
reductions is adequate to address the public health or environmental damages that have been identified—
and the effectiveness of the policy in achieving whatever goal is set (that is, whether targeted reductions
are, in fact, realized). Deciding the stringency of the program—that is, setting the level of the cap—is the
first critical step in designing a cap-and-trade system.

Setting the Level of the Cap
        The efficient level of pollution abatement occurs when the cost of reducing emissions by one ad-
ditional unit equals the benefit to society of an additional unit of pollution reduction. In practice, it is


22   A number of Senators from eastern states that produced high-sulfur coal did insert a provision into the CAAA to award bonus allowances to plant opera-
     tors who installed scrubbers. These states had an interest in promoting greater reliance on scrubbers, since this abatement option—in contrast to fuel-
     switching options—allowed for the continued use of the high-sulfur coal that was mined in their states (Ellerman et al. 2000, 59, 69–70). The provision
     was of sufficiently small scope that it did not significantly affect the cost effectiveness of the system.



                                                                        HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 11
Taxes vs. Cap and Trade




     E    mission taxes are a market-based alternative to cap and trade (Metcalf, 2007): Like cap and
          trade, they create a price signal that provides incentives for emissions reductions while leaving
     individual firms the flexibility to pursue whatever abatement strategy is least costly for them. Emis-
     sion taxes have some potentially important advantages over cap and trade: First, they do not require
     the government to track or allocate allowances and thereby avoid questions about how to allocate
     allowances in the first place. (Calculating tax charges does require monitoring of actual emissions,
     just as determining compliance with an allowance-trading system would.) Second, taxes provide
     price certainty—once government sets the tax rate, everyone knows exactly what the cost per ton
     will be for as long as the tax is in place (Weitzman 1974). Third, taxes avoid concerns about distor-
     tion, manipulation, or excessive price volatility in allowance markets. Finally, in countries that may
     not have a well-developed institutional infrastructure to support commodity markets, taxes may be
     a more feasible option, administratively.

     Taxes also have disadvantages. Of particular concern to environmental advocates is that a tax does
     not guarantee specific quantities of emissions reduction. Annual emissions-reductions will fluctu-
     ate, depending on the cost and availability of abatement options (which cannot be precisely known
     in advance) relative to the level of the tax. Second, taxes often raise distributional concerns (e.g.,
     the concern that emission taxes are regressive or might fall more heavily on some groups than oth-
     ers), although it is the case that any regulatory policy creates winners and losers. (See below for
     more on distributional issues.)

     Third, while concerns about market complexities and failures arise with cap and trade, a tax is
     subject to becoming increasingly complex, to being changed in the future, and to having revenues
     redirected to other purposes as exemptions, deductions, loopholes, and subsidies are introduced
     through the interplay of interest-based politics and the legislative process. The most complex as-
     pects of a cap-and-trade system usually involve the distribution of free allowances, but these alloca-
     tion decisions have no effect on the cost-effectiveness of the system (to a close approximation, but
     see Stavins [1995]). In tax legislation, by contrast, complexity arises when tax preferences of vari-
     ous sorts are granted to favored interests. Such preferences do adversely affect the cost-effectiveness
     of the system. In particular, when lower tax rates or exemptions are granted to some parties or
     interests, the same quantity of emissions will have multiple prices. This detracts from the cost ef-
     fectiveness of the policy. A cap-and-trade system, on the other hand, preserves a single price per
     unit of emissions, even when relief is granted to favored interests through free allocation.

     Finally, and perhaps decisively, taxes are extremely unpopular. Taxes make the costs of abating
     emissions highly visible, whereas in an allowance-trading system, these costs are less obvious. Hav-
     ing said this, given the extreme fiscal pressures sure to be faced by the U.S. government over
     coming years and the unpopularity of cap and trade in recent climate debates, it is possible that
     a carbon tax, in some form, will be among the options considered as lawmakers look for ways to
     raise needed revenue.
usually difficult to determine the efficient level of abatement, both because it is difficult to assess the mar-
ginal cost of abatement in advance and because it is difficult to quantify, in monetary terms, the environ-
mental or public health benefit that would result from an additional ton of emissions reduction. Partly
because of this uncertainty, political negotiations over program stringency tend to focus on identifying a
level of perceived benefits for which costs are acceptable, rather than employing formal benefit-cost analy-
sis to find the level of action at which the difference between benefits and costs is greatest (Arrow et al.
1996). This was the case both for the Title IV program and in more recent climate proposals.


         The explicit and implicit analysis carried out by the George H.W. Bush Administration in the
context of the 1990 CAAA focused almost exclusively on the cost side. The benefits considered were those
associated with reducing the ecological impacts of acid rain. Not surprisingly, analysts failed to foresee
either lower-than-expected abatement costs or the substantial human health benefits of reducing fine par-
ticulate pollution, which also originates from SO2 emissions. Had those lower costs and added benefits
been fully appreciated, policy makers might have pursued an even lower SO2 cap. According to workshop
participants, formal analysis was neither fully ignored by nor fully incorporated into the decision-making
process; rather it was overwhelmed by heuristic (“back of the envelope”) sketches of real and perceived
costs—to industry, electricity ratepayers, and the economy as a whole—and of potential environmental
effectiveness.23


         That the SO2 emissions cap was not determined by formal benefit-cost analysis, but instead reflect-
ed a qualitative collective judgment about what constitutes an acceptable balance of cost and environmen-
tal protection, does not make the decision about the cap any less important to the design or effectiveness
of the cap-and-trade program. On the contrary, the level of the cap in the SO2 allowance-trading system
was very important for political and economic reasons and of great concern to electric utilities. As one
workshop participant put it: “Above all, what stands out for me in the policy lessons about acid rain is that
the cap is the essential driver. And the best role of government is to have government deciding how much
environmental protection it’s going to afford and…give the market the flexibility and entrepreneurs the
flexibility to figure out how to deliver that in the least expensive way.” This view of the central rationale
for a cap-and-trade system can be traced to an idea articulated by Baumol and Oates (1971): If it is too
difficult to determine what level of pollution control is perfectly efficient in every instance (in the sense
that the marginal costs incurred to provide that level of control are exactly offset by the marginal benefits),
then government can simply set an acceptable standard and focus on minimizing the costs of achieving it
(and perhaps iterating through subsequent adjustments).



23   Benefit-cost analysis has developed very considerably since 1990 and is now more regularly and systematically deployed in meaningful ways to inform
     policy decisions.



                                                                  HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 13
          Given that decisions about major new environmental policies are—to some degree—determined
by political leaders’ evaluations of how both costs and environmental effectiveness will be perceived by
stakeholders, a cap-and-trade system offered promise on both fronts. Cap and trade can reduce costs, and
it offers a clear and stable environmental target—the emissions cap. The challenge remained, in the case of
acid rain, to convince stakeholders that the cap was low enough.24 By reducing the costs of regulation rela-
tive to conventional prescriptive approaches, cap and trade made it politically feasible to reduce emissions
more than might otherwise have been the case. Without the cap-and-trade architecture, it is unlikely that
a ten million ton reduction would have been endorsed by the Bush Administration or would have had the
votes to pass the Congress.


         Apparently, the one type of formal economic analysis that White House policy makers did consider
was the so-called “knee” or “elbow” of the cost curve analysis—that is, identifying the level of pollution
control at which the marginal cost of abatement began to increase sharply. Again, there was considerable
uncertainty, but it appeared that the knee was in the range of a seven to eight million ton reduction over
the approximate time period envisioned for the program. Adopting cap and trade would move the knee
up (enabling larger emissions reductions before marginal costs rose sharply), but workshop participants
agreed that no one knew by how much. The Bush team eventually chose a ten million ton reduction policy,
which was the most ambitious of the three options presented to the President by the Domestic Policy
Council at the time, according to workshop participants. (The other options proposed targeted reductions
of six and eight million tons.)25 This ten-million-ton option presented marketing opportunities: It was a
double-digit number, and it represented a 50 percent reduction in emissions, both of which signified that
Bush was serious about pollution reductions.


Effectiveness in Achieving the Cap

         The SO2 allowance-trading program was highly effective. SO2 emissions from electric power plants
decreased 36 percent (from 15.9 million to 10.2 million tons) between 1990 and 2004,26 despite the fact
that electricity generation from coal-fired power plants increased 25 percent over the same period (growing



24   And that the market for allowances would work, but for that see below.

25   It also represented the greatest reduction of the more than 70 legislative proposals offered in the preceding ten years and was consistent with reductions
     advocated by Canada and the environmental community. For example, a bill sponsored by Senator George Mitchell (D-Maine) called for a twelve mil-
     lion ton reduction from projected 2000 emissions, which was consistent with a ten million ton reduction off actual 1980 levels as contained in President
     Bush’s proposal and the enacted legislation (Jackson 1987; Joskow and Schmalensee 1998, 48).

26   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National Emissions Inventory Air Pollutant Emissions Trends Data; “1970–2011 Average annual emissions, all
     criteria pollutants in MS Excel—October 2011,” tab “SO2,” line “FUEL COMB. ELEC. UTIL.”. www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/trends/index.html.



14 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
from 1.59 to 1.98 billion megawatt hours).27 The program’s long-term goal of reducing annual nationwide
utility emissions to 8.95 million tons was achieved in 2007; by 2010 emissions had declined further, to 5.1
million tons, in response to the related Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR), which was promulgated in 2005
under the George W. Bush Administration. (CAIR is discussed further in a later section.)28


        The SO2 allowance-trading program delivered emissions reductions more quickly than expected.
Because of its banking provisions, many utility companies—some of which owned plants that were very
dirty and had large and relatively inexpensive abatement opportunities—over-complied in the first phase
of the program. As a result, actual emissions during Phase I of the program (1995–1999) fell well below
the Phase I target. One workshop participant remarked that the Phase I reduction in emissions was “the
most striking feature of [the acid rain] program … There has never, in the history of 40 years of clean air
regulation, been a comparable, quick, and significant reduction of emissions at one time.” Again, utilities
were not compelled to over-comply in the early years of the program; rather, incentives internal to the
program led to the decisions that produced these large, early reductions. On the other hand, in the early
years of Phase II (2000–2010), national emissions exceeded the national cap as firms applied excess allow-
ances banked during Phase I.


         Effective monitoring and compliance mechanisms played a major role in the SO2 allowance-trad-
ing system’s environmental effectiveness, in the view of both environmental advocates and industry stake-
holders. One participant noted that while he initially opposed the requirement that regulated units install
costly, real-time, continuous emissions monitors, he later came to view this requirement as central to the
legitimacy of the program.


        Although the specific cap was identified and set in a somewhat ad hoc manner, the SO2 allowance-
trading system is widely viewed as having been highly effective. The program achieved its emission-reduc-
tion goals with relatively little government intervention (of the traditional type) and with very high levels
of compliance among regulated entities (compared with significantly lower levels of compliance for most
previous traditional regulatory policies). These results were achieved despite considerable concern that the
SO2 allowance market would fail to function properly—a topic to which we now turn.




27   U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Electricity Net Generation: Total (All Sectors), 1949–2010,” http://205.254.135.24/totalenergy/data/an-
     nual/txt/ptb0802a.html.

28   U.S. EPA, National Emissions Inventory, as above; and U.S. EPA (2011). On CAIR, see notes above and www.epa.gov/cair.



                                                                 HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 15
5. Market Performance and Regulatory Complexity

        Because a cap-and-trade system for emissions had never been implemented on a large scale prior
to 1990, considerable concern arose during the CAAA debate about how well the SO2 allowance market
would work in practice. One potential problem was that the market would have too few buyers and sellers
of allowances—insufficient liquidity—to function well. In that case, utilities needing allowances to com-
ply might not be able to obtain them. A related concern was that incumbent firms might use the allowance
market to construct barriers to entry against new entrants. To address these issues, approximately three
percent of the allowances allocated to installations were retained by EPA and auctioned annually, with the
proceeds (less expenses) returned pro rata to those same installations. But these concerns did not material-
ize, and the allowance auction proved to be largely unnecessary for liquidity purposes.29


        Other potential problems with the SO2 market centered on access to information and on transac-
tion costs: Specifically, that information about buyer and seller positions might be difficult to access and
that transaction costs in the allowance market would be high. Again, these problems did not materialize in
practice, and the SO2 market supported a robust level of trading activity almost from the outset. By March
1998, 20.3 million allowances had been traded between unrelated entities and another 1.3 million allow-
ances had been purchased through EPA auctions (Ellerman et al. 2000, 178). The banking provisions in-
cluded in the program helped the market adjust to fluctuations in allowance supply and demand over time.


         There is broad consensus that the SO2 allowance market operated transparently and fairly. Accord-
ing to Burtraw and Szambelan (2009, 2), “Transparent data systems, public access to information, and
strict and certain penalties for noncompliance have led to a virtually perfect compliance record.” And evi-
dence suggests that both traders and EPA auctions played valuable roles in the price discovery process dur-
ing the early years of the SO2 allowance-trading system (Joskow, Schmalensee, and Bailey 1998, 676–678).

        Excessive price volatility would be an indicator of potential problems in the allowance market,
particularly if volatility were driven by trading behavior rather than by changes in market fundamentals.
In general, participants at the workshop agreed that SO2 allowance prices had tracked the fundamentals
in the market, but there was some discussion about what can be considered a “fundamental” in a market
that is created by regulation. For example, it is unclear if expectations of a future policy change should be
considered a “fundamental” in the SO2 emissions-trading market.


29   The CAAA also included a provision that allowed firms to purchase SO2 allowances directly from the government at a fixed price of $1,500 per ton.
     However, SO2 allowance markets functioned well and allowance prices remained at or below $200 per ton through 2003—well below prices anticipated
     prior to implementation of the program. The direct sale provision was nullified in 1997 because it was deemed unnecessary. On this, see: www.epa.gov/
     airmarkets/progsregs/arp/basic.html#auctions.



16 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
         A major source of uncertainty with any government-created market is that the government can
undo what it created—possibly unintentionally. In essence, this is what has transpired in the SO2 allow-
ance market. It was recognized by the late 1990s that SO2 reductions in excess of those resulting from
Title IV would be required by other provisions in the Clean Air Act and would otherwise be warranted
in any case, given the significant adverse health effects of fine particulates associated with SO2 emissions.
Questions remained about how to accomplish these additional reductions. In 2005, after Congress failed
to pass President George W. Bush’s Clear Skies Act of 2002,30 which would have tightened the SO2 cap, the
Administration promulgated CAIR with the same intentions. CAIR lowered the cap on SO2 emissions—
in part by applying more stringent emission requirements on certain “upwind [primarily midwestern]
states that were contributing to violations of EPA’s primary ambient air quality standards for fine particu-
lates in the eastern United States.” (Palmer and Evans 2009) CAIR attempted to do so while maintaining
the nation-wide, cap-and-trade system (and the allowances) established under Title IV.

         SO2 (Title IV) allowance prices rose in anticipation of CAIR (which one would expect if the cap
were to be lowered). Thereafter, an array of factors led to much greater volatility—and reduced liquid-
ity—in the SO2 allowance market. Among these factors were natural disasters (including Hurricanes Ka-
trina and Rita, which impaired petroleum refining capacity) and developments in broader energy markets.
Importantly, in 2008, the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that CAAA Title IV SO2 allowances could
not be limited on the basis of facility location to address the other Clean-Air-Act requirements (ambient
air standards) in question (U.S. EPA 2011). Neither the Bush nor the Barack Obama Administrations
appealed that decision, and congressional attempts to affirm the reduction in the cap (which industry had
already begun implementing) were unsuccessful. In response to the court’s 2008 decision on CAIR, the
Bush and Obama Administrations developed new rules to replace CAIR that employ trading only within
states and do not employ Title IV allowances; the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR) was finalized
in July 2011.31 Subsequently, SO2 (Title IV) allowance prices fell to near zero (Burtraw and Szambelan
2009).32

        In sum, the recent history of SO2 regulation is complex—and that is the point. The allowance-
trading system was highly successful in its first decade of operation, in terms of both aggregate cost and
environmental effectiveness—and showed every sign of continuing to be so. However, conflicts arose be-
tween market-based and traditional regulatory methods, as well as between objectives specified in law and
regulation. While the Title IV allowance market itself functioned transparently, effectively, and with great

30   www.epa.gov/clearskies

31   www.epa.gov/airtransport

32   See also Belden (2005); Bravender (2009); Palmer and Evans (2009); Schmalensee and Stavins (2011, 4–5); Spinney (2011); U.S. EPA (2011). For
     recent allowance prices, see: www.ferc.gov/market-oversight/othr-mkts/emiss-allow/othr-emns-no-so-pr.pdf.



                                                                  HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 17
integrity, the broader regulatory environment for this market—to the chagrin of almost all stakeholders—
served to end its life prematurely.

6. Distribution of Allowances and Fairness of Impact
         A program that is seen as unfair or inequitable in its distribution of benefits and costs can have
difficulty winning political support. Three distributional issues are particularly relevant to the SO2 allow-
ance-trading system: (1) the method by which emissions allowances were allocated; (2) the geographic
distribution of program benefits and costs; and (3) the distribution of benefits and costs across socio-
economic groups.

Allowance Allocation
         To a close approximation, regulated entities in a cap-and-trade system will face the same incentives
to reduce emissions, regardless of how allowances are initially allocated, including, specifically, how many
allowances a given firm holds at the outset (Montgomery 1972). What matters with regard to firms’ deci-
sions to trade or abate are marginal abatement costs, and these costs are generally unaffected by the initial
allocation of allowances.33


         Emissions allowances have monetary value as a result of the aggregate cap placed on emissions,
combined with the system’s enforcement mechanisms. Government, in effect, is creating a new commod-
ity (that is, a new property right in limited supply, in place of a previously unlimited open-access resource)
and must decide at the outset how to transfer that commodity to the private entities that will need it to
demonstrate compliance. As discussed above, the government has two basic options: Allowances can be
given away or sold (preferably through an auction, which will facilitate smooth functioning of the market).


         The intent of the Acid Rain Program was to cut permitted emissions in half. To achieve this goal,
emitters were expected to incur billions of dollars per year in new compliance costs. Congress and the
George H.W. Bush Administration judged that it was politically untenable to double the cost of the leg-
islation by requiring SO2 emitters to pay the government for the emissions they were still allowed under
the new policy. In particular, the free allocation of allowances was critical for gaining the support, or at
least the acquiescence, of the expected “losers” in the SO2 allowance-trading program—that is, high-sulfur-
coal-intensive power companies in the Midwest and their congressional representatives. (In contrast, some
roundtable participants maintained that the Waxman-Markey bill’s CO2 cap-and-trade system was disad-
vantaged politically because it included an initial auction of 15 percent of allowances, with the percentage
rising significantly thereafter.)

33   For an examination of the conditions under which this theorem of the independence of the initial allocation from the equilibrium allocation after trading
     is violated, see Hahn and Stavins (2010). See also Stavins (1995).



18 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
         Free allowances represent a cash transfer to firms and so can be used to compensate firms that face
particularly high costs, without changing the cap or distorting the market incentives of the program that
lead to a cost-effective solution. Although free allowances can, under some circumstances, constitute a sig-
nificant windfall, the option to freely allocate some or all allowances nonetheless provides an opportunity
to build political support for a nascent cap-and-trade program. Conversely, an auction forces emitters to
pay for permitted emissions for which they have previously not had to pay.34


         Indeed, members of Congress fought intensely to increase the share of freely allocated allowances
that would go to utilities in their home districts, as a means to sell the SO2 allowance-trading program
to constituents.35 In the end, the distribution of free allowances to individual firms was largely based on
prior regulatory benchmarks associated with emissions per unit of heat. This general principle allowed for
considerable political horse-trading at the margin, however—that is, awarding a few more allowances to
a particular plant in a particular district while maintaining the total cap—to win support for the overall
policy.36

         At the time the CAAA were being debated, consumer advocates, economists, and environmen-
tal organizations exerted little pressure to consider alternatives to free allocation, the most significant of
which is an auction that would raise public revenues. Economic analyses conducted since that time have
elucidated the relative merits of free allocation and auctions, with regard to distributional issues and cost-
effectiveness. Three conclusions are relevant to the SO2 allowance-trading program:

     1. Unless the overall emissions cap is very stringent, the sum of the market value of allowances is likely
        to substantially exceed the total abatement costs incurred to meet the cap. Thus, recipients of free al-
        lowances are likely to be overcompensated for their actual compliance costs, resulting in a windfall.37



34   As noted above, EPA each year withheld a small number of allowances (2.8 percent of the total) to sell through a spot auction. This provision was origi-
     nally introduced to ensure that new entrants could obtain the allowances they needed to operate, and in the early years it may have provided valuable
     information on future allowance prices. The first spot auction was held in 1993, two years before Phase I went into effect. This auction indicated that
     allowance prices were likely to be lower than the industry had predicted. This information led several companies to cancel orders for expensive scrubber
     systems. See also Ellerman, et al. (2000, 175).

35   For detailed quantitative analyses of the political economy of the congressional process that determined allocation methods, see Joskow and Schmalensee
     (1998) and Ellerman et al. (2000, 31–76).

36   An important adjustment that was made for political purposes was to allow utilities to select the average annual fuel consumption of a plant in the years
     1985-1987, to account for those power plants that were operating at less than capacity or were inoperative for maintenance for all or a portion of the
     year 1985.

37   The magnitude of the windfall to emitters could be even more significant in the context of a much larger market for greenhouse-gas allowances. The
     experience of the European Union Emissions Trading System provides some evidence for this windfall effect. An approach that would fully compensate
     emitters (on average, across all sectors) in a U.S. economy-wide CO2 cap-and-trade system would initially auction 50 perecent of the allowances and
     move gradually to a 100 percent auction over 25 years. This would be roughly equivalent to a 15 percent free allocation in perpetuity (Stavins 2008).



                                                                     HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 19
     2. In competitive markets, free allocation does not reduce firms’ incentives to pass the marginal cost of emis-
        sions control (as reflected in the market price of allowances) through to customers. Again, this is because
        the cost to a firm of using an allowance is the same whether the firm already holds the allowance (in which
        case it is foregoing the opportunity to sell that allowance at the market price) or has to purchase the allow-
        ance. This means that a large share of the costs of a cap-and-trade program can be expected to ultimately
        be borne by consumers. In effect, free allowances amount to a transfer of wealth from consumers to the
        shareholders of the firms holding the free allowances. However, under cost-of-service regulation of electric-
        utility companies, which is still in place in many states, regulators are unlikely to allow firms to pass through
        the market price of allowances if those allowances have been received for free. In these cases, free allocation
        will lead to lower electricity prices. This will create significant differences in effects in different regions of
        the country, based on whether markets are competitive or regulated.


     3. An allowance auction generates public revenues that can be used to reduce distortionary taxes in the econ-
        omy (especially taxes on income or investment).38 In this way, an auction can improve overall economic
        efficiency and reduce costs to society, even though the private costs incurred for pollution abatement under
        the policy remain unchanged.


Regional Distribution of SO2 Program Costs and Benefits

         Most of the nation’s coal-fired, electric-generating capacity is concentrated east of the Mississippi
River, and much of that capacity was built more than a generation ago.39 Plants in the West tend to be
newer. Air pollutants emitted from the tall smokestacks of older plants are transported long distances
in the lower atmosphere, causing environmental harm hundreds and even thousands of miles from their
sources.40 Because of prevailing west to east wind patterns, much of the pollution emitted by large coal
plants in the upper Midwest and Ohio River Valley is carried to the northeastern and mid-Atlantic states
(as well as eastern Canada). Thus, it was reasonable to expect that most of the cost of SO2 controls would
be concentrated in the midwestern states, while most of the benefits would accrue to northeastern states.


        However, from the beginning, there were concerns that a cap-and-trade system could not guaran-
tee that emissions reductions would occur in the quantities and at the locations needed to protect all areas
from environmental harm. Indeed, the advantage of cap and trade is that it directs abatement to where it


38   This is an application of a more general principle that society would often benefit from shifting the burden of taxation from social “goods” (primarily
     investment or income) to social “bads” (such as pollution).

39   In aggregate, coal-fired capacity in the United States (approximately 330 gigawatts in 2000) had an average age of 35 years in 2002 (Deutch, Moniz, et
     al. 2007, 17–18).

40   The tall stacks employed by coal-fired power plants were themselves a response to earlier Clean Air Act regulations that governed ambient concentrations
     of SO2 and other so-called criteria air pollutants.



20 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
is least costly, not necessarily to facilities causing the most geographic-specific damage. Northeastern states
worried that the ability to buy allowances in lieu of installing SO2 controls might leave upwind sources
too much latitude to avoid making the actual emissions reductions needed to address downwind impacts.


         New York and North Carolina, among other eastern states, implemented their own regulations to
direct abatement to where it would produce the most benefits for their residents. New York, in particular,
conducted a lengthy legal campaign to maintain its more stringent standards (Palmer, Burtraw, and Shih
2005; Stavins 2003, 28–29; Winebrake, Farrell, and Bernstein 1995, 244–246). These actions highlight
something of a tension between geographically broad-based, cap-and-trade approaches and state and local
authorities’ desires to limit emissions within a particular area or from a particular set of sources. As sug-
gested in the discussion of regulatory complexity above, extending the allowance-trading program over the
largest geographically-relevant area and minimizing (or eliminating) overlapping regulatory requirements
was key to realizing its potential to be cost-effective. On the other hand, any source that might be com-
pelled by state or local regulations to implement extra pollution controls would end up with extra allow-
ances under the federal program that could then be sold to other sources in a different jurisdiction.41 The
end result would be no net change in total emissions over the larger region covered by the cap.


         Distributional concerns also arose with respect to impacts on electricity rates. To the extent that
midwestern utilities implemented the largest share of SO2 reductions, they (and their ratepayers) also in-
curred the largest share of SO2 control costs. Nevertheless, the SO2 allowance-trading system on the whole
did not produce substantial rate differentials across regions, in part because overall compliance costs ended
up being quite low, but also because coal hardly ever sets the electricity price in competitive markets. As
a result, the effect of the program on marginal electricity prices was small. This was true despite it being
common in regulated electricity markets for state regulators, legislators, or both to adopt policies that dis-
couraged the pursuit of least-cost compliance options.


        For example, a number of states tried to direct in-state utilities toward using in-state coal or install-
ing scrubbers so they could continue using in-state, high-sulfur coal rather than taking advantage of lower
cost fuel-switching options from out-of-state sources. Such state policies were struck down by the courts as
interference with interstate commerce. These types of policies would have made the national SO2 trading
program more costly. Nonetheless, the rate impacts were still small, particularly since electricity rates in
the regulated, coal-intensive areas of the Midwest were generally quite low to begin with (and considerably
lower than rates in the downwind northeastern states).



41   For a discussion of parallel concerns about the interaction of federal and state regulations, pertaining to greenhouse gases, see Goulder and Stavins
     (2010).



                                                                   HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 21
        The acid rain experience and subsequent debates about the use of cap and trade in other contexts
suggest that issues of geographically-specific impacts and state and local control should be considered
in light of the type of pollutant being regulated, its behavior in the environment, and the specific harm
being addressed. For some pollution problems, particularly those characterized by well-defined relation-
ships between sources and points of damage (receptors) combined with increasing marginal receptor dam-
ages, cap and trade (or other flexible, market-based mechanisms) can lead to problematic “hot-spots”—or
geographically-concentrated damage—which increase total damages and hence may not be appropriate.
By contrast, in the case of climate change, the location of the emissions source has no bearing whatsoever
on its environmental impact: GHGs are evenly distributed throughout the global atmosphere, thus emis-
sions from any given source have the same warming effect on the atmosphere as GHGs emitted anywhere
else. From this perspective, cap and trade and other market-based approaches are especially well suited to
limiting GHG emissions.


         On the spectrum from pollutants with primarily local impacts to pollutants with entirely global
impacts, SO2 falls in the middle: Because of its transport and deposition properties, emissions impacts may
be dispersed over a very broad region; at the same time there was some heterogeneity in the distribution
of benefits across the nation. Concerns about local impacts or potential hot-spots were to some extent
alleviated by the existence of separate regulatory protections in the form of federally-mandated ambient
air quality standards for SO2.42 In addition, modeling analyses undertaken prior to passage of the 1990
CAAA pointed to the likelihood that the distribution of actual emission cuts would be highly correlated
geographically with the distribution of the largest and most damaging emissions sources. Thus, policy
makers could be reasonably confident that a single national SO2 market would drive substantial emissions
reductions in the Midwest, where the largest coal plants were concentrated. This confidence was largely
borne out as the program was implemented (Ellerman et al. 2000, 77–80; Swift 2004, 7–8).43


         As discussed above, provisions in the Clean Air Act concerning ambient air standards led the EPA
under the George W. Bush Administration to develop CAIR, which attempted to reconcile geography-
specific remedies with national allowance trading. The courts determined that this attempt was inconsis-
tent with the Clean Air Act and vacated CAIR. The replacement for CAIR, the Cross-State Air Pollution
Rule (CSAPR, initially known as the Clean Air Transport Rule), addresses the concerns of the courts, but



42   Near the opposite end of the spectrum from GHGs, the EPA under the George W. Bush Administration attempted to implement a trading system related
     to its Clean Air Mercury Rule (CAMR), which was intended to reduce mercury emissions from coal-fired power plants. Mercury is not transported far
     from its source, and concern about hot-spots was one factor (among several) in CAMR not being implemented.

43   Perhaps further vindicating this approach, later efforts to address acid rain in Europe through smaller, regional cap-and-trade programs illustrated the
     problems that can arise with thin, regionally differentiated markets.



22 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
in so doing, effectively eliminated national (interstate) allowance trading44 in favor of more geographically-
restricted trading intended to focus the health benefits of emissions reductions on specific downwind
states. This will reduce cost-effectiveness in favor of what is intended to be a more equitable distribution
of benefits across geographical regions (Belden 2005; Nelson 2011; Schmalensee and Stavins 2011; U.S.
EPA 2011).


Distribution Across Socio-Economic Groups

         Any public policy raises concerns about how the benefits and costs of that policy are distributed
across socio-economic groups. As suggested in the foregoing section, the possibility that a facility chooses
to purchase allowances rather than reduce emissions could result, under certain conditions, in decreased
local air quality. In their study of the SO2 allowance-trading system, Shadbegian, Gray, and Morgan
(2005) found that low-income groups received slightly lower benefits than people of higher income, but
that minority groups received significantly greater benefits, relative to cost, than the average population.
It is likely that this was because minorities are concentrated in cities, where the local health benefits of
reduced SO2 concentrations dominate the benefit-cost analysis.


        Evidence indicates that the SO2 allowance-trading system did not lead to significant hot-spots. A
number of explanations for this result were offered at the workshop. One explanation is that local and
state regulations—including those intended to achieve compliance with National Ambient Air Quality
Standards—tended to preclude hot-spots; another is that trading in conjunction with a significant overall
reduction in emissions (via the cap) tended to lead to reductions at the largest-emitting facilities and to
smoothing out emissions over space, rather than concentrating them (Swift 2004).


7. Technological Innovation
        Advances in technology can expand the menu of abatement options available and substantially
reduce the cost of achieving emissions reductions. In choosing among different policy instruments, it is
important to consider whether some options are more effective at inducing technology innovation than
others (or at least pose fewer impediments to innovation).


        On its face, a market-based approach would seem to have advantages over a command-and-con-
trol-based approach for at least two reasons: First, the greater flexibility of a market-based approach pro-
vides greater latitude for regulated entities to pursue compliance strategies that might not have been an-

44   Previously allowed by the same Court in 2000 when ruling on the NOx Budget Trading Program (U.S. EPA, National Center for Environmental Eco-
     nomics 2001, 84).



                                                               HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 23
ticipated by policy makers at the outset of the program. Second, while a command-and-control system
can create incentives for reducing the costs associated with achieving a given environmental standard, it
does not provide incentives for out-performing the standard (or “over-complying,” as discussed above).45
A market-based program, by contrast, creates continuous incentives for innovation, since each additional
ton of reduction that can be achieved for less than the market price of an allowance creates value for the
entity that produces those reductions. In looking at these issues from the standpoint of real-world experi-
ence with the SO2 allowance-trading system, workshop participants considered the record of innovation
in two areas: with respect to improvements in scrubber technologies and with respect to the diffusion of a
broader set of emissions-reducing practices unrelated to the use of any particular technology.


        Scrubbers—as noted, by far the prevalent technology for removing SO2 from power-plant emis-
sions—were an established technology in 1990. Environmental regulation under the 1970 Clean Air Act
had made the use of scrubbers an important compliance option in newly-built coal-fired power plants
(Lange and Bellas 2005). The 1970 legislation had specified an emissions rate that could be met through
use of low-sulfur coals found in the East and West, but in response to the 1977 Clean Air Act Amend-
ments, regulations were tightened to require a 70–90 percent removal of SO2 from the emissions of un-
controlled coal. This could only be accomplished through the use of scrubbers. The 1977 bill also required
a 90 percent reduction of emissions from new sources relative to the emissions levels that would prevail
without mandated control. This further encouraged the use of scrubbers.


         More than half of currently installed SO2 scrubber systems were installed after the 1990 CAAA,
but the timing of more recent installations has come in bursts. From 1990 through 2000, scrubbers were
installed at a nearly constant rate; installations slowed early in Phase II of the Acid Rain Program (after
2000), however, as growth in electric-sector demand slowed and as utilities used banked allowances from
Phase I to meet their compliance obligations. For utilities subject to Title IV requirements after the pas-
sage of the CAAA in 1990, the decision to install scrubber systems involved multiple considerations: the
strength of the price signal for SO2 reductions (as reflected in the market price of SO2 allowances); the cost
and feasibility of other abatement options (such as fuel switching); investment risk (including uncertainty
about future allowance prices and about the susceptibility of SO2 markets to price volatility); cost recovery
rules (in the case of regulated utilities); and the effects of state-level (Frey 2008) or other federal regulatory
and financial incentives.46


45   Under certain conditions, a command-and-control system might even create disincentives to further improving on available control technologies—par-
     ticularly if regulated entities view these improvements as opening the door to ever more stringent pollution control requirements.

46   One workshop participant pointed out that utilities likely considered another advantage of scrubbers: These systems generally can be shut down or by-
     passed to increase output during periods of high electricity prices and demand. To compensate for excess emissions released during these periods, utilities
     can purchase allowances or operate at a more stringent level of emissions control during periods of lower demand.



24 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
         The wave of scrubber installations (technology diffusion) that occurred in the 1990s was attribut-
able in large part to the incentives created by the SO2 cap-and-trade program, since the high cost of these
systems could only be justified in expectation of non-trivial SO2 allowance prices. Some evidence also sug-
gests that the program succeeded at inducing innovation in scrubber technology. Scrubber performance
has improved over the last two decades, and the costs of achieving a fixed level of scrubber performance
have declined (Bellas and Lange 2011; Popp 2003; Lange and Bellas 2005; Burtraw 2000; Burtraw and
Palmer 2003, 22–24).47


         The SO2 allowance-trading program also appears to have sparked innovation in a range of compli-
ance alternatives that could reduce SO2 emissions without necessitating the use of add-on pollution con-
trols. One example was the diffusion of mining techniques for extracting lower-sulfur coal seams, a prac-
tice that was known before the 1990 CAAA but not in wide use. A related strategy deployed in the 1990s
involved blending low-sulfur coal with high-sulfur coal to reduce the aggregate sulfur-intensity of boiler
fuel. Prior to 1990, many in the industry believed that existing boilers could accommodate only modest
levels of fuel blending unless modifications were made that required large capital investments. After the
cap-and-trade program went into effect, this view was disproved, with some plants achieving blend levels
of as much as 40 percent without significant modifications. Clearly, fuel switching would not have evolved
to become a significant compliance option had the government pursued a more prescriptive regulatory
policy that required all emissions sources to install add-on controls.


         The SO2 allowance-trading program also stimulated non-technological innovations in the electric
utility industry. These included strategies for managing allowance trading within a firm and creating the
appropriate financial management and brokerage capacities needed to exploit new market opportunities.
More generally, the cap-and-trade system, by its nature, granted the flexibility of a performance (as op-
posed to a technology) standard on individual sources, and then allowed trading. In other words, even
without trading, the cap-and-trade system was less costly than an inflexible technology standard would
have been. Workshop participants characterized this as facilitating “cost savings without trading” (Burtraw
1996). Along with improvements in SO2 control technologies, these examples of innovation and knowl-
edge diffusion played some role in reducing overall Acid-Rain-Program costs and were seen by workshop
participants as strengthening the innovation case for favoring market-based environmental regulation.




47   Some cost reduction was probably the result of learning through using, as the number of installed scrubbers increased. Also, a market emerged for much
     cheaper scrubbers that were somewhat less reliable than New Source Performance Standards allowed, which lowered average cost.



                                                                    HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 25
8. Political Context of the Acid Rain Program

         In July 1989, President George H.W. Bush proposed substantial revisions to the Clean Air Act,
based in part on earlier congressional proposals and in part on new ideas developed by his Administration.
The final bill containing the CAAA of 1990 passed the House of Representatives by nearly a 20 to 1 mar-
gin (401-21) and the Senate by a large majority (89-11). A joint conference committee met from July to
October of 1990 to resolve differences in the House and Senate bills, and both houses approved the pack-
age recommended by the conferees with almost identical majorities.48 The President signed the resulting
bill into law on November 15, 1990. The Amendments contained seven titles, each of which substantially
updated an existing portion of the Clean Air Act. In addition to the acid rain title (IV), these included
programs related to urban smog, industrial emissions of certain toxic chemicals, automobile emissions,
and releases of chemicals that deplete ozone in the upper atmosphere.49

         Unlike most earlier pieces of landmark environmental legislation, the CAAA of 1990 was not
precipitated by a “crisis moment,” which may have given policy makers greater latitude to implement a
flexible and entrepreneurial policy, rather than resorting to a more rigid traditional approach (Wiener and
Richman 2010). On the other hand, some workshop participants did point out that concern about the
environment was rising generally in the summer of 1988, with unusually hot weather contributing to poor
air quality (as evidenced by a high level of ambient ozone—smog—that summer), and with many reports
of ocean pollution in New York and New Jersey.


        Some workshop participants asserted that the Acid Rain Program flew “under the radar,” in terms
of the attention it received both from the public and environmental advocacy groups—perhaps because
they were more concerned about changes to other portions of the Act or perhaps because the issue had
been debated for more than ten years, and the levels of control were consistent with what environmental
groups had advocated. These factors allowed for a more calm and deliberative debate about the choice of
policy instruments than might have been possible under other circumstances. The Bush Administration,
the Congress, and policy entrepreneurs were important in these developments and helped facilitate the
adoption of the national SO2 trading program as part of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990.50




48   See legislative chronology at www.epa.gov/ttn/caaa/gen/chron.txt.

49   For a summary of the amendments, see: http://epa.gov/oar/caa/caaa_overview.html; For the text of Title IV, see: http://epa.gov/oar/caa/title4.html.

50   For an account of the political and policy process, see Conniff (2009), and for a concise account of the individuals who contributed to the development
     of the SO2 allowance-trading program, see Yergin (2011, 471–479).



26 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
The Bush Administration

        The administration of President Ronald Reagan had been unfavorably inclined to address public-
policy problems—including environmental challenges—through regulation. This approach had served
Reagan well, on balance, with regard to public opinion about his stewardship of the economy. But it began
to present potential political costs for the subsequent Republican presidential candidate, as environmental
issues became increasingly important for key demographic groups in swing states with large suburban
populations leading up to the 1988 election.


        In 1988, Vice President George H.W. Bush made the environment a key theme of his presidential
campaign, explicitly promising to update the Clean Air Act and to cut acid rain by half. On February 9,
1989, three weeks after taking office, President Bush addressed a joint session of Congress and said of
acid rain that “the time for study alone has passed, and the time for action is now.”51 Five months later,
his administration submitted to Congress a single, comprehensive clean air bill, which included the basic
structure of the SO2 allowance-trading program.


        Given the confluence of President Bush’s ideological preferences and his campaign commitment to
reducing SO2 emissions, it was perhaps not surprising that his administration put forward a market-based
approach to SO2 regulation. The Reagan Administration had deregulated many key sectors of the U.S.
economy, including airlines, oil and refined oil products, and trucking.52 The limits of a command-and-
control-style approach to governing had become readily apparent with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
With the economic growth of the 1980s beginning to slow, President Bush was concerned about the eco-
nomic impact of the bill. He wanted to improve air quality at the minimum possible cost to industry and
the economy as a whole and believed that a market-based approach could accomplish this.53


51   http://millercenter.org/scripps/archive/speeches/detail/3420

52   However, the Staggers Rail Act, which deregulated railroads and made low-sulfur, Powder River Basin coal more competitive (see above), was passed
     under President Jimmy Carter in 1980.

53   While workshop participants acknowledged the Bush Administration for its leadership in the legislative process, participants also noted that Bush never
     received sufficient credit for the CAAA from the environmental community or the press. They were struck by President Bush, despite having launched
     a number of exceptionally important environmental initiatives, failing to win a single endorsement from an environmental advocacy group in his 1992
     reelection bid, opposing Bill Clinton, the Governor of Arkansas, a state then ranked 50th in terms of environmental protection. (Besides the 1990
     CAAA, the Bush Administration also funded sewage treatment plants around the country, created 57 new wildlife refuges, designated more than a mil-
     lion acres of new national park land, and included the United States as a signatory to the Rio Convention on Climate Change.) Some of the participants
     at the workshop who had served in the Bush White House believed that this lack of recognition was a major factor in the Republican Party’s subsequently
     giving up on the environmental vote, concluding Republicans would never win support from environmental interest groups no matter what policies they
     pursued. Others believed that the negative messages on the environment sent during the eight years of the Reagan Administration and the last two years
     of the Bush Administration, through the actions of the Council on Competiveness to delay and dilute implementation of the CAAA and other laws, had
     undermined the support gained through enactment of the 1990 CAAA.



                                                                    HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 27
Congress

         Bush came into office confronting large Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress. Thus,
all involved knew that legislation could not be enacted without considerable bipartisan support. Congress
was, on balance, already strongly inclined toward strengthening air quality protections. The Senate Com-
mittee on Environment and Public Works had promoted acid-rain legislation for a decade, but it had
never gone anywhere, in part because the Majority Leader of the Senate, Robert Byrd (D-West Virginia),
represented a state with a high reliance on the mining of (high-sulfur) coal, and in part because the Com-
mittee had a history of reporting legislation not sufficiently centrist to attract filibuster-proof majorities in
the Senate. But, in November 1988, George Mitchell (D-Maine) was elected Majority Leader, replacing
Byrd; Maine was among the states most affected by acid rain.


         While Mitchell enjoyed a Democratic majority in the Senate, his coalition was not sufficient to
guarantee the 60 votes necessary to invoke cloture in the event of a filibuster against acid rain legislation,
especially given disparate regional views within the Democratic Party itself. Thus, the new Majority
Leader knew he had to negotiate with the new Bush Administration in order to secure enough votes to
steer clean air legislation to passage in the Senate. In this way, both George H.W. Bush (because of his
campaign promise and his concern about the economy) and George Mitchell (because of his need for a 60
vote majority) were motivated to negotiate with each other to win passage of a clean air bill acceptable to
both parties. Observers at the time, and in the period since, have attributed passage of the CAAA in 1990
to leadership by “the two Georges.”


         The seminal moment in the debate came when President Bush sent a letter to the Majority Leader
indicating that any clean air bill he would sign would have to meet “five tests of balance and reasonable-
ness,” the most important of which was that its compliance costs could not exceed $20 billion annually
(plus or minus 5 percent). This led to a protracted negotiation between representatives of the Adminis-
tration and members of the Senate, led by Senator Mitchell, to craft a bill that could achieve the desired
environmental outcomes and pass those tests. After months of negotiation, the Administration and the
Senate leadership announced an agreement that withstood challenge from both the political left and the
political right on the Senate floor and led to passage of the CAAA in the Senate by the above-noted margin
of 89-10, with an equal number of Republicans and Democrats voting against.


        In the House, the range of competing interests involved in the acid rain debate was well represent-
ed in the Committee on Energy and Commerce, which included representatives from eastern (high-sulfur)
coal-producing and coal-using states, several of the northeastern states that were most affected by acid rain,
and several western low-sulfur coal-producing and -using states. The politics of the electric power industry


28 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
was divided more along regional lines than along party or ideological lines, with coal-intensive districts
in the Midwest concerned about stranded capital investments and districts in the West apprehensive of
applying differential regulatory treatment to new and existing capital. On the broader topic of clean air,
the Committee also represented a wide range of interests, even within parties. The diversity of views was
best represented in the long-standing tension between the Chairman of the Committee, Rep. John Dingell
(D-Michigan), who represented areas of Michigan in which the automobile industry was an important
employer, and the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment, Rep. Henry Waxman
(D-California), whose Los Angeles district suffered from the worst smog in the country.


        In the 1970s and 1980s, representatives from the northeastern states and environmental advocates
had put forth a steady stream of acid rain bills. But the coalitions needed to pass these bills had never
been able to overcome the fault lines that formed on the basis of regional differences in mitigation costs.
According to one workshop participant, members of the House Subcommittee on Energy and Power (the
subcommittee with initial jurisdiction over the SO2 trading proposal) were not reflexively opposed to en-
vironmental regulation as such, but were genuinely concerned about the impact of higher electricity rates
in their districts. These representatives were in principle open to reducing SO2 emissions as long as they
could be confident that their constituents would receive a “fair” deal.


Policy Entrepreneurs

        The proposal for what became the SO2 allowance-trading system was part of a legislative package
developed by the George H. W. Bush White House. But where did the White House get its ideas, and
how did it develop them? In addition to elected officials, the environmental and academic communities
played key roles. In 1960, University of Chicago Professor Ronald Coase laid the intellectual foundation
in the Journal of Law and Economics (Coase 1960) for the notion of using markets to solve environmental
problems. Then, U.S. economist Thomas Crocker (1966) and Canadian economist John Dales (1968) fol-
lowed up by arguing that the best way to clean up air and water pollution would be with a market in rights
to emit pollution. These arguments were made much more rigorous a few years later when David Mont-
gomery—a workshop participant—demonstrated in the Journal of Economic Theory (Montgomery 1972)
precisely how and why an emissions-trading system would be cost-effective. Prominent legal scholars also
advocated emissions trading (Ackerman and Stewart 1985). These and other explorations in the academic
world eventually led EPA to experiment with small-scale emissions-credit-trading systems in the 1970s
and 1980s, including most importantly the phase out of leaded gasoline in vehicle fuel in the mid-1980s.




                                               HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 29
        The design and implementation of a much larger-scale allowance-trading program required the
participation of committed policy entrepreneurs. George H.W. Bush, as already noted, was one. Several of
those later involved in the Bush Administration played key roles in formulating President Bush’s campaign
commitments on the environment. Robert Grady (a workshop participant), chief speechwriter and senior
policy adviser on the 1988 campaign, joined the White House staff as Associate Director of the Office of
Management and Budget in charge of Natural Resources, Energy, and Science. Robert Zoellick, issues
director on the campaign, became Under Secretary of State and later White House Deputy Chief of Staff.
C. Boyden Gray (a workshop participant), who had advised Vice President Bush earlier on the White
House Competitiveness Council that oversaw the phase out of lead in gasoline, became White House
Counsel.


         Ironically, in light of the political dynamics of the recent climate debate, the main opposition
to market-based environmental policies at the time came from environmental advocacy groups (with
an important exception highlighted below) and from Democrats (with a few important exceptions, also
highlighted below). Some of these advocates thought that a policy based on the principle that firms could
“pay to pollute” was morally bankrupt; they worried that the very creation of tradable allowances implied
that firms had a right or an entitlement to emit. In their view, the government should continue to regulate
private-sector emissions through command-and-control regulation, in effect setting minimum control
standards or technology requirements for each individual emissions source.


         Among the major environmental advocacy groups, it was the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF)
that set itself apart from its environmental brethren by backing market-based approaches to environmental
protection, including for acid rain control. EDF was led then (as now) by Fred Krupp, another workshop
participant. When EDF helped the Bush Administration design, and later announced its support of, the
trading component of the CAAA, it was a “Nixon-in-China” moment and a turning point in the politics
of market-based regulation. Several workshop participants from the Bush White House confirmed that the
SO2 trading program could not have won congressional support had EDF not provided the administration
with the necessary credibility from within the environmental community.


        Two policy entrepreneurs in the U.S. Senate, Timothy Wirth (D-Colorado, now President of the
United Nations Foundation) and the late John Heinz (R-Pennsylvania), together created and chaired Proj-
ect 88, which developed a compelling economic proposal for a market-based program to reduce SO2 emis-
sions through a cap-and-trade system (Stavins, 1988).54 In 1988, shortly after the election and even before
inauguration, C. Boyden Gray brought the director of the Heinz-Wirth Project 88 effort, Robert Stavins


54   See also the Heinz Family Philanthropies’ web page for Project 88: www.heinzfamily.org/aboutus/project88.html.



30 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
(then a new assistant professor at the Harvard Kennedy School), to the White House, together with Fred
Krupp and key members of the EDF staff. Gray also recruited emissions-trading advocate Richard Stew-
art, a law professor at Harvard, to serve as the top environmental lawyer at the Justice Department.

       The development, adoption, and implementation of the Acid Rain Program—as any major in-
novation in public policy—can be attributed to a solid base of knowledge, sound strategy, and a certain
amount of luck in placing effective policy entrepreneurs in important positions, in this case at the White
House, EPA, the Department of Justice, the Congress, and environmental organizations.55 These entre-
preneurs, working together on the Acid Rain Program, made a break with the past with regard to environ-
mental policy.




9. Conclusion

         More than twenty years later, the introduction of the national SO2 allowance-trading program as
part of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 remains widely regarded as a landmark step in the world-
wide history of environmental regulation. The program, while not without flaws, is viewed as a success
by almost all measures. Certainly it demonstrated that broad-based cap-and-trade systems can be used to
achieve significant emissions reductions, that firms can navigate and regulators can enforce the compliance
requirements of such systems, and that giving the private sector the flexibility to pursue a range of abate-
ment options can simultaneously protect the environment, stimulate innovation and diffusion, and reduce
aggregate costs.


         The SO2 allowance-trading program was enacted with large bipartisan majorities and was successful
in reducing SO2 emissions at a cost much less than a traditional-regulatory approach would have incurred
(and less than had been predicted). The program was partially inspired by the belief that the shortcomings
of earlier emissions-credit-trading programs could be overcome with a cap-and-trade design and strong
monitoring. The program’s subsequent success in turn inspired other market-based emissions-reductions
programs, including the much larger European Union Emissions Trading System.


55   Other active and influential enthusiasts of market-based environmental instruments were: In the White House, Deputy Counsel John Schmitz, Domes-
     tic Policy Adviser Roger Porter, Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) Member Richard Schmalensee, and CEA Senior Staff Economist Robert Hahn.
     (All except Schmitz were workshop participants.) At EPA, Administrator William Reilly enjoyed valuable credibility with environmental advocacy
     groups; Deputy Administrator Henry Habicht and Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation William Rosenberg were key, early supporters of
     market-based instruments. At EDF, in addition to Fred Krupp, Senior Economist Daniel Dudek and Staff Attorney Joseph Goffman worked closely
     with the White House to develop the initial allowance-trading proposal.



                                                                   HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 31
         The broad political consensus on the CAAA of 1990 was hard-won. A number of influential stake-
holders engaged in a decade of often contentious deliberation and negotiation—including intense discus-
sion about the Title IV provisions—before Congress passed the Amendments. Divergent views on the
CAAA largely reflected regional differences in the distribution of coal-fired power plants and coal types.
But the advent of the proposed allowance-trading program facilitated the consensus that emerged among
leaders in the Bush Administration, lawmakers in Congress, and many affected corporations and business
associations (Joskow and Schmalensee 1998). Thus, the SO2 allowance-trading program made it possible
to focus on how one could achieve the agreed public policy goal (in this case, reducing acid rain pollution)
in a manner that would simultaneously minimize costs and provide regulated entities with the flexibility
embodied in markets.


         The recent climate debate has taken place in a political context that is much different than that of
the CAAA of 1990. Deep ideological division dominates today’s dialogue in Washington; the two major
political parties were much less ideologically polarized in 1990. A convergence of the creative vision and
the large bipartisan majorities of 1990 appears much less likely today. Recent hostility toward cap and
trade in U.S. climate legislation may reflect the broader political environment of the climate debate more
than it reflects the substantive merits (or demerits) of market-based regulation.56 In other words, congres-
sional hostility toward greenhouse-gas cap and trade appears to have been collateral damage in a wider set
of policy and ideological battles.


        Ironically, the cap-and-trade model seems especially well suited to addressing the problem of cli-
mate change, in that emitted GHGs are evenly distributed throughout the world’s atmosphere. Emis-
sions reductions anywhere make identical contributions to helping alleviate the problem, and there are no
pollutant concentration hot-spots. The sheer number and variety of GHG-emissions sources heightens
the practical difficulty of developing a comprehensive and effective command-and-control approach and
magnifies the cost savings that could be achieved by enlisting the market to find the least costly abatement
options.


        It is difficult to achieve an international agreement to limit GHG emissions, however, for precisely
the same reasons—many countries, hosting many emissions sources, must agree to take action. Given the
complexities of either developing a domestic U.S. cap-and-trade system for GHGs or obtaining congres-
sional approval for an international system in which the United States participates, it is likely that at least
as much bipartisan collaboration would be required as was evident in the CAAA process. Instead, we have
much less.

56   The design of the Waxman-Markey climate-change bill, including the auctioning of 15% of allowances initially, with the percentage rising over time,
     may have also affected the political outcome.



32 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
        The stakes for a broad-based GHG policy—economic, political, and environmental—are much
higher than they were for SO2 policy in 1990. While the debate over federal policy to address climate
change is currently in hiatus, the lessons of the SO2 allowance-trading program will prove useful and rel-
evant to future deliberations about climate change policy when the time arrives for serious reflection.




                                               HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 33
References

Ackerman, Bruce A., and Richard B. Stewart. 1985. “Reforming environmental law.” Stanford Law Review 37 (5):
       1333–1365.

Arimura, Toshi H. 2002. “An empirical study of the SO2 allowance market: Effects of PUC regulations.” Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 44 (2) (September): 271–289. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1006/
       jeem.2001.1202.

Arrow, Kenneth J., Maureen L. Cropper, George C. Eads, Robert W. Hahn, Lester B. Lave, Roger G. Noll, Paul
        R. Portney, et al. 1996. “Is there a role for benefit-cost analysis in environmental, health, and safety regu-
        lation?” Science 272 (5259) (April 12): 221–222. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2889625.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Dallas Burtraw, David Evans, and Alan Krupnick. 2006. “Valuation of natural resource
        improvements in the Adirondacks.” Land Economics 82 (3): 445–464.

Baumol, William J., and Wallace E. Oates. 1971. “The use of standards and prices for protection of the environ-
       ment.” The Swedish Journal of Economics 73 (1) (March): 42–54. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.2307/3439132.

Belden, Roy. 2005. “A hole in CAIR.” Environmental Finance, November. www.environmentalmarkets.org/galler-
        ies/default-file/ef11ema18.pdf.

Bellas, Allen S., and Ian Lange. 2011. “Evidence of innovation and diffusion under tradable permit programs.”
         International Review of Environmental and Resource Economics 5 (1) (May): 1–22. http://dx.doi.org/
         doi:10.1561/101.00000036.

Bohi, Douglas R., and Dallas Burtraw. 1992. “Utility investment behavior and the emission trading market.”
       Resources and Energy 14 (1–2) (April): 129–53. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/0165-0572(92)90022-9.

Bravender, Robin. 2009. “Acid rain credits nosedive on CAIR concerns.” Greenwire, March 27. www.eenews.net/
       public/Greenwire/2009/03/27/4?page_type=print.

Burtraw, Dallas. 1996. “The SO2 emissions trading program: Cost savings without allowance trades.” Contempo-
        rary Economic Policy 14 (2) (April 1): 79–94. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1111/j.1465-7287.1996.tb00615.x.

———. 1998. “Cost Savings, Market Performance and Economic Benefits of the U.S. Acid Rain Program.” Dis-
    cussion Paper 98-28-REV. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future, March. www.rff.org/RFF/Docu-
    ments/RFF-DP-98-28-REV.pdf.

———. 2000. “Innovation Under the Tradable Sulfur Dioxide Emission Permits Program in the U.S. Electricity
    Sector.” Discussion Paper 00–38. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future, September. www.rff.org/
    documents/RFF-DP-00-38.pdf.

Burtraw, Dallas, and Erin Mansur. 1999. “The Effects of Trading and Banking in the SO2 Allowance Market.”
        Discussion Paper 99-25. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future, March. www.rff.org/documents/
        RFF-DP-99-25.pdf.



34 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
Burtraw, Dallas, and Karen Palmer. 2003. “The Paparazzi Take a Look at a Living Legend: The SO2 Cap-and-
        Trade Program for Power Plants in the United States.” Discussion Paper 03-15. Washington, D.C.:
        Resources for the Future, April. www.rff.org/documents/rff-dp-03-15.pdf.

Burtraw, Dallas, and Sarah Jo Szambelan. 2009. “U.S. Emissions Trading Markets for SO2 and NOx.” Discus-
        sion Paper 09-40. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future, October. www.rff.org/documents/RFF-
        DP-09-40.pdf.

Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, and Danny Kahn. 2010. “A symmetric safety valve.” Energy Policy 38 (9) (Septem-
        ber): 4921–4932. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.03.068.

Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen L. Cropper, and Karen Palmer. 2000. “Sulfur dioxide control by electric
        utilities: What are the gains from trade?” Journal of Political Economy 108 (6) (December): 1292–1326.

Coase, Ronald H. 1960. “The problem of social cost.” Journal of Law and Economics 3: 1–44.

Conniff, Richard. 2009. “The political history of cap and trade.” Smithsonian, August. www.smithsonianmag.com/
        science-nature/Presence-of-Mind-Blue-Sky-Thinking.html.

Crocker, Thomas D. 1966. “The structuring of atmospheric pollution control systems.” In The Economics of Air
        Pollution, ed. Harold Wolozin, 61–86. New York: W.W. Norton.

Dales, John H. 1968. Pollution, Property, and Prices. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Deutch, John, Ernest J. Moniz, et al. 2007. The Future of Coal. Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of
       Technology. http://web.mit.edu/coal.

Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, Richard Schmalensee, Juan-Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth M. Bailey. 2000.
        Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Program. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Frey, Elaine. 2008. “Technology Diffusion and Environmental Regulation: The Adoption of Scrubbers by
         Coal-Fired Power Plants.” Working Paper 08-04. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection
         Agency, National Center for Environmental Economics, March. http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/
         WPNumber/2008-04/$File/2008-04.PDF.

Goulder, Lawrence, and Robert N. Stavins. 2010. Interactions between State and Federal Climate Change Policies.
       Discussion Paper 2010-36. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Project on Climate Agreements, June. http://belf-
       ercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/publication/20251.

Hahn, Robert W., and Robert N. Stavins. 2010. “The Effect of Allowance Allocations on Cap-and-Trade System
       Performance.” Working Paper 15854. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research. www.
       nber.org/papers/w15854.

Jackson, Robert L. 1987. “Senators offer measures to cut acid rain pollutants.” Los Angeles Times, January 17.
        http://articles.latimes.com/1987-01-17/news/mn-5105_1_acid-rain.




                                                   HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 35
Joskow, Paul L, and Richard Schmalensee. 1998. “The political economy of market-based environmental policy:
        The U.S. Acid Rain Program.” Journal of Law and Economics 41 (1) (April): 37–83.

Joskow, Paul L., Richard Schmalensee, and Elizabeth M. Bailey. 1998. “The market for sulfur dioxide emissions.”
        American Economic Review 88 (4) (September): 669–685. www.jstor.org/stable/117000.

Keohane, Nathaniel O. 2003. “What Did the Market Buy? Cost Savings Under the U.S. Tradeable Permits Pro-
       gram for Sulfur Dioxide.” Working Paper YCELP-01-11-2003. Yale Center for Environmental Law and
       Policy, October 15. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=465320.

Lange, Ian, and Allen S. Bellas. 2005. “Technological change for sulfur dioxide scrubbers under market-based
        regulation.” Land Economics 81 (4) (November): 546–556. www.jstor.org/stable/4129681.

Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2007. An Equitable Tax Reform to Address Global Climate Change. Discussion Paper 		
        2007-12. The Hamilton Project. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, October. www.brook-
        ings.edu/papers/2007/10carbontax_metcalf.aspx.

Montgomery, W. David. 1972. “Markets in licenses and efficient pollution control programs.” Journal of Economic
      Theory 5 (3) (December): 395–418. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/0022-0531(72)90049-X.

NAPAP. 2005. National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program Report to Congress: An Integrated Assessment. Wash-
      ington, D.C.: National Science and Technology Council, Committee on Environment and Natural
      Resources. http://ny.cf.er.usgs.gov/napap/Information/NAPAP%20Report%208-22-05.pdf.

Nelson, Gabriel. 2011. “EPA orders power plants to clean up interstate emissions.” New York Times, July 7. www.
        nytimes.com/gwire/2011/07/07/07greenwire-epa-orders-power-plants-to-clean-up-interstate-87138.html.

Palmer, Karen, and David A. Evans. 2009. “The evolving SO2 allowance market: Title IV, CAIR, and beyond.” Re-
        sources for the Future Weekly Policy Commentary. July 13. www.rff.org/Publications/WPC/Pages/090713-
        Evolving-SO2-Allowance-Market.aspx.

Palmer, Karen, Dallas Burtraw, and Jhih-Shyang Shih. 2005. “Reducing Emissions from the Electricity Sector: The
        Costs and Benefits Nationwide and for the Empire State.” Discussion Paper 05-23. Washington, D.C.:
        Resources for the Future, June. www.rff.org/documents/RFF-DP-05-23.pdf.

Peace, Janet, and Robert N. Stavins. 2010. “Meaningful and Cost Effective Climate Policy: The Case for Cap and
         Trade.” In Brief. Arlington, Va.: Pew Center on Global Climate Change, June. www.c2es.org/publica-
         tions/whitepaper/meaningful-and-cost-effective-climate-policy-case-cap-and-trade.

Popp, David. 2003. “Pollution control innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management 22 (4): 641–660.

Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N. Stavins. 2011. “A guide to economic and policy analysis of EPA’s Transport
       Rule.” White Paper. Analysis Group, March. http://206.169.254.86/uploadedFiles/News_and_Events/
       News/2011_StavinsSchmalansee_TransportRuleReport.pdf.

Schmalensee, Richard, Paul L. Joskow, A. Denny Ellerman, and Elizabeth M. Bailey. 1998. “An interim evalua-
       tion of sulfur dioxide emissions trading.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (3): 53–68. www.jstor.org/
       stable/2647032.



36 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
Shadbegian, Ronald J., Wayne B. Gray, and Cynthia L. Morgan. 2005. “Benefits and Costs from Sulfur Dioxide
       Trading: A Distributional Analysis.” Working Paper 05-09. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Pro-
       tection Agency, National Center for Environmental Economics, December. http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/
       epa/eed.nsf/WPNumber/2005-09/$File/2005-09.PDF.

Spinney, Peter. 2011. “EPA issues final CAIR replacement rule effective January 1, 2012.” The Optimization Blog.
        com. July 19. www.energyblogs.com/theoptimizationblog/index.cfm/2011/7/19/EPA-Issues-Final-CAIR-
        Replacement-Rule-Effective-January1-2012.

Stavins, Robert N. 1988. Project 88: Harnessing Market Forces to Protect our Environment. Washington, D.C.: Proj-
         ect 88, December. http://www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/rstavins/Monographs_&_Reports/Project_88-1.pdf.

———. 1995. “Transaction costs and tradeable permits.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 29
    (2) (September): 133–148. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1006/jeem.1995.1036.

———. 1998. “What can we learn from the grand policy experiment? Lessons from SO2 allowance trading.” Jour-
    nal of Economic Perspectives 12 (3): 69–88. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2647033.

———. 2003. “Experience with market-based environmental policy instruments.” In Handbook of Environmental
    Economics, ed. Karl-Göran Mäler and Jeffrey Vincent, Vol. I:355–435. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier
    Science.

———. 2008. “Addressing climate change with a comprehensive U.S. cap-and-trade system.” Oxford Review of
    Economic Policy 24 (2) (June): 298–321. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1093/oxrep/grn017.

Swift, Byron. 2004. “Emissions trading and hot spots: A review of the major programs.” Environment Reporter 35
        (19) (May 7): 1–16.

U.S. EPA. 2011. Clean Air Interstate Rule, Acid Rain Program, and Former NOx Budget Trading Program 2010
       Progress Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, October 5. www.epa.gov/air-
       markets/progress/ARPCAIR10.html.

U.S. EPA, National Center for Environmental Economics. 2001. The United States Experience with Economic In-
       centives for Protecting the Environment. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Janu-
       ary. http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eerm.nsf/vwAN/EE-0216B-13.pdf/$file/EE-0216B-13.pdf.

U.S. EPA, Office of Air and Radiation. 2000. Analysis of the Acid Deposition and Ozone Control Act (S. 172).
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, July. http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/re-
       source/docs/s172report.pdf.

———. 2011. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act from 1990 to 2020: Final Report. Washington, D.C.:
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, March. http://www.epa.gov/air/sect812/prospective2-2.html.

Weitzman, Martin L. 1974. “Prices vs. quantities.” Review of Economic Studies 41 (128) (October): 477–491.

Wiener, Jonathan B., and Barak D. Richman. 2010. “Mechanism choice.” In Research Handbook on Public Choice
        and Public Law, ed. Daniel A. Farber and Anne Joseph O’Connell, 363–397. Research Handbooks in
        Law and Economics Series. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.


                                                  HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM • HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL » 37
Winebrake, James J., Alexander E. Farrell, and Mark A. Bernstein. 1995. “The Clean Air Act’s sulfur dioxide emis-
       sions market: Estimating the costs of regulatory and legislative intervention.” Resource and Energy Econom-
       ics 17 (3) (November): 239–260. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/0928-7655(95)00006-J.

Yergin, Daniel. 2011. The Quest: Energy, Security and the Remaking of the Modern World. New York: Penguin Press.




38 « THE SO2 ALLOWANCE TRADING SYSTEM AND THE CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1990: REFLECTIONS ON TWENTY YEARS OF POLICY INNOVATION
The SO2 Allowance Trading System and the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990:
Reflections on Twenty Years of Policy Innovation
Research Workshop and Policy Roundtable Participants
May 19-20, 2011
Harvard University

Research Participants                                                          Policy and Politics Participants

JOSEPH ALDY                             W. DAVID MONTGOMERY                    ROBERT GRADY
Assistant Professor of Public Policy    Senior Vice President                  General Partner
Harvard Kennedy School                  NERA Economic Consulting               Cheyenne Capital Fund
                                                                               1989-1991: Associate Director, Office of
DALLAS BURTRAW                          ERICH J. MUEHLEGGER                    Management and Budget (Natural
Darius Gaskins Senior Fellow            Associate Professor of Public Policy   Resources, Energy & Science);
Resources for the Future                Harvard Kennedy School                 1991-1993: Executive Associate Director,
                                                                               OMB, and Deputy Assistant to
DENNY ELLERMAN                          KAREN L. PALMER                        the President
Part-time Professor                     Senior Fellow
European University Institute           Resources for the Future               C. BOYDEN GRAY
Robert Schuman Centre for                                                      Principal
Advanced Studies                        JOHN PARSONS                           Boyden Gray & Associates
                                        Executive Director                     1989-1993: White House Counsel
MICHAEL GREENSTONE                      Center for Energy and
3M Professor of                         Environmental Policy Research          FRED KRUPP
Environmental Economics                 MIT Sloan School of Management         President (1984-present)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                                          Environmental Defense Fund
                                        FOREST L. REINHARDT
LAWRENCE H. GOULDER                     John D. Black Professor of             MARY D. NICHOLS
Shuzo Nishihara Professor of            Business Administration                Chairman
Environmental and Resource Economics    Harvard Business School                California Air Resources Board
Stanford University                                                            1993-1997: Assistant Administrator for Air
                                        RICHARD L. SCHMALENSEE                 and Radiation, U.S. Environmental Protec-
ROBERT HAHN                             Howard W. Johnson Professor of         tion Agency
Director of Economics                   Economics and Management
Smith School                            MIT Sloan School of Management         ROGER PORTER
University of Oxford                                                           IBM Professor of Business and Government
                                        DANIEL SCHRAG                          Harvard Kennedy School
PAUL L. JOSKOW                          Sturgis Hooper Professor of Geology    1989-1993: Assistant to the President for
President                               Harvard University                     Economic and Domestic Policy
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
                                        ROBERT N. STAVINS                      RICHARD L. SCHMALENSEE
ERIN T. MANSUR                          Albert Pratt Professor of              Howard W. Johnson Professor of
Associate Professor of Economics        Business and Government                Economics and Management
Dartmouth College                       Harvard Kennedy School                 MIT Sloan School of Management
                                                                               1989-1991: Member, President’s Council
ALBERT McGARTLAND                       THOMAS TIETENBERG                      of Economic Advisers
Director                                Mitchell Family Professor of
National Center for                     Economics, Emeritus                    PHILIP SHARP
Environmental Economics                 Colby College                          President
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                                           Resources for the Future
                                        JONATHAN B. WIENER                     1975-1995: Member, U.S. House of
BRIAN J. McLEAN                         William R. and Thomas L. Perkins       Representatives, Indiana
Former Director                         Professor of Law                       Chairman, Energy and Power Subcommit-
Office of Atmospheric Programs          Duke University Law School             tee, House Committee on Natural Resources
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
