                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS AND THE WORLD TRADE SYSTEM:
                       A MULTILATERALIST VIEW

                                          Pravin Krishna

                                       Working Paper 17840
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17840


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2012




Paper prepared for the NBER – Bank of England Conference on “Globalization in an Age of Crisis:
Multilateral Co-operation in the Twenty First Century”, held September 14-16, 2011 at the Bank of
England, London, UK. I am grateful to my discussants, Tony Venables and Ernesto Zedillo, to Richard
Baldwin, Jagdish Bhagwati, Robert Feenstra, Alan Taylor and to participants at the March 2011 Pre-
Conference at the NBER for many helpful comments and to Nadia Rocha at the WTO for generously
sharing the WTO’s database on the “Anatomy of Preferential Trade Agreements”. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Pravin Krishna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Preferential Trade Agreements and the World Trade System: A Multilateralist View
Pravin Krishna
NBER Working Paper No. 17840
February 2012
JEL No. F1,F13

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper reviews recent developments in international trade to evaluate several arguments concerning
the merits of preferential trade agreements (PTAs) and their place in the world trade system. Taking
a multilateralist perspective, it makes several points: First, despite the proliferation of PTAs in recent
years, the actual amount of liberalization that has been achieved through PTAs is actually quite limited.
Second, at least a few studies point to significant trade diversion in the context of particular PTAs
and thus serve as a cautionary note against casual dismissals of trade diversion as a merely theoretical
concern. Equally, adverse effects on the terms-of-trade of non-member countries have also been found
in the literature. Third, while the literature has found mixed results on the question of whether tariff
preferences help or hurt multilateral liberalization, the picture is different with the more elastic tools
of trade policy, such as antidumping duties (ADs); the use of ADs against non-members appears to
have dramatically increased while the use of ADs against partner countries within PTAs has fallen.
Fourth, despite the rapid expansion of preferences in trade, intra-PTA trade shares are relatively small
for most PTAs; multilateral remain relevant to most member countries of the WTO.


Pravin Krishna
Johns Hopkins University
1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
Pravin_Krishna@jhu.edu
    Preferential	  Trade	  Agreements	  and	  the	  World	  Trade	  System:	  A	  Multilateralist	  
                                                  View	  
                                                     	  
	  
I.	  Introduction	  
	  
A	   cornerstone	   of	   the	   World	   Trade	   Organization	   (WTO),	   is	   the	   principle	   of	   non-­‐
discrimination:	   member	   countries	   may	   not	   discriminate	   against	   goods	   entering	  
their	   borders	   based	   upon	   the	   country	   of	   origin.	   However,	   in	   an	   important	   exception	  
to	  its	  own	  central	  prescript,	  the	  WTO,	  through	  Article	  XXIV	  of	  its	  General	  Agreement	  
on	  Tariffs	  and	  Trade	  (GATT),	  does	  permit	  countries	  to	  enter	  into	  preferential	  trade	  
agreements	  (PTAs)	  with	  one	  another.	  Specifically,	  under	  Article	  XXIV,	  countries	  may	  
enter	  into	  preferential	  trade	  agreements	  by	  fully	  liberalizing	  “substantially”	  all	  trade	  
between	   them	   while	   not	   raising	   trade	   barriers	   on	   outsiders.	   They	   are	   thereby	  
sanctioned	   to	   form	   Free	   Trade	   Areas	   (FTAs),	   whose	   members	   simply	   eliminate	  
barriers	  to	  internal	  trade	  while	  maintaining	  independent	  external	  trade	  policies	  or	  
Customs	   Unions	   (CUs),	   whose	   members	   additionally	   agree	   on	   a	   common	   external	  
tariff	   against	   imports	   from	   non-­‐members.	   Additional	   derogations	   to	   the	   principle	   of	  
non-­‐discrimination	   include	   the	   Enabling	   Clause,	   which	   allows	   tariff	   preferences	   to	  
be	   granted	   to	   developing	   countries	   (in	   accordance	   with	   the	   Generalized	   System	   of	  
Preferences)	   and	   permits	   preferential	   trade	   agreements	   (which	   are	   not	   subject	   to	  
the	  disciplines	  imposed	  by	  Article	  XXIV)	  among	  developing	  countries	  in	  goods	  trade.	  
	  
Such	   preferential	   agreements	   are	   now	   in	   vogue.	   Indeed,	   the	   rise	   in	   preferential	  
trade	  agreements	  between	  countries	  stands	  as	  the	  dominant	  trend	  in	  the	  evolution	  
of	   the	   international	   trade	   system	   in	   the	   recent	   two	   decades,	   with	   hundreds	   of	  
GATT/WTO-­‐sanctioned	  agreements	  having	  been	  negotiated	  during	  this	  period	  and	  
with	  nearly	  every	  member	  country	  of	  the	  WTO	  belonging	  to	  at	  least	  one	  PTA.	  Among	  
the	  more	  prominent	  PTAs	  currently	  in	  existence	  are	  the	  North	  American	  Free	  Trade	  
Agreement	  (NAFTA)	  and	  the	  European	  Economic	  Community	  (EEC),	  the	  MERCOSUR	  
(the	   CU	   between	   the	   Argentine	   Republic,	   Brazil,	   Paraguay,	   and	   Uruguay)	   and	   the	  
ASEAN	  (Association	  of	  South	  East	  Asian	  Nations)	  Free	  Trade	  Area	  (AFTA).	  	  
	  
Alongside	  this	  evolution	  of	  the	  world	  trade	  system	  towards	  preferential	  trade,	  there	  
has	  been	  an	  intensification	  of	  interest	  in	  the	  academic	  and	  policy	  literature	  on	  the	  
economics	   of	   trade	   preferences,	   the	   political	   and	   economic	   determinants	   of	  
preferential	   agreements	   and	   the	   interplay	   between	   the	   bilateral	   and	   multilateral	  
approaches	  to	  achieving	  freer	  trade.	  It	  has	  often	  been	  argued	  that	  the	  acceleration	  
towards	  trade	  preferences	  reflects	  the	  deep	  frustration	  that	  countries	  felt	  with	  the	  
“slow”	  pace	  of	  the	  multilateral	  process.	  It	  has	  also	  been	  argued	  by	  proponents	  that	  
PTAs	  are	  a	  faster	  and	  more	  efficient	  way	  of	  achieving	  trade	  liberalization	  and	  that	  
they	  should	  therefore	  be	  seen	  as	  a	  preferred	  path	  to	  get	  to	  the	  goal	  of	  multilateral	  
free	  trade.	  	  On	  the	  other	  side,	  multilateralists	  have	  argued	  the	  possibility	  of	  welfare	  
losses	   due	   to	   inefficiencies	   caused	   by	   preferences	   in	   trade,	   as	   imports	   may	   be	  
sourced	   from	   inefficient	   partner	   countries	   rather	   than	   more	   efficient	   outsiders	  
because	   of	   the	   lower	   tariffs	   faced	   by	   the	   former.1	  This	   diversion	   of	   trade	   is	   also	  
potentially	   costly	   to	   outsiders	   who	   are	   relatively	   handicapped	   in	   member	   country	  
markets	  and	  may	  incur	  terms	  of	  trade	  losses	  in	  their	  exports.	  Multilateralists	  have	  
also	   argued	   that	   preferential	   agreements	   are	   not	   to	   be	   seen	   as	   providing	   a	   simple	  
monotonic	   path	   to	   multilateral	   free	   trade,	   warning	   that	   preferential	   agreements	  
might	   create	   incentives	   within	   member	   countries	   against	   further	   multilateral	  
liberalization.2	  
	  
About	   two	   decades	   have	   passed	   since	   these	   recent	   debates	   over	   the	   virtues	   of	  


1	  It	  is	  sometimes	  asserted,	  as	  was	  the	  case	  at	  this	  conference,	  that	  the	  fact	  that	  countries	  choose	  

preferential	  agreements	  is	  proof	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  	  “revealed	  preference”	  that	  the	  agreements	  must	  be	  
welfare	  improving.	  	  While	  this	  might	  hold	  if	  trade	  agreements	  were	  decided	  on	  by	  welfare	  
maximizing	  governments,	  it	  is	  decidedly	  incorrect	  in	  practice.	  Trade	  agreements	  are	  the	  outcome	  of	  
intensely	  political	  processes	  in	  which	  powerful	  domestic	  lobbies	  often	  prevail	  over	  less	  powerful	  
groups	  (for	  instance,	  domestic	  consumers)	  in	  influencing	  governments	  and	  moulding	  policy	  to	  best	  
serve	  their	  interests.	  Clearly,	  there	  can	  be	  no	  presumption	  then	  that	  the	  resulting	  agreements	  are	  
welfare	  improving,	  a	  fact	  that	  is	  well	  recognized	  by	  a	  large	  literature	  on	  the	  political	  economy	  of	  
PTAs	  (see,	  for	  instance,	  Krishna	  (1998)	  and	  Grossman	  and	  Helpman	  (1995)).	  
2	  As	  noted	  by	  Professor	  Ernesto	  Zedillo	  in	  his	  conference	  discussion	  of	  this	  paper,	  NAFTA	  offered	  

Mexican	  exporters	  an	  ‘opportunity	  to	  divert	  trade”	  away	  from	  their	  competitors	  in	  the	  US	  and	  
Canadian	  market	  and	  having	  achieved	  this	  outcome,	  Mexico	  would	  be	  have	  been	  “quite	  happy”	  to	  see	  
“preferential	  liberalization	  by	  the	  US	  stop”	  there	  (i.e.,	  without	  extending	  to	  other	  countries	  in	  Latin	  
America).	  
preferential	   trade	   began. 3 	  The	   collective	   experience	   of	   countries	   on	   both	   the	  
preferential	  and	  multilateral	  fronts	  during	  this	  time	  has	  allowed	  for	  an	  empirically	  
based	   discussion	   of	   a	   number	   of	   different	   questions	   on	   this	   topic.	   This	   paper	  
reviews	   developments	   in	   international	   trade	   during	   this	   period	   and	   considers	   the	  
findings	   of	   other	   researchers	   in	   an	   attempt	   to	   evaluate	   a	   range	   of	   analytical	  
arguments	   in	   this	   area.	   Taking	   a	   multilateralist	   perspective,	   this	   paper	   makes	  
several	   points.	   First,	   despite	   the	   proliferation	   of	   PTAs	   in	   recent	   years,	   the	   actual	  
amount	  of	  liberalization	  that	  has	  been	  achieved	  through	  preferential	  agreements	  is	  
actually	   quite	   limited.	   Specifically,	   trade	   flows	   between	   partner	   countries	   that	  
receive	   tariff	   preferences	   are	   a	   relatively	   small	   fraction	   of	   world	   trade.	   This	   casts	  
doubt	   on	   the	   claims	   concerning	   the	   efficiency	   of	   preferential	   agreements	   in	  
achieving	   trade	   liberalization.	   Second,	   while	   the	   literature	   offers	   mixed	   views	   on	  
whether	   liberalization	   achieved	   through	   preferential	   agreements	   has	   been	   welfare	  
improving	   in	   practice,	   a	   few	   studies	   point	   to	   significant	   trade	   diversion	   in	   the	  
context	   of	   particular	   PTAs.	   This	   should,	   at	   a	   minimum,	   serve	   as	   a	   cautionary	   note	  
against	  casual	  dismissals	  of	  trade	  diversion	  as	  a	  merely	  theoretical	  concern.	  Equally,	  
adverse	   effects	   on	   the	   terms-­‐of-­‐trade	   of	   non-­‐member	   countries	   have	   also	   been	  
found	   in	   the	   literature,	   highlighting	   the	   potential	   for	   PTAs	   to	   negatively	   impact	  
outsiders.	   Third,	   while	   a	   rich	   empirical	   literature	   has	   found	   mixed	   results	   on	   the	  
question	   of	   whether	   tariff	   preferences	   help	   or	   hurt	   multilateral	   liberalization,	   the	  
picture	  is	  different	  with	  the	  more	  elastic	  tools	  of	  trade	  policy,	  such	  as	  antidumping	  
duties	   (ADs);	   a	   recent	   study	   has	   shown	   that	   the	   use	   of	   ADs	   against	   non-­‐members	  
has	   dramatically	   increased	   while	   the	   use	   of	   ADs	   against	   partner	   countries	   within	  
PTAs	  has	  fallen.	  Fourth,	  despite	  the	  rapid	  expansion	  of	  preferences	  in	  trade,	  intra-­‐
PTA	  trade	  shares	  are	  relatively	  small	  for	  most	  PTAs.	  This	  suggests	  that	  multilateral	  
initiatives	   involving	   trade	   with	   the	   rest	   of	   the	   world	   remain	   relevant	   to	   most	  
member	  countries	  of	  the	  WTO.	  	  
	  


3
 See,	  for	  instance,	  Bhagwati	  (1993)	  and	  Baldwin	  and	  Venables	  (1995).	  See	  also	  Bhagwati	  2008)	  and	  
Panagariya	  (2000)	  which	  provide	  comprehensive	  discussions	  of	  the	  major	  theoretical	  contributions	  
and	  policy	  debates	  in	  this	  area.	  
Finally,	   this	   paper	   considers	   the	   recently	   evolving	   and	   popular	   argument	   that	   the	  
motivation	   for	   PTAs	   has	   little	   to	   do	   with	   the	   lowering	   of	   trade	   barriers,	   as	   such,	   and	  
that	   PTAs	   are	   primarily	   a	   vehicle	   for	   undertaking	   “deeper”	   forms	   of	   integration	   to	  
achieve	   institutional	   harmonization	   with	   partners. 4 	  The	   institutional	   and	   policy	  
dimensions	   along	   which	   this	   harmonization	   is	   sought	   include	   both	   provisions	   that	  
currently	   fall	   under	   the	   mandate	   of	   the	   WTO	   and	   are	   subject	   to	   some	   level	   of	  
commitment	   in	   WTO	   agreements	   (such	   as	   the	   improvement	   of	   customs	  
administration	  and	  rules	  concerning	  public	  procurement)	  and	  those	  that	  currently	  
fall	   outside	   of	   mandate	   of	   the	   WTO	   (such	   as	   provisions	   on	   investment	   measures,	  
labor	   market	   regulations,	   innovations	   policy	   and	   human	   rights).	   To	   examine	   the	  
argument	  concerning	  deeper	  integration,	  we	  use	  a	  data	  set	  recently	  compiled	  by	  the	  
WTO	   (for	   its	   2011	   publication	   of	   the	   World	   Trade	   Review)	   which	   codifies	   these	  
institutional	   provisions	   in	   more	   than	   a	   hundred	   PTAs	   notified	   to	   the	   WTO,	   and	  
additionally	   indicates	   which	   of	   these	   provisions	   are	   legally	   enforceable.	   While	   it	   is	  
indeed	   true	   that	   a	   number	   of	   PTAs	   have	   incorporated	   provisions	   on	   a	   range	   of	  
issues	   that	   go	   beyond	   trade,	   the	   picture	   is	   again	   a	   mixed	   one.	   	   On	   the	   one	   hand,	   a	  
number	   of	   provisions	   covered	   by	   the	   WTO	   are	   also	   mentioned	   in	   the	   text	   of	   these	  
PTAs	   and	   many	   appear	   to	   have	   legally	   enforceable	   status.	   On	   the	   other	   hand,	  
provisions	  that	  fall	  outside	  of	  the	  WTO	  mandates	  but	  are	  covered	  by	  PTAs	  and	  are	  
also	  deemed	  legally	  enforceable	  by	  the	  text	  of	  the	  PTA	  are	  far	  fewer	  in	  number.	  This,	  
in	  itself,	  permits	  some	  skepticism	  on	  how	  much	  deeper	  PTAs,	  on	  average,	  have	  gone	  
beyond	  the	  possibilities	  offered	  by	  the	  WTO.	  Whether	  harmonization	  at	  the	  bilateral	  
level	   itself	   is	   optimal	   and	   whether	   or	   not	   the	   additional	   provisions	   will	   have	  
significant	   economic	   effects	   (for	   instance,	   on	   the	   bilateral	   flow	   of	   investments)	  
remain	  open	  questions	  for	  future	  research.	  
	  
Two	  final	  comments	  may	  be	  made	  relating	  to	  casual	  commentary	  on	  PTAs	  
	  
The	  rest	  of	  the	  paper	  considers	  each	  of	  these	  arguments	  in	  turn.	  


4	  See	  Lawrence	  (1997).	  
	  
	  
II.	  How	  Much	  Trade	  Has	  Been	  Liberalized	  Through	  PTAs?	  
	  
	  
A	  major	  argument	  made	  by	  the	  proponents	  of	  regionalism	  concerns	  the	  slow	  pace	  of	  
the	   multilateral	   process	   in	   achieving	   trade	   liberalization.	   With	   this	   as	   background	  
we	   may	   ask	   how	   much	   trade	   has	   actually	   been	   liberalized	   by	   preferential	   trade	  
agreements	   and	   whether	   countries	   have	   managed	   to	   liberalize,	   through	   bilateral	  
agreements,	   trade	   that	   they	   have	   been	   otherwise	   been	   unable	   to	   liberalize	  
multilaterally.5	  
	  
The	  analysis	  provided	  by	  the	  recent	  World	  Trade	  Report	  (WTR)	  2011	  is	  instructive	  
in	   this	   regard.	   The	   WTR	   reports	   that	   there	   has	   been	   a	   significant	   increase	   in	   the	  
value	   of	   trade	   taking	   place	   between	   PTA	   members.	   In	   1990,	   trade	   between	   PTA	  
partners	  made	  up	  around	  18	  percent	  of	  world	  trade	  and	  that	  this	  figure	  rose	  to	  35	  
percent	   by	   2008	   (in	   both	   cases,	   the	   figures	   indicated	   exclude	   intra-­‐EU	   trade).	   When	  
the	  European	  Union	  is	  included,	  intra-­‐PTA	  trade	  rose	  from	  about	  28	  percent	  in	  1990	  
to	   a	   little	   over	   50	   percent	   of	   world	   trade.	   In	   dollar	   terms,	   the	   value	   of	   intra-­‐PTA	  
trade,	   excluding	   the	   EU	   countries,	   rose	   from	   537	   billion	   USD	   in	   1990	   to	   4	   trillion	  
USD	  by	  2008	  and	  from	  966	  billion	  to	  nearly	  8	  trillion	  once	  the	  EU	  is	  included.	  This	  
suggests	   that	   by	   now	   a	   large	   share	   of	   world	   trade	   is	   taking	   place	   between	   PTA	  
members.	   However,	   as	   the	   WTR	   points	   out,	   these	   statistics	   vastly	   overstate	   the	  
extent	   of	   preferential	   trade	   liberalization	   and	   thus	   the	   extent	   of	   preferential	   trade	  
that	  is	  taking	  place.	  This	  is	  so	  because	  much	  of	  the	  trade	  between	  PTA	  members	  is	  in	  
goods	  on	  which	  they	  impose	  MFN	  tariffs	  of	  zero	  in	  the	  first	  place.	  And	  goods	  which	  
are	   subject	   to	   high	   MFN	   tariffs	   are	   also	   often	   subject	   to	   exemptions	   from	  
liberalization	  under	  PTAs,	  so	  that	  the	  volume	  of	  trade	  that	  benefits	  from	  preferences	  
is,	  on	  average,	  quite	  low.	  	  

5	  As	  is	  discussed	  in	  the	  next	  section,	  increases	  in	  intra-­‐PTA	  trade	  volumes,	  often	  cited	  as	  an	  indication	  

of	  the	  success	  of	  a	  given	  PTA,	  are	  not	  necessarily	  welfare	  improving,	  as	  they	  may	  be	  “trade	  diverting”	  
flows.	   Thus,	   increased	   intra-­‐PTA	   trade	   flows	   which	   are	   often	   cited	   However,	   we	   set	   this	   concern	  
aside	  for	  the	  present	  discussion.
	  
Specifically,	   WTR	   calculations	   indicate	   that	   despite	   the	   recent	   explosion	   in	   PTAs,	  
only	  about	  16	  percent	  of	  world	  trade	  takes	  place	  on	  a	  preferential	  basis	  (the	  figure	  
rises	   to	   30	   percent	   when	   intra-­‐EU	   trade	   is	   included	   in	   the	   calculations).	  
Furthermore,	  less	  than	  2	  percent	  of	  trade	  (4	  percent	  when	  the	  EU	  is	  included)	  takes	  
place	   in	   goods	   which	   receive	   a	   tariff	   preference	   that	   is	   greater	   than	   10	   percent.	   	   For	  
instance,	  well	  over	  50	  percent	  of	  Korean	  imports	  enter	  with	  zero	  MFN	  tariffs	  applied	  
to	   them.	   Korea	   offers	   preferences	   to	   about	   10	   percent	   of	   its	   imports,	   but	   a	  
preference	   margin	   greater	   than	   10	   percent	   on	   virtually	   none	   of	   its	   imports.	  
Similarly,	  in	  India,	  goods	  entering	  under	  preference	  are	  about	  five	  percent	  of	  overall	  
imports	   with	   over	   50	   percent	   of	   imports	   coming	   in	   under	   zero	   MFN	   tariffs	   and	  
virtually	   no	   imports	   receiving	   a	   preference	   of	   greater	   than	   10	   percent.	   A	   similar	  
picture	   emerges	   on	   the	   exporting	   side.	   One	   of	   the	   countries	   that	   has	   actively	  
negotiated	  PTAs	  is	  Chile	  and	  95	  percent	  of	  Chilean	  exports	  go	  to	  countries	  that	  it	  has	  
a	  PTA	  with.	  However,	  only	  27	  percent	  of	  Chilean	  exports	  are	  eligible	  for	  preferential	  
treatment	  and	  only	  3	  percent	  of	  its	  exports	  benefit	  from	  preference	  margins	  greater	  
than	  10	  percent.	  Table	  I	  provides	  an	  additional	  breakdown	  of	  the	  volumes	  of	  trade	  
that	   enter	   on	   a	   preferential	   and	   on	   an	   MFN	   basis	   for	   a	   number	   of	   sample	   PTAs.	  
Clearly	  for	  most	  PTAs	  the	  majority	  of	  their	  trade	  takes	  place	  under	  zero	  MFN	  tariffs.	  
It	   is	   only	   a	   small	   fraction	   of	   trade	   that	   enters	   on	   a	   preferential	   basis,	   especially	  
outside	  of	  the	  EU	  and	  NAFTA.	  
	  
Taken	   together,	   the	   preceding	   statistics	   suggest	   that	   the	   extent	   of	   trade	  
liberalization	   undertaken	   through	   PTAs	   has	   been	   quite	   modest,	   despite	   the	   large	  
number	   of	   PTAs	   that	   have	   in	   fact	   been	   negotiated.	   These	   observations	   challenge	   the	  
claim	   by	   proponents	   of	   regionalism	   that	   preferential	   agreements	   are	   a	   faster	   or	  
more	   efficient	   way	   of	   achieving	   trade	   liberalization.6	  At	   some	   level	   this	   should	   not	  


6	  In	  addition,	  it	  may	  be	  noted	  that	  the	  discussion	  and	  negotiation	  over	  particular	  PTAs	  has	  sometimes	  

also	  taken	  a	  significant	  amount	  of	  time	  –	  comparable	  to	  the	  duration	  of	  multilateral	  trade	  negotiation	  
rounds	   at	   the	   WTO.	   For	   instance,	   the	   CAFTA-­‐DR	   agreement,	   a	   free	   trade	   area	   between	   the	   United	  
States	   and	   the	   Central	   American	   countries	   of	   Costa	   Rica,	   El	   Salvador,	   Guatemala,	   Honduras	   and	  
Nicaragua	   and	   the	   Dominican	   Republic	   took	   well	   over	   a	   decade,	   from	   1992	   when	   it	   was	   initially	  
perhaps	   be	   too	   surprising.	   It	   is	   widely	   understood	   that	   a	   major	   factor	   working	  
against	   trade	   liberalization	   is	   the	   political	   opposition	   of	   the	   import	   competing	  
lobbies.	  If	  this	  is	  the	  case,	  it	  is	  unclear	  why	  lobbies	  that	  oppose	  trade	  liberalization	  
at	   the	   multilateral	   level	   would	   easily	   support	   liberalization	   undertaken	   on	   a	  
preferential	   basis.	   We	   should	   therefore	   expect	   that	   political	   lobbies	   would	   mostly	  
only	   permit	   preferential	   agreements	   in	   which	   their	   rents	   were	   protected,	   either	  
through	   access	   to	   partner	   country	   markets,	   or	   ,	   more	   simply,	   through	   an	   exemption	  
of	   liberalization	   on	   imports	   of	   those	   goods	   that	   compete	   with	   their	   own	   production,	  
suggesting	  complementarities	  between	  MFN	  and	  PTA	  tariffs.	  	  
	  
To	   explore	   the	   question	   of	   whether	   MFN	   tariffs	   and	   PTA	   tariffs	   are	   indeed	  
complements,	   Baldwin	   and	   Seghezza	   (2010)	   examined	   correlations	   between	   MFN	  
and	   PTA	   tariffs	   at	   the	   10	   digit	   level	   of	   disaggregation	   for	   23	   of	   the	   top	   exporting	  
countries	   within	   the	   WTO	   (for	   which	   data	   was	   available).	   Consistent	   with	   the	  
preceding	   discussion,	   they	   find	   that	   MFN	   tariffs	   and	   PTA	   tariffs	   are	   complements,	  
since	  the	  margin	  of	  preferences	  tends	  to	  be	  low	  or	  zero	  for	  products	  where	  nations	  
apply	  high	  tariffs.	  This	  finding	  of	  complementarity	  has	  been	  confirmed	  in	  the	  more	  
detailed	   studies	   by	   Joshi	   (2010a	   and	   2010b)	   for	   NAFTA	   and	   the	   EU.	   All	   of	   these	  
studies	   suggest	   that	   third	   factors,	   such	   as	   vested	   sectoral	   interests,	   drive	   trade	  
policy	   at	   both	   the	   multilateral	   and	   the	   bilateral	   level.	   The	   implication	   is	   that	   we	  
should	   not	   expect	   liberalization	   that	   is	   difficult	   at	   the	   multilateral	   level,	   to	  
necessarily	  proceed	  easily	  at	  the	  bilateral	  level.	  
	  
III.	  Trade	  Creation	  and	  Trade	  Diversion	  
	  
	  
Does	  preferential	  trade	  liberalization	  in	  favor	  of	  particular	  trading	  partners	  have	  the	  
same	  welfare	  consequences	  as	  non-­‐discriminatory	  trade	  liberalization	  in	  favor	  of	  all	  
imports?	  Do	  a	  simple	  proportion	  of	  the	  welfare	  benefits	  of	  non-­‐discriminatory	  free	  
trade	   accrue	   with	   preferential	   liberalization?	   	   Are	   free	   trade	   areas	   to	   be	   equated	  


conceived	  to	  2009	  when	  it	  came	  into	  effect	  in	  all	  of	  the	  member	  countries.
with	  free	   trade?	   A	   thorough	   answer	  to	  these	  questions	  would	   require	   a	   deep	   plunge	  
into	  the	  abstruse	  world	  of	  the	  second-­‐best	  (whose	  existence	  and	  complexities	  were	  
indeed	   first	   discovered	   and	   developed	   by	   analysts	   working	   on	   the	   economics	   of	  
PTAs).	   But	   the	   idea	   may	   be	   introduced	   in	   a	   rudimentary	   fashion	   using	   the	   following	  
“textbook"	   representation	   of	   Viner’s	   (1950)	   classic	   analysis:	   Consider	   the	   case	   of	  
two	   countries,	   A	   and	   B,	   and	   the	   rest	   of	   the	   world	   W.	   A	   is	   our	   “home"	   country.	   A	  
produces	  a	  good	  and	  trades	  it	  for	  the	  exports	  of	  its	  trading	  partners	  B	  and	  W.	  Both	  B	  
and	   W	   are	   assumed	   to	   export	   the	   same	   good	   and	   offer	   it	   to	   A	   at	   a	   fixed	   (but	  
different)	   price.	   Initially,	   imports	   from	   B	   and	   W	   are	   subject	   to	   non-­‐discriminatory	  
trade	  restrictions:	  tariffs	  against	  B	  and	  W	  are	  equal.	  Imagine	  now	  that	  A	  eliminates	  
its	  tariffs	  against	  B	  while	  maintaining	  its	  tariffs	  against	  W.	  This	  is	  preferential	  tariff	  
reduction	  as	  opposed	  to	  free	  trade,	  since	  the	  latter	  would	  require	  that	  tariffs	  against	  
W	   be	   removed	   as	   well.	   It	   is	   very	   tempting	   to	   think	   that	   this	   reduction	   of	   tariffs	  
against	   B	   is	   a	   step	   in	   the	   direction	   of	   free	   trade	   and	   therefore	   that	   this	   ought	   to	  
deliver	  to	  country	  A	  a	  proportionate	  fraction	  of	  the	  benefits	  of	  complete	  free	  trade.	  
But	  Viner	  showed	  that	  this	  need	  not	  (and	  generally	  would	  not)	  be	  the	  case.	  Indeed,	  
while	  a	  complete	  move	  towards	  free	  trade	  would	  be	  welfare	  improving	  for	  country	  
A,	  Viner	  demonstrated	  that	  the	  tariff	  preference	  granted	  to	  B	  through	  the	  FTA	  could	  
in	  fact	  worsen	  A’s	  welfare.	  
	  
Figures	   I	   and	   II	   illustrate	   preferential	   tariff	   reform	   as	   respectively	   welfare-­‐
enhancing	   and	   welfare	   worsening.	   The	   y-­‐axes	   denote	   price	   and	   the	   x-­‐axes	   denote	  
quantities.	   M A 	  denotes	   the	   import	   demand	   curve	   of	   country	   A.	   EB 	  and	   EW 	  denote	  

the	   price	   at	   which	   countries	   B	   and	   W	   are	   willing	   to	   supply	   A’s	   demand;	   they	  
represent	   the	   export	   supply	   curves	   of	   B	   and	   W	   respectively.	   In	   Figure	   I,	   B	   is	  
assumed	  to	  be	  a	  more	  efficient	  supplier	  of	  A’s	  import	  than	  is	  W:	   EB 	  is	  drawn	  below

   EW ,	   and	   its	   export	   price	   PB 	  is	   less	   than	   W’s	   export	   price	   PW .	   Let	   “ T "	   denote	   the	  
non-­‐discriminatory	  per-­‐unit	  tariff	  that	  is	  applied	  against	  B	  and	  W.	  This	  renders	  the	  
tariff-­‐inclusive	   price	   to	   importers	   in	   A	   as	   PB + T 	  and	   PW + T 	  respectively.	   With	   this	  
non-­‐discriminatory	   tariff	   in	   place,	   imports	   initially	   equal	   M 0 	  and	   the	   good	   is	  

entirely	   imported	   from	   B.	   Tariff	   revenues	   in	   this	   initial	   situation	   equal	   the	   areas	  
(1+2).	   When	   tariffs	   against	   B	   are	   eliminated	   preferentially,	   imports	   rise	   to	   M PT .	  

Imports	  continue	  to	  come	  entirely	  from	  B	  (since	  the	  import	  price	  from	  B	  now,	   PB ,	  is	  

lower	   than	   the	   tariff-­‐inclusive	   price	   of	   imports	   from	   W,	   PW + T ).	   The	   tariff	  

preferences	  granted	  to	  B	  simply	  increase	  the	  volume	  of	  imports.	  This	  increase	  in	  the	  
volume	  of	  trade	  with	  the	  country	  whose	  exports	  were	  initially	  being	  purchased	  by	  A	  
anyway	   (i.e.,	   with	   the	   more	   efficient	   producer)	   when	   tariffs	   against	   it	   are	  
preferentially	  reduced	  is	  referred	  to	  as	  “trade	  creation."	  Trade	  creation	  here	  can	  be	  
shown	   to	   be	   welfare	   improving.	   The	   increase	   in	   benefit	   to	   consumers	   (consumer	  
surplus)	   in	   A	   following	   the	   reduction	   in	   consumption	   prices	   from	   PB + T 	  to	   PB 	  

equals	  the	  areas	  (1	  +	  2	  +	  3	  +	  4).	  No	  tariff	  revenue	  is	  now	  earned	  and	  so	  the	  loss	  of	  
tariff	  revenue	  equals	  areas	  (1+2).	  The	  overall	  gain	  to	  A	  from	  this	  preferential	  tariff	  
reduction	   equals	   areas	   (1+2+3+4)	   -­‐	   (1+2)	   =	   areas	   (3+4),	   a	   positive	   number.	   The	  
trade-­‐creating	  tariff	  preference	  is	  thus	  welfare	  improving.	  	  
	  
In	  demonstrating	  that	  the	  tariff	  preference	  we	  have	  considered	  is	  welfare	  improving	  
for	  the	  home	  country,	  A,	  we	  have	  assumed	  that	  the	  partner	  which	  receives	  this	  tariff	  
preference,	   B,	   is	   the	   more	   efficient	   supplier	   of	   the	   good.	   Figure	   II	   reverses	   this	  
assumption,	  making	  W,	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world,	  the	  more	  efficient	  supplier	  of	  the	  good.	  
   EW 	  is	   thus	   drawn	   below	   EB .	   Initial	   imports	   are M 0 .	   The	   tariff	   revenue	   collected	   is	  
equal	   to	   the	   areas	   (1+2).	   When	   tariffs	   are	   eliminated	   against	   B,	   the	   less	   efficient	  
partner,	   the	   tariff-­‐inclusive	   price	   of	   imports	   from	   W	   is	   higher	   than	   the	   tariff-­‐
exclusive	   price	   from	   B	   (this	   need	   not	   necessarily	   be	   the	   case,	   it	   is	   simply	   so	   as	  
drawn).	  This	  implies	  that	  all	  trade	  is	  now	  “diverted"	  away	  from	  W	  to	  B.	  What	  is	  the	  
welfare	   consequence	   of	   this	   trade	   diversion?	   The	   increase	   in	   consumer	   surplus	   is	  
equal	   to	   the	   areas	   (1+3)	   since	   consumers	   now	   pay	   a	   price	   equal	   to	   PB 	  for	   this	   good.	  

The	  loss	  in	  tariff	  revenue	  is	  (1+2).	  The	  overall	  gain	  to	  A	  equals	  the	  area	  (3-­‐2),	  which	  
mayor	   may	   not	   be	   positive.	   Thus	   a	   trade	   diverting	   tariff	   preference	   may	   lead	   to	   a	  
welfare	  reduction.7	  	  
	  
The	   preceding	   discussion	   leaves	   us	   with	   three	   important	   implications.	   First,	  
liberalization	   undertaken	   in	   a	   preferential	   context	   may	   actually	   result	   in	   a	   greater	  
degree	  of	  trade	  protection	  (for	  inefficient	  partners).	  Second,	  measured	  increases	  in	  
intra-­‐PTA	   trade	   volumes	   do	   not	   automatically	   indicate	   an	   improved	   economic	  
outcome.	   Finally,	   the	   possibility	   of	   welfare	   reducing	   liberalization	   clearly	  
distinguishes	  preferential	  liberalization	  from	  multilateral	  liberalization.	  
	  
A	   variety	   of	   recent	   contributions	   in	   the	   economics	   literature	   have	   examined	   the	  
trade	   creating	   and	   trade	   diverting	   effects	   of	   preferential	   agreements.	   In	   a	   recent	  
paper,	   Romalis	   (2007),	   investigates	   the	   effects	   of	   NAFTA	   and	   the	   previously	   formed	  
Canada-­‐US	   Free	   Trade	   Agreement	   (CUSFTA)	   on	   trade	   flows.	   Romalis	   finds	   that	  
NAFTA	  and	  CUSFTA	  had	  a	  substantial	  impact	  on	  international	  trade	  volumes,	  but	  a	  
modest	  effect	  on	  prices	  and	  welfare.	  While	  he	  finds	  that	  while	  NAFTA	  and	  CUSFTA	  
increased	   North	   American	   output	   in	   many	   highly	   protected	   sectors,	   imports	   from	  
non-­‐member	  countries	  were	  driven	  out,	  suggesting	  trade	  diversionary	  effects.	  Other	  
papers	   analyzing	   the	   trade	   effects	   of	   CUSFTA	   include	   Clausing	   (2001)	   and	   Trefler	  
(2004).	   Using	   cross	   sectional	   variation	   in	   the	   extent	   of	   trade	   liberalization,	   both	  
papers	   attempt	   to	   estimate	   the	   relative	   magnitudes	   of	   trade	   creation	   and	   trade	  
diversion	  caused	  by	  CUSFTA.	  Both	  analyses	  find	  that	  trade	  creation	  dominated	  trade	  
diversion	  and	  Trefler	  (2004)	  reports	  a	  positive	  welfare	  outcome	  for	  Canada	  overall.	  
	  
A	   number	   of	   studies	   have	   used	   “gravity”	   specifications	   to	   examine	   the	   impact	   of	  
preferential	   trade	   agreements	   on	   trade.	   Two	   prominent	   recent	   examples	   include	  
7
  The	   preceding	   examples	   illustrate	   a	   central	   issue	   emphasized	   in	   the	   academic	   literature	   on	   the	  
welfare	   consequences	   of	   preferential	   trade.	   Preferential	   trade	   liberalization	   towards	   the	   country	  
from	  whom	  the	  good	  was	  imported	  in	  the	  initial	  non-­‐discriminatory	  situation	  creates	  more	  trade	  and	  
increases	   welfare;	   preferential	   liberalization	   that	   diverts	   trade	   instead	   may	   reduce	   welfare.	  
Subsequent	   analysis	   also	   developed	   examples	   of	   both	   welfare	   improving	   trade-­‐diversion	   and	  
welfare-­‐decreasing	  trade	  creation	  in	  general	  equilibrium	  contexts	  broader	  than	  those	  considered	  by	  
Viner.	   However,	   the	   intuitive	   appeal	   of	   the	   concepts	   of	   trade	   creation	   and	   trade	   diversion	   has	  
ensured	  their	  continued	  use	  in	  the	  economic	  analysis	  of	  preferential	  trade	  agreements,	  especially	  in	  
policy	  analysis	  (see	  Panagariya	  (2000)	  for	  a	  comprehensive	  survey).
Magee	   (2008)	   and	   Baier	   and	   Bergstrand	   (2007).	   Using	   panel	   data	   from	   over	   a	  
hundred	  countries	  going	  nearly	  two	  decades	  (1980-­‐1998),	  Magee	  (2008)	  estimates	  
trade	  creation	  and	  trade	  diversion	  effects	  of	  preferential	  trade	  agreements	  and	  finds	  
this	  trade	  and	  welfare	  impact	  to	  be	  small,	  although	  trade	  creation	  dominates	  trade	  
diversion	   in	   his	   analysis.	   Using	   a	   similar	   sample	   of	   countries,	   but	   going	   back	   further	  
in	  time	  (1960-­‐2000),	  Baier	  and	  Bergstrand	  (2007)	  estimate	  trade	  creation	  effects	  by	  
considering	   explicitly	   the	   endogeneity	   of	   preferential	   trade	   agreements	   (but	  
excluding	   by	   assumption	   any	   trade	   diversion	   effects)	   using	   the	   following	  
specification.	  Baier	  and	  Bergstrand	  find	  the	  endogeneity	  of	  trade	  agreements	  to	  be	  
crucial,	   and	   report	   that	   accounting	   for	   this	   endogeneity	   raises	   by	   about	   five	   times	  
the	  estimate	  of	  the	  increase	  in	  trade	  flows	  between	  member	  countries	  (see	  Table	  II).	  
Specifically,	   trade	   between	   member	   countries	   is	   predicted	   to	   double	   in	   ten	   years	  
after	  the	  formation	  of	  the	  FTA.8	  	  
	  
The	   preceding	   discussion	   covers	   only	   a	   small	   sample	   of	   the	   research	   quantifying	  
trade	   creation	   and	   trade	   diversion	   effects	   with	   trade	   preferences.	   Nevertheless,	   it	  
should	  suffice	  to	  illustrate	  the	  wide	  range	  of	  estimates	  that	  have	  been	  obtained.	  On	  
the	  one	  hand,	  the	  findings	  in	  many	  papers	  suggest	  that	  changes	  in	  trade	  flows	  due	  to	  
trade	  preferences	  will	  be	  small.	  On	  the	  other,	  hand,	  some	  papers	  have	  suggested	  the	  
possibility	   of	   significant	   trade	   diversion,	   while	   others	   have	   estimated	   large	   trade	  
creation	  effects.	  The	  evidence	  is	  clearly	  mixed.	  	  
	  
One	   study	   that	   is	   additionally	   noteworthy,	   because	   of	   its	   detailed	   and	   unusual	   focus	  
on	  changes	  in	  industry	  trade	  flows	  as	  related	  to	  patterns	  of	  comparative	  advantage	  
is	   Yeats	   (1998)	   which	   investigated	   trade	   diversion	   within	   PTAs	   by	   performing	   an	  
evaluation	  of	  trade	  patterns	  within	  MERCOSUR.	  Specifically,	  to	  study	  the	  impact	  of	  
MERCOSUR	  on	  trade	  patters,	  Yeats	  (1998)	  characterized	  goods	  using	  two	  measures.	  
The	  first	  measure	  is	  a	  “regional	  orientation”	  index	  (for	  good	  i)	  which	  is	  the	  ratio	  of	  
the	   share	   of	   that	   good	   in	   exports	   to	   the	   region	   to	   its	   share	   in	   exports	   to	   third	  

8	  However,	   as	   we	   have	   indicated	   before,	   increases	   in	   intra-­‐PTA	   trade	   are	   not	   necessarily	   welfare	  

improving.	  For	  this	  to	  be	  ascertained,	  the	  extent	  of	  trade	  diversion	  has	  to	  be	  determined	  as	  well.
countries.	  Specifically,	  	  	  
	  
           [(Within MERCOSUR exports of good i)/( Within MERCOSUR exports)]
   ROi =
                [(MERCOSUR exports of good i)/(Total MERCOSUR exports)]     	  


The	   second	   measure	   is	   the	   “revealed	   comparative	   advantage”	   (of	   good	   i)	   which	   is	  
the	  ratio	  of	  the	  share	  of	  good	  in	  MERCOSUR’s	  exports	  to	  third	  countries	  to	  its	  share	  
in	  world	  exports	  (exclusive	  of	  intra-­‐MERCOSUR	  trade).	  	  Specifically,	  
	  
            [(MERCOSUR exports of good i)/(Total MERCOSUR exports)]
   RCAi =
                 [(World exports of good i)/(Total World exports)]  	  


Yeats	  then	  compares	  the	  change	  in	  goods’	  regional	  orientation	  index	  between	  1988	  
and	   1994	   (before	   and	   after	   MERCOSUR)	   with	   their	   revealed	   comparative	   advantage	  
ranking.	  	  The	  results	  of	  his	  study	  are	  striking.	  As	  he	  notes,	  the	  goods	  with	  the	  largest	  
increase	   in	   regional	   orientation	   are	   goods	   with	   very	   low	   revealed	   comparative	  
advantage	   rankings.	   Specifically,	   for	   the	   30	   groups	   of	   goods	   with	   the	   largest	  
increases	   in	   regional	   orientation,	   only	   two	   had	   revealed	   comparative	   advantage	  
indices	  above	  unity	  (see	  Table	  II).	  That	  is,	  the	  largest	  increases	  in	  intra-­‐MERCOSUR	  
trade	   have	   been	   in	   goods	   in	   which	   MERCOSUR	   countries	   lack	   comparative	  
advantage	  suggesting	  strong	  trade	  diversionary	  effects.	  This	  is	  a	  striking	  finding	  and	  
provides	   a	   cautionary	   note	   against	   the	   dismissals	   of	   trade	   diversion	   as	   a	   merely	  
theoretical	  concern.	  
	  
Bhagwati	   (2008)	   has	   discussed	   a	   variety	   of	   additional	   issue	   surrounding	   the	  
question	  of	  trade	  diversion	  in	  practice.	  For	  instance,	  even	  though	  Article	  XXIV	  of	  the	  
GATT	   prevents	   PTA	   countries	   from	   raising	   their	   tariffs	   against	   non-­‐member	  
countries,	   this	   restriction	   applies	   to	   the	   MFN	   tariff	   bindings	   agreed	   to	   by	   the	  
member	  countries	  at	  the	  WTO.	  In	  practice,	  MFN	  tariffs	  applied	  by	  countries	  often	  lie	  
below	  these	  bound	  tariffs.	  Thus	  despite	  the	  disciplines	  imposed	  by	  Article	  XXIV,	  PTA	  
countries	   are	   able	   to	   raise	   their	   barriers	   against	   non-­‐members	   from	   the	   applied	  
level	  up	  to	  the	  bound	  level	  (thus	  increasing	  the	  worry	  of	  trade	  diversion),	  as	  was	  the	  
case	  with	  Mexico	  following	  NAFTA.	  	  Furthermore,	  	  external	  barriers	  may	  be	  raised	  
through	   other	   forms	   of	   administered	   protection,	   such	   as	   anti-­‐dumping	   duties	  
(which	   we	   discuss	   in	   greater	   detail	   in	   section	   IV.3).	   Finally,	   the	   extensive	   use	   of	  
“rules	   of	   origin”	   in	   PTAs	   which	   purport	   to	   determine	   the	   origin	   of	   goods	   so	   as	   to	  
determine	   whether	   they	   qualify	   for	   trade	   preferences	   offered	   by	   the	   PTA,	   raise	  
protection	   to	   suppliers	   of	   intermediate	   goods	   within	   the	   PTA	   and	   may	   thus	   divert	  
trade	  away	  from	  more	  efficient	  suppliers	  of	  intermediates	  outside.	  
	  
	  
III.	  1	  External	  Terms	  of	  Trade	  
	  
Thus	   far,	   we	   have	   focused	   our	   discussion	   largely	   on	   trade	   flows	   and	   welfare	  
consequences	   of	   preferential	   trade	   liberalization	   on	   the	   countries	   undertaking	   the	  
liberalization.	  While	  we	  have	  not	  explicitly	  considered	  this	  so	  far,	  it	  should	  be	  easy	  
to	  see	  that	  changes	  in	  demand	  by	  PTA	  members	  for	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world’s	  exports	  
could	  lower	  the	  relative	  price	  of	  these	  exports	  (i.e.,	  worsens	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world’s	  
terms	  of	  trade).	  In	  general,	  the	  overall	  effect	  on	  the	  external	  terms	  of	  trade	  may	  be	  
seen	  as	  a	  combination	  of	  income	  and	  substitution	  effects.	  The	  former	  represents	  the	  
effect	   of	   real	   income	   changes	   due	   to	   the	   PTA	   on	   demand	   for	   imports	   from	   non-­‐
members	   and	   the	   latter	   reflects	   the	   substitution	   in	   trade	   towards	   from	   partner	  
countries	   (and	   away	   from	   non-­‐member)	   due	   to	   the	   preferences	   in	   trade.	   In	   the	   case	  
of	  a	  real-­‐income	  reducing	  PTA,	  both	  effects	  would	  combine	  to	  lower	  demand	  from	  
the	   rest	   of	   the	   world.	   This	   is	   also	   the	   case	   when	   substitution	   effects	   dominate	   the	  
income	  effect.9	  
	  
Some	  indication	  of	  how	  the	  terms	  of	  trade	  may	  change	  for	  non-­‐member	  countries	  in	  
practice	   is	   provided	   by	   the	   empirical	   analysis	   of	   Chang	   and	   Winters	   (2002)	   who	  	  

9See	   Mundell	   (1964)	   for	   an	   analysis	   if	   how	   such	   extra-­‐union	   terms	   of	   trade	   effects	   may	   complicate	  

matters	  further	  for	  the	  tariff-­‐reducing	  country,	  whose	  terms	  of	  trade	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  
world	  may	  rise	  or	  fall	  following	  a	  preferential	  reduction	  in	  its	  tariffs	  against	  a	  particular	  partner.	  On	  
this	  point	  see	  also	  the	  recent	  analysis	  by	  Panagariya	  (1997)	  
	  
examine	  the	  impact	  of	  MERCOSUR	  (specifically,	  the	  exemption	  in	  tariffs	  that	  Brazil	  
provided	   to	   its	   MERCOSUR	   partners)	   on	   the	   terms-­‐of-­‐trade	   (export	   prices)	   of	  
countries	  excluded	  from	  the	  agreement.	  Theory	  would	  suggest	  that	  trade	  diversion	  
would	   worsen	   the	   terms	   of	   trade	   of	   excluded	   countries	   and	   this	   indeed	   is	   what	   they	  
find.	   They	   report	   significant	   declines	   in	   the	   export	   prices	   of	   the	   Brazil’s	   major	  
trading	   partners	   (the	   United	   States,	   Japan,	   Germany	   and	   Korea)	   following	  
MERCOSUR.	   (See	   Figure	   YYY).	   These	   associated	   welfare	   losses	   sustained	   by	   the	  
excluded	   countries	   are	   significant	   as	   well	   –	   amounting	   to	   roughly	   ten	   percent	   of	   the	  
value	   of	   their	   exports	   to	   Brazil.	  For	   instance,	   the	   United	   States	   is	   estimated	   to	   lose	  
somewhere	   between	   	   550	   to	   600	   million	   dollars	   on	   exports	   of	   about	   5.5	   billion	  
dollars	   with	   Germany	   losing	   between	   170	   and	   236	   million	   dollars	   on	   exports	   of	  
about	  2	  billion	  dollars.	  
	  
	  
IV.	  Preferential	  Trade	  Agreements	  and	  the	  Multilateral	  Trade	  System	  	  	  
	  
IV.	  1	  Expansion	  of	  Trade	  Blocs	  -­‐	  Theory	  
	  
Stimulated	   by	   the	   theoretical	   results	   concerning	   the	   generally	   ambiguous	   welfare	  
results	   associated	   with	   trade	   preferences,	   an	   important	   literature	   has	   studied	   the	  
design	   of	   necessarily-­‐welfare-­‐improving	   PTAs.	   A	   classic	   result	   stated	   independently	  
by	  Kemp	  (1964)	  and	  Vanek	  (1965)	  and	  proved	  subsequently	  by	  Ohyama	  (1972)	  and	  
Kemp	   and	   Wan	   (1976)	   provides	   a	   welfare-­‐improving	   solution	   for	   the	   case	   of	   CUs.	  
Starting	  from	  a	  situation	  with	  an	  arbitrary	  structure	  of	  trade	  barriers,	  if	  two	  or	  more	  
countries	   freeze	   their	   net	   external	   trade	   vector	   with	   the	   rest	   of	   the	   world	   through	   a	  
set	  of	  common	  external	  tariffs	  and	  eliminate	  the	  barriers	  to	  internal	  trade	  (implying	  
the	   formation	   of	   a	   CU),	   the	   welfare	   of	   the	   union	   as	   a	   whole	   necessarily	   improves	  
(weakly)	   and	   that	   of	   the	   rest	   of	   the	   world	   does	   not	   fall.10	  The	   Kemp-­‐Wan-­‐Ohyama	  


10	  The	   logic	   behind	   the	   Kemp-­‐Wan	   theorem	   is	   as	   follows:	   	   By	   fixing	   the	   combined,	   net	   extra-­‐union	  

trade	  vector	  of	  member	  countries	  at	  its	  pre-­‐union	  level,	  non-­‐member	  countries	  are	  guaranteed	  their	  
original	  level	  of	  welfare.	  Since	  there	  is	  no	  diversion	  of	  trade	  in	  this	  case,	  the	  welfare	  of	  the	  member	  
analysis	   of	   welfare	   improving	   CUs	   does	   not	   automatically	   extend	   to	   FTAs	   since	  
member-­‐specific	   tariff	   vectors	   in	   the	   case	   of	   FTAs	   imply	   that	   domestic-­‐prices	   will	  
differ	   across	   member	   countries.	   Panagariya	   and	   Krishna	   (2002)	   has,	   nevertheless,	  
recently	   provided	   a	   corresponding	   construction	   of	   necessarily	   welfare-­‐improving	  
FTAs	   in	   complete	   analogy	   with	   the	   Kemp-­‐Wan	   CU.	   	   Taken	   together,	   these	  
contributions	   suggest	   that,	   in	   principle,	   preferential	   trade	   agreements	   could	   expand	  
sequentially	  to	  include	  the	  whole	  world,	  while	  monotonically	  raising	  welfare	  along	  
the	  way.	  	  
	  
But	  will	  PTAs	  expand	  successively	  to	  eventually	  include	  all	  trading	  nations?	  11	  	   Will	  
preferential	   liberalization	   prove	   a	   quicker	   and	   more	   efficient	   way	   of	   getting	   to	  
global	   free	   trade	   than	   a	   multilateral	   process?12	  	   These	   questions	   concerning	   the	  
interaction	   between	   preferential	   trade	   liberalization	   and	   the	   multilateral	   trade	  
system	  are	  important	  and	  complex	  in	  that	  they	  involve	  economic	  considerations	  and	  
political	   factors	   as	   well.	   Recently,	   several	   attempts	   have	   been	   made	   in	   the	   economic	  
literature	   to	   understand	   the	   phenomenon	   of	   preferential	   trade	   and	   its	   interaction	  
with	   the	   multilateral	   trade	   system	  -­‐-­‐	   taking	   into	   account	   the	   domestic	   determinants	  
(political	  and	  economic)	  of	  trade	  policy.	  	  
	  
Levy	  (1997)	  has	  modeled	  trade	  policy	  as	  being	  determined	  by	  majority	  voting	  and	  
where	   income	   distributional	   changes	   brought	   about	   by	   trade	   lead	   to	   different	  
degrees	   of	   support	   (or	   opposition)	   by	   different	   members	   of	   society.	   He	   finds	   that	  
bilateral	  agreements	  could	  preclude	  otherwise	  feasible	  multilateral	  liberalization	  if	  
crucial	   voters	   (or	   more	   generally	   voting	   blocs)	   enjoyed	   a	   greater	   level	   of	   welfare	  
under	   the	   bilateral	   agreement	   than	   they	   would	   under	   multilateral	   free	   trade.	  	  


countries	   is	   also	   not	   adversely	   affected.	   The	   PTA	   thus	   constructed	   has	   a	   common	   internal	   price	  
vector,	   implying	   further	   a	   common	   external	   tariff	   for	   member	   countries.	   The	   Kemp-­‐Wan-­‐Ohyama	  
design,	   by	   freezing	   the	   external	   trade	   vector	   and	   thus	   eliminating	   trade	   diversion,	   offers	   a	   way	   to	  
sidestep	  the	  complexities	  and	  ambiguities	  inherent	  in	  the	  analysis	  of	  PTAs.	  
11	  See	   the	   related	   discussion	   in	   Bhagwati	   (1993)	   of	   what	   Bhagwati	   has	   called	   the	   “dynamic	   time-­‐path	  

question”.	  	  
12	  This	   question	   has	   often	   been	   referred	   to	   in	   the	   literature	   as	   the	   “stumbling-­‐bloc	   versus	   building-­‐

bloc”	  question	  in	  the	  phrasing	  of	  Bhagwati	  (1993).
Grossman	   and	   Helpman	   (1995)	   and	   Krishna	   (1998)	   have	   both	   modeled	   the	  
influence	   of	   powerful	   producers	   in	   decision	   making	   over	   a	   country’s	   entry	   into	   a	  
PTA,	  and	  while	  their	  models	  and	  analytic	  frameworks	  differ	  in	  detail,	  they	  come	  to	  a	  
similar	   and	   striking	   conclusion,	   that	   PTAs	   that	   divert	   trade	   are	   more	   likely	   to	   win	  
internal	   political	   support.	   This	   is	   so	   because	   governments	   must	   respond	   to	  
conflicting	   pressures	   from	   their	   exporting	   sectors,	   which	   gain	   from	   lower	   trade	  
barriers	  in	  the	  partner,	  and	  their	  import-­‐competing	  sectors,	  which	  suffer	  from	  lower	  
trade	   barriers	   at	   home,	   when	   deciding	   on	   whether	   to	   form	   or	   enter	   a	   PTA.	   As	  
Krishna	   (1998)	   argues,	   trade	   diversion	   effectively	   shifts	   the	   burden	   of	   the	   gain	   to	  
member-­‐country	   exporters	   off	   member-­‐country	   import-­‐competing	   sectors	   and	   onto	  
non-­‐member	   producers,	   who	   have	   little	   political	   clout	   inside	   the	   member	   countries.	  
Krishna	   (1998)	   also	   argues	   that	   such	   PTAs	   will	   lower	   the	   incentives	   for	   any	  
subsequent	   multilateral	   liberalization	   − 	  producers	   in	   trade	   diverting	   PTAs	   may	  
oppose	   multilateral	   reform	   since	   this	   would	   take	   away	   the	   gains	   from	   benefits	   of	  
preferential	  access	  that	  they	  enjoyed	  in	  the	  PTA	  that	  diverted	  trade	  to	  them.	  Under	  
some	   circumstances,	   the	   incentive	   for	   further	   multilateral	   liberalization	   is	  
completely	   eliminated.	   Both	   sets	   of	   papers	   we	   have	   discussed	   above	   argue	   that	  
bilateral	   agreements	   could	   impede	   progress	   towards	   multilateral	   free	   trade	   and	  
thus	  undermine	  the	  multilateral	  trade	  system.	  	  
	  
Ornelas	   (2005a)	   reconsiders	   the	   preceding	   analyses	   in	   a	   context	   in	   which	   the	  
external	   tariffs	   are	   determined	   endogenously	   rather	   than	   historically	   set	   (as	  
implicitly	   assumed	   by	   Grossman	   and	   Helpman	   (1995)	   and	   Krishna	   (1998).	   Through	  
general	   equilibrium	   effects	   having	   to	   do	   with	   the	   leakage	   of	   protection	   to	   partner	  
countries	   and	   changes	   in	   the	   difficulty	   of	   redistributing	   surplus	   through	   trade	  
policies	   under	   an	   FTA,	   he	   finds,	   contrary	   to	   Grossman	   and	   Helpman	   (1995)	   and	  
Krishna	  (1998),	  that	  it	  is	  only	  sufficiently	  welfare	  enhancing	  FTAs	  that	  are	  politically	  
viable	   and	   also	   that	   predicts	   that	   external	   tariffs	   will	   fall	   subsequent	   to	   the	  
formation	   of	   an	   FTA.	   However,	   in	   subsequent	   work,	   Ornelas	   (2005b)	   argues	   that	  
when	  political	  lobbies	  are	  also	  allowed	  to	  lobby	  for	  the	  decision	  on	  the	  trade	  regime,	  
one	  cannot	  rule	  out	  the	  political	  viability	  of	  welfare	  reducing	  FTAs.	  	  
	  
Baldwin	   (1995),	   on	   the	   other	   hand,	   has	   argued	   that	   PTA	   expansion	   could	   have	  
“domino"	   effects	   − 	  increasing	   the	   size	   of	   a	   bloc	   increases	   the	   incentive	   for	   others	   to	  
join	   it	   (as	   they	   then	   gain	   preferential	   access	   to	   increasingly	   large	   markets).	   In	  
combination	  with	  his	  “Juggernaut”	  view	  that	  initial	  tariff	  cuts	  will	  lead	  to	  increased	  
momentum	   for	   greater	   trade	   liberalization,13	  he	   argues	   that	   PTAs	   may	   lead	   towards	  
multilateral	  free	  trade.	  
	  
Yi	   (1996),	   using	   advances	   in	   endogenous	   coalition	   theory, 14 	  has	   compared	  
theoretical	   outcomes	   with	   PTAs	   under	   two	   regimes,	   “open”	   membership	   and	  
“unanimous”	   membership.	   Under	   open	   membership	   rules	   any	   country	   interested	   in	  
joining	  an	  existing	  PTA	  is	  able	  to	  do	  so	  while	  under	  unanimous	  membership,	  a	  new	  
country	  may	  join	  only	  if	  all	  existing	  members	  agree	  to	  admit	  the	  new	  member.	  The	  
differences	   in	   outcomes	   are	   striking.	   Global	   free	   trade	   is	   an	   equilibrium	   outcome	  
with	   open	   membership	   rules	   but	   this	   generally	   does	   not	   obtain	   under	   unanimous	  
membership.	  Intuitively,	  while	  some	  within	  union	  members	  may	  have	  reasons	  not	  
to	   expand	   membership	   (for	   reasons	   similar	   to	   what	   we	   have	   discussed	   before),	  
outsiders	  who	  have	  had	  trade	  diverted	  away	  from	  them	  will	  generally	  be	  tempted	  to	  
join	   -­‐	   especially	   as	   a	   union	   expands	   and	   yet	   greater	   trade	   is	   diverted	   away	   from	  
them.	  While	  unanimous	  membership	  rules	  will	  stop	  the	  expansion	  of	  the	  bloc	  well	  
before	   global	   free	   trade	   is	   reached,	   open	   membership	   will	   accelerate	   the	   movement	  
to	   global	   free	   trade.	   While	   these	   results	   have	   been	   only	   been	   rigorously	  
demonstrated	   in	   the	   context	   of	   the	   specific	   theoretical	   structure	   assumed	   by	   Yi	  
(1996),	  they	  have	  strong	  intuitive	  appeal.	  That	  open	  membership	  rules	  will	  bring	  us	  
closer	   to	   global	   free	   trade	   can	   also	   be	   seen	   to	   hold	   in	   a	   variety	   of	   different	  




13 	  In	  
         this	   view,	   reciprocity	   within	   the	   WTO	   implies	   that	   initial	   tariff	   cuts	   create	   an	   increasing	  
momentum	  for	  further	  cuts	  by	  altering	  the	  domestic	  political	  economy	  in	  favor	  of	  exporting	  lobbies	  
and	  against	  import	  competing	  lobbies.	  See	  Baldwin	  (2004).	  
14	  See	  also	  Saggi	  and	  Yildiz	  (2008,	  2009)	  for	  innovative	  formulations	  of	  the	  question	  of	  preferential	  

agreements	  using	  the	  theory	  of	  endogenous	  coalitions	  and	  taking	  into	  account	  country	  asymmetries	  
in	  equilibrium	  determination.
formulations	  of	  the	  problem.15,16,17	  	  
	  
Thus,	   the	   theoretical	   literature	   has	   highlighted	   a	   variety	   of	   political	   and	   economic	  
forces	   that	   may	   lead	   PTAs	   to	   support	   or	   oppose	   progress	   towards	   multilateral	  
liberalization.	  Which	  of	  these	  forces	  will	  dominate	  is	  an	  empirical	  question	  and	  it	  is	  
to	  empirical	  evaluations	  of	  these	  linkages	  that	  we	  turn	  to	  next.	  
	  
IV.	  2	  Tariff	  Preferences	  and	  Multilateral	  Liberalization	  -­‐-­‐	  Empirical	  Evidence	  
	  
The	   interplay	   between	   trade	   preferences	   and	   multilateral	   liberalization	   has	   been	  
studied	   in	   a	   number	   of	   papers	   in	   the	   literature.	   Estevadeordal	   et	   al.	   (2008)	   has	  
studied	   the	   effect	   of	   preferential	   tariffs	   on	   external	   trade	   liberalization	   in	   a	   group	   of	  
ten	   Latin	   American	   countries	   by	   asking	   whether	   the	   MFN	   tariff	   by	   a	   country	   on	  
imports	   of	   any	   given	   good	   (defined	   at	   the	   ISIC	   4	   Digit-­‐level)	   are	   related	   to	   the	  
corresponding	   preferential	   tariff	   applied	   by	   the	   country	   in	   the	   preceding	   period.	  
They	   find	   no	   evidence	   that	   trade	   preferences	   in	   FTAs	   within	   Latin	   America	   led	   to	  
higher	  external	  tariffs	  or	  smaller	  tariff	  cuts,	  but	  find	  instead	  that	  preferences	  induce	  
a	   faster	   decline	   in	   external	   tariffs. 18 	  In	   CUs	   within	   Latin	   America,	   however,	  
preferential	  liberalization	  is	  not	  associated	  with	  any	  change	  in	  external	  tariffs.	  

15	  Open	    membership	   thus	   appears	   to	   be	   a	   valuable	   complement	   to	   the	   preferential	   integration	  
process.	  Nevertheless,	  open	  membership	  in	  combination	  with	  preferential	  trade	  integration	  does	  not	  
imply	   that	   discrimination	   is	   eliminated	   -­‐-­‐	   clearly	   outsiders	   at	   any	   point	   in	   time	   will	   still	   face	  
discriminatory	  trade	  barriers.	  Nor	  does	  open	  membership	  guarantee	  a	  faster	  path	  to	  global	  free	  trade	  
than	   the	   multilateral	   process.	   Finally,	   as	   a	   practical	   matter,	   it	   may	   be	   noted	   that	   no	   trade	   bloc	   in	  
existence	   has	   adopted	   such	   liberal	   membership	   policies.	   Entry	   into	   existing	   trade	   blocs	   is	   a	   slow	   and	  
carefully	   negotiated	   process.	   As	   Panagariya	   (2000)	   notes	   “The	   Canada-­‐U.S.	   Free	   Trade	   Agreement	  
was	   concluded	   almost	   a	   decade	   ago	   and,	   taking	   into	   account	   NAFTA,	   its	   membership	   has	   grown	   to	  
only	  three	  so	  far.”	  
16	  The	   impact	   of	   multilateralism	   on	   regionalism	   has	   also	   been	   studied	   in	   the	   literature.	   Ethier	   (1998)	  

and	  Freund	  (2000)	  both	  view	  the	  increased	  interest	  in	  preferential	  agreements	  in	  recent	  decades	  as	  a	  
consequence	   of	   successful	   trade	   liberalization	   at	   the	   multilateral	   level.	   Specifically,	   Freund	   (2000)	  
argues	   that	   when	   multilateral	   tariffs	   are	   low,	   the	   dangers	   from	   trade	   diversion	   are	   small	   but	   the	  
benefits	   from	   trade	   creation	   remain.	   This	   increases	   the	   likelihood	   of	   self-­‐sustaining	   preferential	  
agreements.	  
17	  In	   addition	   to	   the	   papers	   described	   above,	   important	   contributions	   to	   this	   literature	   include	  

Aghion,	   Antras	   and	   Helpman	   (2007),	   Bagwell	   and	   Staiger	   (1997a,	   1997b),	   Cadot,	   DeMelo	   and	  
Olarreaga	  (1999),	  McLaren	  (2000)	  and	  Saggi	  (2006).	  
18	  See	   also	   Bohara,	   Gawande	   and	   Sanguinetti	   (2004)	   who	   find	   links	   between	   trade	   diversion	   and	  

declining	  external	  tariffs	  in	  MERCOSUR.	  
	  
Differently,	   Limao	   (2006)	   considered	   the	   question	   of	   whether	   liberalization	  
undertaken	   by	   the	   US	   in	   the	   Uruguay	   round	   was	   related	   to	   preferential	  
liberalization	  prior	  to	  the	  Uruguay	  round.	  More	  specifically,	  he	  examines	  MFN	  tariff	  
cuts	   in	   the	   Uruguay	   round	   for	   a	   cross	   section	   of	   products	   (at	   HS	   8	   level	   of	  
disaggregation)	   and	   asks	   if	   these	   cuts	   were	   lower	   on	   products	   with	   a	   regional	  
preference	   in	   place	   or	   if	   the	   opposite	   was	   true.	   In	   contrast	   with	   Estevadeordal	   at	   al.	  
(2008),	   his	   findings	   support	   the	   argument	   that	   trade	   preferences	   may	   indeed	  
impede	   multilateral	   progress;	   MFN	   tariff	   cuts	   were	   smaller	   in	   products	   that	   were	  
subject	   to	   trade	   preferences.	   Karacaovali	   and	   Limao	   (2008)	   have	   repeated	   this	  
exercise	  for	  the	  EU	  and	  found	  similar	  results.	  	  
	  
Tovar	   (2010)	   used	   data	   disaggregated	   at	   the	   HS	   6	   level	   to	   examine	   the	   same	  
question	  in	  the	  context	  of	  the	  formation	  of	  the	  free	  trade	  agreement	  signed	  between	  
Costa	   Rica	   the	   Dominican	   Republic,	   El	   Salvador,	   Guatemala,	   Honduras,	   Nicaragua	  
and	  the	  United	  States	  in	  2004	  (CAFTA-­‐DR).	  Focusing	  on	  the	  four	  focus	  on	  the	  four	  
Central	  American	  countries	  for	  which	  the	  agreement	  has	  been	  in	  force	  since	  2006:	  
El	   Salvador,	   Guatemala,	   Honduras	   and	   Nicaragua,	   she	   found	   that	   MFN	   tariffs	   were	  
raised	  (or	  lowered	  by	  less)	  in	  products	  with	  larger	  reductions	  in	  preferential	  tariffs.	  	  
	  
Thus,	   the	   examination	   of	   MFN	   tariff	   liberalization	   and	   tariff	   preferences	   does	   not	  
yield	  an	  unambiguous	  answer	  with	  regard	  to	  the	  question	  of	  whether	  PTAs	  impede	  
progress	   towards	   multilateral	   tariff	   liberalization.	   We	   turn	   our	   attention	   next	   to	  
non-­‐tariff	  barriers.	  
	  
IV.	  3	  Non-­‐Tariff	  Barriers	  
	  
Bhagwati	   (1993)	   and	   Bhagwati	   and	   Panagariya	   (1996)	   have	   argued	   that	   an	  
additional	   worry	   with	   respect	   to	   PTA	   members	   is	   that	   they	   may	   resort	   to	   the	   use	   of	  
the	   more	   aggressive	   use	   of	   various	   forms	   of	   administered	   protection	   against	   non-­‐
member	   countries,	   as	   administered	   protection	   is	   more	   elastic	   and	   manipulable	   by	  
domestic	   players.	   Thus,	   while	   a	   PTA’s	   structure,	   in	   the	   first	   instance,	   might	   not	   be	  
trade	   diversionary,	   the	   endogenous	   trade	   policy	   choices	   made	   under	   the	   PTA	   may	  
nevertheless	  yield	  a	  diversionary	  outcome.	  
	  
In	   an	   innovative	   recent	   study,	   Prusa	   (2011),	   has	   evaluated	   this	   possibility	  
empirically	   by	   examining	   the	   use	   of	   trade	   remedy	   actions	   (specifically,	   antidumping	  
duties)	   by	   PTA	   members.	   The	   study	   covers	   worldwide	   antidumping	   activity	   since	  
1980	   and	   includes	   nearly	   5000	   antidumping	   cases	   initiated	   by	   WTO	   members	  
belonging	   to	   at	   least	   one	   PTA.	   The	   study	   proceeds	   in	   two	   steps.	   First,	   Prusa	  
examines	   the	   number	   of	   antidumping	   disputes	   initiated	   by	   PTA	   members	   against	  
other	   PTA	   members	   (“intra-­‐PTA	   filings”)	   is	   calculated	   for	   each	   importing	   country,	  
with	  the	  goal	  of	  comparing	  trends	  in	  intra-­‐PTA	  filings	  before	  and	  after	  the	  formation	  
of	   the	   PTA.	   In	   a	   second	   step,	   in	   order	   to	   control	   for	   global	   trends	   in	   antidumping	  
filing	   activity,	   trends	   in	   intra-­‐PTA	   filings	   are	   compared	   with	   trends	   in	   filings	   by	   PTA	  
members	   against	   non-­‐member	   countries.	   The	   results	   are	   striking.	   In	   the	   pre-­‐PTA	  
period,	   58	   percent	   of	   the	   filings	   are	   against	   non-­‐PTA	   countries	   and	   42	   percent	   were	  
against	  PTA	  members.	  By	  contrast,	  in	  the	  post	  PTA	  period,	  90	  percent	  of	  the	  cases	  
were	  against	  non-­‐PTA	  countries	  while	  only	  10	  percent	  were	  against	  PTA	  members.	  
As	   Prusa	   notes,	   these	   results	   “clearly	   raise	   the	   specter	   of	   protection	   diversion	   and	  
more	  subtle	  forms	  of	  trade	  diversion”	  and	  that	  even	  if	  “tariff	  preferences	  are	  small	  
and	   might	   result	   in	   only	   small	   amounts	   of	   trade	   diversion”,	   it	   appears	   that	   “other	  
provisions	  of	  a	  PTA	  might	  be	  a	  greater	  source	  of	  discrimination”.	  	  
	  
IV.	  4	  Intra-­‐PTA	  and	  Extra-­‐PTA	  trade	  volumes	  
	  
The	   steady	   increase	   in	   the	   number	   of	   preferential	   agreements	   in	   recent	   years	   raises	  
the	   question	   of	   how	   relevant	   extra-­‐PTA	   trade	   still	   is	   for	   member	   countries.	   Have	  
countries	   already	   organized	   themselves	   into	   preferential	   blocs	   to	   an	   extent	   that	  
most	   of	   their	   trade	   is	   with	   each	   other	   and	   further	   multilateral	   liberalization	   is	  
insignificant?	  
	  
Table	  III	  lists	  intra-­‐PTA	  and	  extra-­‐PTA	  trade	  flows	  for	  the	  year	  2008	  for	  a	  number	  of	  
prominent	  trade	  agreements.	  	  The	  EU	  has	  the	  largest	  intra-­‐PTA	  shares	  with	  export	  
and	   import	   shares	   both	   standing	   at	   above	   60	   percent.	   For	   NAFTA,	   intra	   –PTA	  
exports	  take	  up	  about	  50	  percent	  of	  their	  overall	  exports,	  while	  intra-­‐PTA	  imports	  
amount	   a	   smaller	   fraction	   (33	   percent)	   of	   their	   overall	   imports.	   Next,	   we	   have	  
ASEAN.	  However,	  despite	  the	  heavy	  emphasis	  that	  Intra-­‐ASEAN	  trade	  has	  received	  
in	   the	   literature	   on	   PTAs,	   especially	   with	   reference	   to	   the	   large	   volumes	   of	  
“fragmented”	   trade	   within	   ASEAN	   serving	   as	   a	   possible	   motivation	   for	   deeper	  
integration	   within	   ASEAN,	   it	   is	   evident	   that	   most	   ASEAN	   trade	   (over	   75	   percent)	  
takes	   place	  with	  countries	  in	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world.	  Extra	  Union	  trade	  is	  greater	  than	  
80	  percent	  for	  nearly	  all	  the	  remaining	  PTAs	  and	  indeed	  greater	  than	  90	  percent	  for	  
majority	  of	  them.	  	  
	  
Thus,	   despite	   the	   rapid	   expansion	   of	   preferences	   in	   trade,	   intra-­‐PTA	   trade	   shares	  
(and	  thus	  extra-­‐PTA	  shares	  as	  well)	  are	  relatively	  small	  for	  most	  PTAs.	  This	  suggests	  
that	   multilateral	   initiatives	   involving	   trade	   with	   the	   rest	   of	   the	   world	   remain	  
relevant	  to	  most	  member	  countries	  of	  the	  WTO.	  
	  
V.	  PTAs	  and	  Deep	  Integration?	  
	  
Recently,	  it	  has	  begun	  to	  be	  argued	  that	  the	  motivation	  for	  PTAs	  may	  have	  little	  to	  
do	  with	  the	  lowering	  of	  trade	  barriers,	  as	  such,	  and	  that	  PTAs	  should	  be	  understood	  
instead	   as	   vehicles	   for	   undertaking	   “deeper”	   forms	   of	   integration	   to	   achieve	  
institutional	   harmonization	   with	   partner	   countries.	   The	   institutional	   and	   policy	  
dimensions	   along	   which	   this	   harmonization	   is	   sought	   include	   both	   provisions	   that	  
currently	   fall	   under	   the	   mandate	   of	   the	   WTO	   and	   are	   subject	   to	   some	   level	   of	  
commitment	   in	   WTO	   agreements	   (such	   as	   the	   improvement	   of	   customs	  
administration	  and	  rules	  concerning	  public	  procurement)	  and	  those	  that	  currently	  
fall	   outside	   of	   mandate	   of	   the	   WTO	   (such	   as	   provisions	   on	   investment	   measures,	  
labor	  market	  regulations,	  innovations	  policy	  and	  human	  rights).	  
	  
To	   examine	   the	   extent	   of	   deep	   integration	   undertaken	   in	   PTAs,	   we	   use	   a	   data	   set	  
recently	   compiled	   by	   the	   WTO	   (for	  its	  2011	  publication	  of	  the	  World	  Trade	  Review)	  
which	  codifies	  these	  institutional	  provisions	  in	  over	  a	  hundred	  PTAs	  notified	  to	  the	  
WTO,	  and	  additionally	  indicates	  which	  of	  these	  provisions	  are	  deemed	  to	  be	  legally	  
enforceable.19	  	  
	  
Table	   IV	   provides	   a	   list	   of	   the	   policy	   areas	   covered	   in	   PTAs	   along	   with	   a	   breakdown	  
of	   policy	   areas	   into	   those	   covered	   by	   the	   WTO	   and	   those	   that	   fall	   outside	   of	   the	  
WTO’s	   mandate.	   Table	   IV	   also	   indicates	   the	   fraction	   of	   PTAs	   (of	   the	   131	   PTAs	  
covered	   by	   the	   data	   set)	   in	   which	   the	   particular	   policy	   area	   is	   not	   included	   in	   the	  
text	   of	   the	   PTA	   and	   the	   fraction	   in	   which	   it	   is	   included	   and	   also	   deemed	   to	   be	  
potentially	  legally	  enforceable.	  	  
	  
The	   picture	   is	   a	   mixed	   one.	   On	   the	   one	   hand,	   a	   number	   of	   provisions	   covered	   by	   the	  
WTO	  are	  also	  mentioned	  in	  the	  text	  of	  these	  PTAs	  and	  many	  appear	  to	  have	  legally	  
enforceable	  status.	  Thus,	  over	  65	  percent	  of	  the	  PTAs	  in	  the	  database	  include	  legally	  
enforceable	   provisions	   on	   customs	   administration,	   nearly	   50	   percent	   of	   the	   PTAs	  
include	  prohibitions	  on	  export	  taxes	  and	  slightly	  over	  50	  percent	  include	  provisions	  
on	  the	  administration	   of	   antidumping	  duties.	  A	  smaller,	  but	  still	  significant,	  fraction,	  
include	   provisions	   on	   the	   liberalization	   of	   services	   and	   trade	   related	   intellectual	  
property	  rights	  and	  investment	  measures.	  
	  
On	  the	  other	  hand,	  provisions	  that	  fall	  outside	  of	  the	  WTO	  mandates	  but	  are	  covered	  
by	  PTAs	  and	  are	  also	  deemed	  legally	  enforceable	  by	  the	  text	  of	  the	  PTA	  are	  far	  fewer	  
in	   number.20	  Only	   4	   percent	   of	   the	   PTAs	   include	   legally	   enforceable	   provisions	   on	  


19	  As	   noted	   by	   the	   WTR	   2011,	   in	   the	   data	   set,	   the	   codification	   of	   policy	   areas	   and	   institutional	  
provisions	  covered	  by	  a	  PTA	  and	  the	  determination	  of	  the	  legal	  enforceability	  of	  PTA	  obligations	  in	  
these	   domains	   follows	   the	   methodology	   of	   Horn,	   Mavroidis	   and	   Sapir	   (2010).	   See	   WTR	   2011	   for	  
details.	  
20	  As	   the	   WTR	   2011	   notes,	   whether	   or	   not	   the	   actual	   terminology	   in	   a	   PTA	   describing	   a	   provision	  

“establishes	   a	   legally	   enforceable	   obligation”	   is	   a	   matter	   of	   interpretation.	   In	   any	   event,	   legal	  
enforceability	   in	   theory	   does	   not	   imply	   easy	   enforceability	   in	   practice,	   due	   to	   a	   variety	   of	   “political	  
factors,	  resource	  constraints	  and	  other	  non-­‐legal	  considerations”.	  
anti-­‐corruption	  measures,	  12	  percent	  include	  provisions	  on	  labor	  regulation,	  and	  11	  
percent	   include	   provisions	   on	   environmental	   regulations.	   Regulations	   on	   the	  
movement	   of	   capital	   and	   the	   protection	   of	   intellectual	   property	   rights	   (specifically	  
accession	  to	  international	  treaties	  not	  included	  in	  the	  GATS)	  are	  more	  significant	  at	  
40	   percent	   and	   34	   percent	   respectively,	   but	   most	   of	   the	   remaining	   provisions	   are	  
simply	   not	   referenced	   in	   the	   vast	   majority	   of	   PTAs.	   This,	   in	   itself,	   permits	   some	  
skepticism	   on	   how	   much	   deeper	   PTAs,	   on	   average,	   have	   gone	   beyond	   the	  
possibilities	  offered	  by	  the	  WTO.	  Whether	  or	  the	  not	  the	  enforceable	  provisions	  will	  
have	  significant	  economic	  effects	  (for	  instance,	  whether	  provisions	  on	  cross-­‐border	  
investment	   will	   yield	   greater	   flow	   of	   investments)	   remains	   an	   open	   question	   for	  
future	  research.	  
	  
Separately,	   it	   has	   begun	   to	   be	   argued	   that	   the	   fragmentation	   of	   global	   production	  
provides	  a	  new	  basis	  for	  countries	  to	  achieve	  preferential	  integration	  regionally	  and	  
at	   a	   “deeper”	   level	   (see	   WTR	   2011	   for	   a	   comprehensive	   discussion).21	  While	   this	  
argument	   is	   gaining	   currency	   in	   some	   quarters,	   it	   would	   seem	   that	   production	  
fragmentation	   should	   provide	   greater	   incentives	   instead	   for	   broader	   multilateral	  
liberalization.	  After	  all,	  the	  most	  efficient	  producers	  of	  any	  given	  intermediate	  good	  
need	   not	   lie	   within	   the	   jurisdictional	   boundaries	   of	   any	   specific	   preferential	  
agreement	  and	  the	  identity	  and	  location	  of	  the	  efficient	  producers	  of	  intermediates	  
may	   be	   expected	   to	   vary	   faster	   than	   any	   country's	   ability	   to	   sign	   new	   preferential	  
agreements.	   Furthermore,	   with	   increased	   fragmentation	   the	   identification	   of	   the	  
origin	   of	   goods,	   so	   that	   preferences	   may	   be	   suitably	   granted,	   is	   itself	   a	   major	  
challenge.22	  As	   a	   practical	   matter,	   if	   PTAs	   were	   designed	   to	   support	   fragmented	  
production	   networks,	   we	   might	   expect	   to	   see	   greater	   geographic	   concentration	   of	  
trade	   over	   time	   as	   many	   production	   networks	   are	   regional	   in	   nature.	   As	   the	   WTR	  

21	  The	   fragmentation	   of	   trade	   has	   been	   well	   documented	   in	   the	   economics	   literature	   For	   instance,	  

Varian	  (2007)	  points	  out	  that	  the	  popular	  music	  player,	  the	  Ipod,	  is	  made	  out	  of	  well	  over	  400	  parts	  
that	  originate	  in	  a	  number	  of	  different	  countries	  and	  are	  finally	  assembled	  in	  China.	  See	  also	  
22	  On	  this	  point,	  see	  the	  excellent	  discussion	  by	  Bhagwati	  (2008,	  pp	  61-­‐70)	  on	  why	  the	  “who	  is	  who”	  

problem	   of	   identification	   of	   the	   “true”	   origin	   of	   goods	   (i.e.,	   as	   to	   whether	   an	   importable	   truly	  
originates	   in	   a	   partner	   country	   or	   elsewhere)	   provides	   one	   of	   the	   most	   important	   arguments	   against	  
preferences	  in	  trade.
2011	   notes,	   however,	   the	   share	   of	   intra-­‐regional	   trade	   in	   Europe	   has	   remained	  
roughly	  constant	  at	  around	  73	  percent	  between	  1990	  and	  2009.	  While	  Asia's	  intra-­‐
regional	   trade	   seems	   to	   have	   risen	   from	   42	   to	   52	   percent	   during	   the	   same	   period,	  
North	   America's	   intra-­‐regional	   	   trade	   shares	   rose	   from	   41	   percent	   in	   1990	   to	   56	  
percent	  in	  2000	  and	  fell	  back	  to	  48	  percent	  in	  2009.	  	  	  
	  
In	   any	   event,	   it	   is	   not	   obvious	   that	   the	   achievement	   of	   “deep	   integration”	   at	   a	  
regional	  level	  is	  a	  desirable	  goal	  from	  either	  a	  regional	  or	  multilateral	  perspective.	  
Common	   policies	   may	   benefit	   countries	   with	   common	   policy	   preferences,	   but	   may	  
be	   costly	   if	   there	   are	   wide	   differences	   in	   the	   preferences	   of	   member	   countries	   (as	   is	  
often	   the	   case	   with	   provisions	   involving	   environmental	   and	   labor	   standards,	   for	  
instance).	  In	  the	  context	  of	  North-­‐South	  agreements,	  there	  is	  an	  additional	  concern	  
that	   the	   greater	   resources	   and	   organizational	   ability	   of	   government	   and	   sectoral	  
lobbies	   in	   the	   North	   will	   shift	   policy	   in	   a	   direction	   that	   is	   closer	   to	   their	   own	  
interests	   and	   away	   from	   the	   interests	   of	   the	   South.	   	   Furthermore,	   the	   establishment	  
of	  policies	  and	  standards	  at	  a	  regional	  level	  may	  inhibit	  multilateral	  liberalization	  if	  
the	  multilateral	  standards	  vary	  from	  regional	  ones	  and	  there	  are	  costs	  to	  switching	  
standards.	   It	   is	   also	   conceivable	   that	   different	   regional	   agreements	   follow	   quite	  
different	   templates	   making	   future	   harmonization	   difficult,	   even	   at	   the	   regional	  
level23	  The	   possibility	   of	   negative	   spillovers	   on	   non-­‐member	   countries	   also	   cannot	  
be	  ignored.	  Thus,	  for	  instance,	  prohibition	  of	  the	  use	  of	  antidumping	  duties	  against	  
partner	  countries	  may	  result	  in	  the	  increased	  use	  of	  antidumping	  measures	  against	  
non-­‐members	  as	  the	  work	  of	  Prusa	  (discussed	  earlier)	  suggests.	  	  
	  
VI.	  Trade	  Preferences	  and	  the	  Doha	  Round	  

23	  The	   phenomenon	   of	   overlapping	   and	   criss-­‐crossed	   preferential	   agreements,	   with	   differing	   trade	  

rules,	  especially	  on	  the	  rules	  of	  origin	  that	  permit	  goods	  produced	  within	  the	  agreement	  to	  receive	  
duty	   free	   treatment,	   has	   been	   famously	   described	   by	   Jagdish	   Bhagwati	   as	   an	   inefficient	   “spaghetti-­‐
bowl”	   of	   PTAs.	   As	   Bhagwati	   (2008)	   has	   also	   wittily	   pointed	   out,	   evolving	   these	   agreements	   into	  
multilateral	  free	  trade	  requires	  turning	  the	  spaghetti-­‐bowl	  into	  a	  more	  uniform	  lasagna,	  a	  task	  that	  
may	   only	   be	   accomplished	   using	   flat	   pasta	   (identical	   templates	   on	   trade-­‐unrelated	   issues).	   Recent	  
experience,	   for	   instance	   in	   Asia	   where	   the	   	   US-­‐led	   Trans	   Pacific	   Partnership	   (TPP)	   initiative	   for	   trade	  
integration	  that	  has	  collided	  with	  China’s	  vision	  for	  trade	  in	  the	  region,	  has	  not	  been	  reassuring	  on	  
this	  count.	  
	  
An	  important	  issue	  in	  the	  Doha	  round	  concerns	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  the	  reduction	  of	  
multilateral	   barriers	   by	   developing	   countries	   erodes	   the	   preference	   margins	   to	  
those	   developing	   countries	   that	   already	   have	   preferential	   access	   to	   the	   developed	  
country	   markets.	   For	   instance,	   under	   the	   Everything	   But	   Arms	   (EBA)	   regulation	  
signed	  into	  effect	  in	  2001,	  the	  European	  Union	  permitted	  granting	  duty-­‐free	  access	  
to	  imports	  of	  all	  products	  from	  49	  LDCs,	  except	  arms	  and	  ammunitions,	  without	  any	  
quantitative	   restrictions	   (with	   the	   exception	   of	   bananas,	   sugar	   and	   rice	   for	   a	   limited	  
period).	   Multilateral	   liberalization	   by	   the	   EU	   would	   then	   erode	   the	   preferential	  
access	  of	  the	  LDCs	  to	  the	  EU	  market.	  	  
	  
Amiti	   and	   Romalis	   (2007)	   have	   studied	   the	   question	   of	   preference	   erosion	   under	  
Doha	   and	   argued	   that	   lowering	   tariffs	   under	   the	   multilateral	   system	   will	   lead	   to	   a	  
net	   increase	   in	   market	   access	   for	   developing	   countries.	   Nevertheless,	   preference	  
erosion	   is	   likely	   to	   have	   important	   redistributive	   and	   thus	   political	   economy	   effects.	  
In	   the	   context	   of	   the	   multilateral	   liberalization	   proposed	   in	   the	   Doha	   round,	   LDCs	  
concerned	   about	   the	   loss	   of	   their	   preferential	   access,	   especially	   in	   the	   agricultural	  
sector,	   could	   be	   expected	   to	   oppose	   the	   round	   while	   other	   developing	   countries	  
exporters,	   without	   prior	   preferential	   access	   to	   the	   developed	   country	   markets,	  
would	   likely	   gain	   support.	   Thus,	   in	   addition	   to	   the	   fact	   that	   developing	   countries	  
which	  are	  net	  exporters	  of	  food	  have	  different	  interests	  in	  the	  round	  than	  those	  that	  
are	   net	   importers	   food,	   divisions	   have	   developed	   within	   the	   set	   of	   developing	  
countries	  based	  on	  their	  prior	  preferential	  access	  to	  the	  developed	  country	  markets.	  	  
	  
Two	  recent	  studies	  confirm	  these	  fears.	  Francois,	  Hoekman	  and	  Manchin	  (2005)	  and	  
Limao	   and	   Olarreaga	   (2005)	   both	   estimate	   significant	   losses	   to	   a	   number	   of	  
countries	  in	  Africa	  and	  South	  Asia	  due	  to	  a	  full	  erosion	  of	  preferences.	  Both	  studies	  
suggest	  that	  Bangladesh	  will	  suffer	  the	  greatest	  losses	  from	  preference	  erosion	  (in	  
the	  range	  of	  about	  200	  million	  dollars	  annually).	  	  A	  number	  of	  countries	  are	  forecast	  
to	   lose	   significant	   fractions	   of	   their	   GDP,	   for	   instance,	   Malawi	   (8	   percent),	   Lesotho	  
(2.7	  percent)	  and	  Sao	  Tome	  and	  Principe	  (1.6	  percent).	  	  
	  
To	  counter	  the	  opposition	  to	  multilateral	  liberalization	  due	  to	  preference	  erosion,	  a	  
number	   of	   solutions,	   each	   involving	   some	   mechanism	   to	   compensate	   the	   losers,	   can	  
be	   contemplated.	   One	   possibility	   is	   to	   simply	   provide	   “aid	   for	   trade”.	   This	   would	  
require	   that	   countries	   be	   given	   aid	   money	   in	   proportion	   to	   their	   losses.	   Leaving	  
aside	   any	   worries	   regarding	   the	   moral	   hazard	   that	   such	   policies	   may	   generate,	   such	  
a	   scheme	   would	   require	   financing	   in	   the	   tune	   of	   approximately	   500	   million	   to	   a	  
billion	   USD	   annually	   (see	   Page,	   2005).	   Even	   if	   such	   aid	   financing	   were	   to	   be	   made	  
available,	  LDCs	  could	  worry	  that	  these	  funds	  would	  simply	  be	  diverted	  from	  other	  
intended	   forms	   aid.	   This	   would	   require	   a	   separate	   fund	   to	   be	   set	   up	   and	   financed,	  
over	  and	  above	  the	  aid	  commitments	  already	  under	  taken	  by	  the	  richer	  nations.	  
	  
Another	   possibility,	   suggested	   by	   Limao	   and	   Olarreaga	   (2005),	   is	   for	   the	   tariff	  
preferences	  to	  be	  replaced	  by	  import	  subsidies	  in	  the	  same	  magnitude,	  so	  that	  LDC’s	  
whose	   preferences	   are	   eroded,	   nevertheless	   have	   the	   same	   export	   earnings	   as	  
before.	   This	   has	   theoretical	   appeal,	   but	   runs	   into	   the	   criticism	   that	   it	   replaces	   one	  
set	   of	   distortions	   within	   the	   WTO	   system	   with	   another	   (even	   though	   this	  
transformation	  will	  indeed	  be	  Pareto	  improving).	  As	  an	  alternative	  to	  compensation	  
for	   preference	   erosion,	   delaying	   liberalization	   or	   gradually	   liberalizing	   trade	   in	  
those	   sectors	   with	   significant	   preferences	   has	   also	   been	   suggested.	   Lawrence	   and	  
Rosito	   (2006)	   have	   argued	   for	   a	   more	   complex	   approach	   which	  combines	   delayed	  
liberalization	   with	   a	   compensation	   mechanism;	   they	   propose	   that	   developed	  
countries	   should	   be	   granted	   a	   temporary	   and	   limited	   waiver	   from	   meeting	   their	  
liberalization	   obligations	   in	   particular	   product	   categories	   on	   condition	   that	   the	  
additional	  funds	  so	  raised	  are	  paid	  as	  compensation	  for	  preference	  erosion.	  	  
	  
The	   ideas	   discussed	   above	   provide	   a	   range	   of	   policy	   options	   for	   the	   WTO	   to	  
consider.	  It	  is	  conceivable	  that	  any	  eventual	  resolution	  round	  the	  Doha	  will	  combine	  
different	   aspects	   of	   these	   proposals.	   The	   political	   experience	   with	   liberalization	  
under	   Doha	   nonetheless	   suggests	   the	   subtle,	   yet	   important,	   ways	   in	   which	  
preferential	   agreements	   have	   impacted	   the	   multilateral	   process	   and	   portends	  
poorly	   for	   future	   rounds	   that	   reach	   beyond	   agriculture	   and	   aim	   to	   unwind	   the	  
preferences	  enjoyed	  on	  a	  broader	  set	  of	  goods	  by	  a	  wider	  range	  of	  countries	  in	  the	  
existing	  set	  of	  PTAs.	  
	  
	  
VII.	  Conclusions	  
	  
The	   question	   of	   trade	   preferences	   is	   a	   complex	   one.	   While	   sharp	   conclusions	   are	  
hard	   to	   reach,	   this	   paper	   has	   presented	   a	   multilateralist	   perspective	   in	   evaluating	  
this	   issue	   in	   light	   of	   recent	   trends	   in	   the	   international	   trade	   system.	   It	   has	  
challenged	   the	   ideas	   that	   PTAs	   present	   an	   efficient	   alternative	   to	   multilateral	  
approaches	   in	   achieving	   genuine	   liberalization	   of	   trade	   and	   that	   PTAs	   have	  
uniformly	   enabled	   the	   “deep	   integration”	   claimed	   by	   proponents	   of	   preferential	  
trade.	   It	   concludes	   that	   multilateral	   initiatives	   remain	   desirable	   and	   relevant	   for	   the	  
member	  countries	  of	  the	  WTO.	  
	                                          	  
References	  
	  
Aghion,	   P.,	   Antras,	   P.,	   and	   Helpman,	   E.,	   2007,	   “Negotiating	   Free	   Trade,”	   Journal	   of	  
International	  Economics,	  73(1):	  1-­‐30	  
	  
Amiti,	  M.,	  and	  Romalis,	  J.,	  2007,	  “Will	  the	  Doha	  Round	  Lead	  to	  Preference	  Erosion”,	  
IMF	  Staff	  Papers.	  
	  
Bagwell,	  K.,	  and	  R.	  Staiger,	  1997a,	  “Multilateral	  Cooperation	  during	  the	  Formation	  of	  
Free	  Trade	  Areas,”	  International	  Economic	  Review.	  	  
	  
Bagwell,	  K.,	  and	  R.	  Staiger,	  1997b,	  “Multilateral	  Cooperation	  during	  the	  Formation	  of	  
Customs	  Unions,”	  	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics.	  	  
	  
Baier,	  S.	  L.,	  and	  Bergstrand,	  J.,	  2007,	  “Do	  Free	  Trade	  Agreements	  Actually	  Increase	  
Member	  Countries	  Trade,”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  71:	  72-­‐95.	  
	  
Baldwin,	  R.,	  1995,	  “A	  Domino	  Theory	  of	  Regionalism,”	  In	  R.	  Baldwin,	  P.	  Haaparanta,	  
and	   J.	   Kiander,	   eds.,	   Expanding	   Membership	   of	   the	   European	   Union,	   Cambridge	  
University	  Press	  
	  
Baldwin,	   R.,	   and	   Venables,	   A.,	   1995,	   “Regional	   Economic	   Integration,”	   In	   Gene	  
Grossman	   and	   Kenneth	   Rogoff,	   eds.,	   Handbook	  of	  International	  Economics,	   Volume	  
III,	  Elsevier	  Science	  BV	  
	  
Baldwin,	   R.,	   2004,	   “Stepping	   stones	   or	   building	   blocs?	   Regional	   and	   Multilateral	  
Integration,”	  Mimeo,	  Graduate	  Institute	  of	  International	  Studies,	  Geneva	  
	  
Baldwin,	  R.,	  and	  Seghezza,	  E.,	  2010,	  “Are	  Trade	  Blocs	  Building	  or	  Stumbling	  Blocs,”	  
Journal	  of	  Economic	  Integration,	  25(2):	  276-­‐297	  
	  
Bhagwati,	  J.,	  1993,	  “Regionalism	  and	  Multilateralism:	  An	  Overview,”	  In	  Jaime	  deMelo	  
and	   Arvind	   Panagariya,	   eds.,	   New	   Dimensions	   in	   Regional	   Integration,	   Cambridge	  
University	  Press.	  	  
	  
Bhagwati,	   J.,	   2008,	   Termites	   in	   the	   Trading	   System:	   How	   Preferential	   Agreements	  
Undermine	  Free	  Trade,	  Oxford	  University	  Press	  
	  
Bhagwati,	   J.,	   and	   Panagariya,	   A.,	   1996,	   “Free	   Trade	   Areas	   or	   Free	   Trade?”	   in	   	   The	  
Economics	   of	   Preferential	   Trade	   Areas,	   American	   Enterprise	   Institute,	   AEI	   Press,	  
Washington,	  DC.	  	  
	  
Bhagwati,	   J.,	   and	   Panagariya,	   A.	   and	   Krishna.	   P.,	   1999,	   Trading	   Blocs:	   Alternative	  
Approaches	  to	  Analyzing	  Preferential	  Trade	  Agreements,	  MIT	  Press.	  	  
	  
Bohara,	   A.,	   Gawande,	   K.,	   and	   Sanguinetti,	   P.,	   2004,	   “Trade	   Diversion	   and	   Declining	  
Tariffs:	  Evidence	  from	  MERCOSUR,”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  64:1-­‐27.	  
	  
Cadot,	  O.,	  DeMelo	  J.,	  and	  Olarreaga,	  M.,	  1999,	  “Regional	  Integration	  and	  Lobbying	  for	  
Tariffs	  Against	  Non-­‐members,”	  International	  Economic	  Review.	  	  
	  
Chang,	   W.,	   and	   Winters,	   A.,	   2002,	   “How	   Regional	   Trade	   Blocs	   Affect	   Excluded	  
Countries:	   The	   Price	   Effects	   of	   MERCOSUR,”	  The	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  Vol.	   92,	  
pp	  889-­‐904.	  
	  
Clausing,	  K.,	  2001,	  “Trade	  Creation	  and	  Trade	  Diversion	  in	  the	  Canada-­‐United	  States	  
Free	  Trade	  Agreement,”	  Canadian	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  34:	  678-­‐96	  
	  
Estevadeordal,	  A.,	  Freund,	  C.,	  and	  Ornelas,	  E.,	  2008,	  “Does	  Regionalism	  Affect	  Trade	  
Liberalization	   towards	   Non-­‐Members,”	   Quarterly	   Journal	   of	   Economics,	   123:	   1531-­‐
1575.	  
	  
Ethier,	  W.,	  1998,	  “Regionalism	  in	  a	  Multilateral	  World,”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  
	  
Frankel,	   J.,	   Stein,	   E.,	   and	   Wei,	   S.,	   1996,	   “Trading	   Blocs:	   The	   Natural,	   The	   Unnatural	  
and	  The	  Super	  Natural?,”	  Journal	  of	  Development	  Economics,	  47(1),	  pp	  61-­‐95.	  	  
	  
François,	   J.,	   Hoekman,	   B.,	   and	   Manchin,	   M.	   2005,	   “Preference	   Erosion	   and	  
Multilateral	  Trade	  Liberalization,”	  Tinbergen	  Institute	  Discussion	  Paper,	  2005-­‐073/2	  
	  
Freund,	  C.,	  2000,	  “Multilateralism	  and	  the	  Endogenous	  Formation	  of	  PTAs,”	  Journal	  
of	  International	  Economics	  
	  
Grossman,	   G.,	   and	   Helpman,	   E.,	   1995,	   “The	   Politics	   of	   Free	   Trade	   Agreements,”	  
American	  Economic	  Review	  	  
	  
Grinols,	   E.,	   1981,	   “An	   Extension	   of	   the	   Kemp-­‐Wan	   Theorem	   on	   the	   Formation	   of	  
Customs	  Unions,”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics	  	  
	  
Horn,	  H.,	  Mavroidis,	  P	  C.,	  and	  Sapir,	  A.,	  2010,	  “Beyond	  the	  WTO:	  An	  Anatomy	  of	  EU	  
and	  US	  Preferential	  Trade	  Agreements,”	  The	  World	  Economy,	  33	  (11):	  1565-­‐1588	  
	  
Joshi,	   V.,	   2010a,	   “Preferential	   Tariff	   Formation:	   The	   Case	   of	   the	   European	   Union,”	  
Working	   Paper,	   Graduate	   Institute	   of	   International	   and	   Development	   Studies,	  
Number	  05/2010	  
	  
Joshi,	  V.,	  2010b,	  “Preferential	  Tariff	  Formation	  in	  the	  United	  States,”	  Working	  Paper,	  
Graduate	  Institute	  of	  International	  and	  Development	  Studies,	  Number	  06/2010	  
	  
	  
Karacavaoli,	   B.,	   and	   Limao,	   N.,	   2008,	   “The	   Clash	   of	   Liberalizations:	   Preferential	   vs	  
Multilateral	   Trade	   Liberalization	   in	   the	   European	   Union,”	   Journal	   of	   International	  
Economics,	  74:	  299-­‐327.	  
	  
Kemp,	  M.,	  1964,	  The	  Pure	  Theory	  of	  International	  Trade,	  Prentice-­‐Hall,	  N.J.	  	  
	  
Kemp,	  M.,	  and	  Wan,	  H.,	  1976,	  “An	  Elementary	  Proposition	  Concerning	  the	  Formation	  
of	  Customs	  Unions,”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics	  
	  
	  
Krishna,	  P.,	  1998,	  “Regionalism	  and	  Multilateralism:	  A	  Political	  Economy	  Approach,”	  
Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics.	  	  
	  
Krishna,	   P.,	   2003,	   “Are	   Regional	   Trading	   Partners	   Natural?,”	   Journal	   of	   Political	  
Economy.	  	  
	  
Krishna,	  P.,	  2005,	  Trade	  Blocs:	  Economics	  and	  Politics,	  Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  
	  
Krugman,	   P.,	   1991,	   “The	   Move	   To	   Free	   Trade	   Zones,”	   In	   Federal	   Reserve	   Bank	   of	  
Kansas	  City,	  Policy	  Implications	  of	  Trade	  and	  Currency	  Zones,	  Kansas	  City:	  Federal	  
Reserve	  Bank	  of	  Kansas	  City,	  7-­‐41.	  	  
	  
Lawrence,	   Robert,	   1997,	   Regionalism,	   Multilateralism	   and	   Deeper	   Integration,	  
Washington:	  Brookings	  Institution.	  
	  
Lawrence,	  R.,	  and	  Rosito,	  T.,	  2006,	  “A	  New	  Compensation	  Mechanism	  for	  Preference	  
Erosion	   in	   the	   Doha	   Round,”	   Working	   Paper,	   Kennedy	   School	   of	   Government,	  
Harvard	  University,	  RWP	  06-­‐044	  
	  
Limao	   N.,	   and	   Olarreaga,	   M.,	   2005,	   “Trade	   Preferences	   to	   Small	   Developing	  
Countries	   and	   the	   Welfare	   Costs	   of	   Lost	   Multilateral	   Liberalization,”	   World	   Bank	  
Policy	  Research	  Working	  Paper,	  WPS3565	  
	  
Limao	  N.,	  2006,	  “Preferential	  Trade	  Agreements	  as	  Stumbling	  Blocs	  for	  Multilateral	  
Trade	  Liberalization:	  Evidence	  for	  the	  US,”	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  96:	  896-­‐914	  
	  
Levy,	   P.,	   1997,	   “A	   Political	   Economic	   Analysis	   of	   Free	   Trade	   Arrangements,”	  
American	  Economic	  Review	  
	  	  
Magee,	  C.,	  2008,	  “New	  Measures	  of	  Trade	  Creation	  and	  Trade	  Diversion,”	  Journal	   of	  
International	  Economics,	  75:340-­‐362	  
	  
McLaren,	  J.,	  1999,	  “A	  Theory	  of	  Insidious	  Regionalism,”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  
	  
Mundell,	   R.,	   1964,	   “Tariff	   Preferences	   and	   the	   Terms	   of	   Trade,”	  Manchester	  School	  of	  
Economic	  Studies,	  1-­‐13.	  	  
	  
Ohyama,	   M.,	   1972,	   “Trade	   and	   Welfare	   in	   General	   Equilibrium,”	   Keio	   Economic	  
Studies,	  9,	  37-­‐73.	  	  
	  
Ornelas,	   E.,	   2005a,	   “Trade	   Creating	   Free	   Trade	   Areas	   and	   the	   Undermining	   of	  
Multilateralism”,	  European	  Economic	  Review,	  49:	  1717-­‐1735	  
	  
Ornelas,	   E.,	   2005b,	   “Rent	   Destruction	   and	   the	   Political	   Viability	   of	   Free	   Trade	  
Agreements”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  120:	  1475-­‐1506	  
	  
Page,	   S.,	   2005,	   “A	   Preference	   Erosion	   Compensation	   Fund:	   A	   New	   Proposal	   to	  
Protect	   Countries	   from	   the	   Negative	   Effects	   of	   Trade	   Liberalization,”	   Overseas	  
Development	  Institute,	  Opinions	  35,	  January	  2005	  
	  
Panagariya, A., 1997, “Preferential Trading and the Myth of Natural Trading Partners,”
Japan and the World Economy
	  
Panagariya,	   A.,	   2000,	   “Preferential	  Trade	  Liberalization:	  The	  Traditional	  Theory	  and	  
New	  Developments,”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Literature	  
	  
Panagariya,	   A.	   and	   Krishna,	   P.,	   2002,	   “On	   the	   Existence	   of	   Necessarily	   Welfare	  
Improving	  Free	  Trade	  Areas,”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics	  
	  
Prusa,	   T.,	   2011,	   “Trade	   Remedy	   Provisions,”	   in	   Chaffour	   and	   Maur	   editors,	  
Preferential	  Trade	  Agreement	  Policies	  for	  Development,	  World	  Bank,	  Washington	  DC	  
	  
Romalis,	   J.,	   2007,	   NAFTA’s	   and	   CUSFTA’s	   effects	   on	   International	   Trade,	   Review	  of	  
Economics	  and	  Statistics,	  89(3),	  pp	  416-­‐435.	  
	  
Saggi,	   K.,	   2006,	   “Preferential	   Trade	   Agreements	   and	   Multilateral	   Tariff	   Co-­‐
operation”,	  International	  Economic	  Review,	  47:29-­‐58	  
	  
Saggi	   K.,	   and	   Yildiz	   H.	   M.	   2008,	   “Bilateral	   Trade	   Agreements	   and	   the	   Feasibility	   of	  
Multilateral	  free	  trade,”	  Working	  Paper,	  Southern	  Methodist	  University	  
	  
Saggi	  K.,	  and	  Yildiz	  H.	  M.,	  2009,	  “Bilateralism,	  Pure	  Multilateralism,	  and	  the	  quest	  for	  
global	  free	  trade,”	  Working	  Paper,	  Southern	  Methodist	  University	  
	  
Tovar,	   P.,	   2009,	   “Preferential	   Trade	   Agreements	   and	   Unilateral	   Liberalization:	  
Evidence	  from	  CAFTA",	  Mimeo,	  Brandeis	  University	  
	  
Trefler,	   D.,	   2004,	   “The	   Long	   and	   the	   Short	   of	   the	   Canada-­‐United	   States	   Free	   Trade	  
Agreement,”	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  94:870-­‐895	  
	  
Vanek,	   J.,	   1965,	   General	   Equilibrium	   of	   International	   Discrimination,	   Harvard	  
University	  Press.	  	  
	  
Varian,	  H.,	  2007,	  “An	  Ipod	  Has	  Global	  Value,	  Ask	  the	  (Many)	  Countries	  That	  Make	  it”,	  
New	  York	  Times,	  June	  28.	  
	  
Viner,	   J.,	   1950,	   The	   Customs	   Unions	   Issue,	   Carnegie	   Endowment	   for	   International	  
Peace,	  New	  York.	  	  
	  
World	   Trade	   Report,	   2011,	   “The	   WTO	   and	   Preferential	   Trade	   Agreements,”	   WTO,	  
Geneva	  
	  
	  
Yeats,	   A.,	   1998.	   “Does	   MERCOSUR’s	   Trade	   Performance	   Raise	   Concerns	   about	   the	  
Effects	   of	   Regional	   Trade	   Arrangements?”	   The	  World	  Bank	  Economic	  Review,	   Vol.	   12,	  
(1),	  pp	  1-­‐28.	  
	  
Yi, S., 1996, “Endogenous Formation of Customs Unions under Imperfect Competition:
Open Regionalism is Good,” Journal of International Economics.
                                          Table I: Trade Under Preferences (2008)

            Regime                        Preferential Trade                  Non-Preferential Trade     MFN=0       Trade

                                  Total    PM > 10%       PM < 10%    Total     MFN > 10%     MFN< 10%           Billions (USD)


MFN                                0           0                0     44.8          4.9           40      53.9       4874

EU-intra                          63.7         9.4             54.3    0             0             0      34.4       3807

Reciprocal Regimes                43.7         5.8             37.9    7.6           1            6.6     47         2803

NAFTA                             60.9         6.3             54.7    0.1           0             0      38.2        912

EU - Switzerland                  56.9         3.9             53      1.3          0.5           0.8     41          261

ASEAN*                            20.1         4               16      3.6          0.3           3.3     72.9        141

EU-Turkey                         78.4        15.2             63.2    0.9          0.5           0.4     20          141

EU-Mexico                         51.2        13.5             37.7    0.9          0.6           0.3     43.2        58


Non-Reciprocal Regimes            17.6         1               16.6   26.3          5.4           21      55.6       2067

EU-GSP                            13.3         0.1             13.2    23           5.7           17.3    63.4       1012

US-GSP                             8.3         0.2             8.1    62.4          5.6           56.8    28.8        258

US-AGOA                           90.1         1.5             88.6    0.1           0             0      9.9         84


Source; World Trade Review 2011
                                                          Table II: Regional Orientation of Trade and Comparative Advantage ­ MERCOSUR

          Product               Exports (Thousands USD)    Exports (Thousands USD)   Regional Orientation   Regional Orientation   ∆ Regional Orientation   Comparative Advantage
                                          1998                       1994                   1988                   1994


Nonalcoholic beverages                     349                      26238                    2.35                  48.47                   46.12                    0.05
Lead                                       642                        219                    3.03                  25.42                   22.39                      0
Prepared dairy                           23495                      204019                   4.31                  22.49                   18.17                    0.13
Nonwheat meal or Flour                      4                         954                    0.05                  17.26                   17.21                    0.04
Perfumes and Cosmetics                   4766                       86282                    5.22                  13.37                   8.16                     0.14
Wheat meal or Flour                        65                        35051                   0.22                   5.67                   5.44                     1.08
Cork manufactures                          18                         721                    1.18                    6.3                   5.13                     0.05
Preserved vegetables                     23404                      48745                   17.66                  22.61                   4.95                     0.13
Articles of Paper                        15763                      72249                    2.16                   7.1                    4.93                      0.2
Nonmotor road vehicles                   3118                       35854                    2.23                   6.88                   4.65                     0.13
Alcoholic beverages                      4137                       81671                    1.87                   6.48                   4.61                     0.19
Agricultural machinery                   39608                      121294                   2.08                   5.88                   3.81                     0.45
Domestic electrical machinery            12568                       97322                   2.19                   5.94                   3.76                     0.23
Road motor vehicles                     206996                     2112750                   1.25                   4.42                   3.17                     0.45
Materials of rubber                       3636                       30780                   3.13                   6.26                   3.13                     0.32
Glassware                                45017                        2.21                   5.09                   2.88                    0.38
Synthetic fibers                         13381                       21170                   6.28                   9.14                    2.87                    0.11
Rice (glazed)                            22583                      148079                   9.28                  11.65                   2.37                     1.03
Lace and Ribbons                          1386                       13157                   3.56                   5.86                    2.29                    0.22
Food preparations                         7727                       45412                    2.1                   4.35                    2.25                    0.28


Source: Yeats (1998)
                                            Table III: Intra-PTA and Extra-PTA Trade (2008)


                     Preferential Trade Agreement                 World (Billions USD)    Intra-PTA Share     Extra-PTA Share

                                                                  Export      Import     Export     Import   Export     Import


ANDEAN Community                                                     94          93        7          8        93         92

ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA)                                        966         929        25         24       75         76

Asia Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA)                                 2043        1897       11         19       89         81

Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM)                      26          29        16         12       84         88

Central American Common Market (CACM)                                25          44        24         11       76         89

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)               57         115        10         5        90         95

Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)                            693         456        18         27       82         73

Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)                   71          58        8          9        92         91

European Free Trade Association (EFTA)                              374         279        1          1        99         99

European Union (27)                                                 5806        6083       67         60       33         40

Global System of Trade Preferences (GSTP)                           1437        1486       19         22       81         78

Gulf Cooperation Council                                            704         366        2          7        98         93

Latin American Integration Association                              814         760        16         18       84         82

North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)                         2047        2882       49         33       51         67

Pan-Arab Free Trade Area (PAFTA)                                    892         607        6          11       94         89

South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA)                            211         374        6          2        94         98

Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR)                                   278         249        17         18       83         82


Source: World Trade Review 2011
                                                                                           Table IV: PTAs - Depth of Integration


                                                                                                                                                                   Provision Not Mentioned   Provision Mentioned and
                                                                Description of Provisions                                                                                                       Legally Enforceable

                                                                                                                                                                      Fraction of PTAs           Fraction of PTAs

                                       WTO-plus areas
FTA Industrial                    Tariff liberalization on industrial goods; elimination of non-tariff measures                                                              27                     73
FTA Agriculture                   Tariff liberalization on agriculture goods; elimination of non-tariff measures                                                             27                     73
Customs                           Provision of information; publication on the Internet of new laws and regulations; training                                                35                     65
Export Taxes                      Elimination of export taxes                                                                                                                52                     48
SPS                               Affirmation of rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement on SPS; harmonization of SPS measures                                        69                     21
TBT                               Affirmation of rights and obligations under WTO Agreement on TBT; harmonization of regulations;                                            67                     30
STE                               Establishment of an independent competition authority; nondiscrimination regarding production and marketing condition;                     64                     34
AD                                Retention of Antidumping rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement (Art. VI GATT).                                                    40                     53
CVM                               Retention of Countervailing measures rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement (Art VI GATT)                                          49                     44
State Aid                         Assessment of anticompetitive behaviour; annual reporting on the value and distribution of state aid given                                 57                     39
Public Procurement                Progressive liberalisation; national treatment and/or non-discrimination principle; specification of public procurement regime             70                     27
TRIMs                             Provisions concerning requirements for local content and export performance of FDI                                                         69                     31
GATS                              Liberalisation of trade in services                                                                                                        61                     39
TRIPs                             Harmonisation of standards; enforcement; national treatment, most-favoured nation treatment                                                56                     43

                                        WTO-X areas
Anti-Corruption                   Criminal offence measures in matters affecting international trade and investment                                                          96                      4
Competition Policy                Harmonisation of competition laws; establishment of an independent competition authority                                                   52                     30
Environmental Laws                Development of environmental standards; enforcement of national environmental laws                                                         85                     11
IPR                               Accession to international treaties not referenced in the TRIPs Agreement                                                                  62                     34
Investment                         Legal frameworks; Harmonisation; National treatment; mechanism for the settlement of disputes                                             69                     30
Labour Market Regulation          Regulation of the national labour market; affirmation of ILO commitments; enforcement                                                      85                     12
Movement of Capital               Liberalisation of capital movement; prohibition of new restrictions                                                                        60                     40
Consumer Protection               Harmonisation of consumer protection laws; exchange of information and experts; training                                                  95                      4
Data Protection                   Exchange of information and experts; joint projects                                                                                        95                      3
Agriculture                       Technical assistance to conduct modernisation projects; exchange of information                                                           93                      5
Approximation of Legislation      Application of EC legislation in national legislation                                                                                      95                      5
Audio Visual                      Promotion of the industry; encouragement of co-production                                                                                 100                      0
Civil Protection                  Implementation of harmonised rules                                                                                                        100                      0
Innovation Policies               Participation in framework programmes; promotion of technology transfers                                                                  99                      1
Cultural Cooperation              Promotion of joint initiatives and local culture                                                                                           98                      1
Economic Policy Dialogue          Exchange of ideas and opinions; joint studies                                                                                              98                      1
Education and Training            Measures to improve the general level of education                                                                                         94                      3
Energy                            Exchange of information; technology transfer; joint studies                                                                                94                      5
Financial Assistance              Set of rules guiding the granting and administration of financial assistance                                                              95                      5
Health                            Monitoring of diseases; development of health information systems; exchange of information                                                99                      0
Human Rights                      Respect for human rights                                                                                                                  100                      0
Illegal Immigration               Conclusion of re-admission agreements; prevention and control of illegal immigration                                                      98                      2
Illicit Drugs                     Treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts; joint projects on prevention of consumption;                                                100                      0
Industrial Cooperation            Assistance in conducting modernisation projects; facilitation and access to credit to finance                                              96                      3
Information Society               Exchange of information; dissemination of new technologies; training                                                                       96                      3
Mining                            Exchange of information and experience; development of joint initiatives                                                                   98                      1
Money Laundering                  Harmonisation of standards; technical and administrative assistance                                                                       100                      0
Nuclear Safety                    Development of laws and regulations; supervision of the transportation of radioactive materials                                           100                     0
Political Dialogue                Convergence of the parties’ positions on international issues                                                                             100                      0
Public Administration             Technical assistance; exchange of information; joint projects; Training                                                                   100                      0
Regional Cooperation              Promotion of regional cooperation; technical assistance programmes                                                                         97                      2
Research and Technology           Joint research projects; exchange of researchers; development of public-private partnership                                               93                      5
SME                               Technical assistance; facilitation of the access to finance                                                                                95                      2
Social Matters                    Coordination of social security systems; non-discrimination regarding working conditions                                                  91                      8
Statistics                        Harmonisation and/or development of statistical methods; training                                                                          98                      2
Taxation                          Assistance in conducting fiscal system reforms                                                                                             98                      2
Terrorism                         Exchange of information and experience; joint research and studies                                                                        100                      0
Visa and Asylum                   Exchange of information; drafting legislation; training                                                                                    85                     14

Source: World Trade Review 2011
        P




PW+ T       E’W

                                     E’B
PB+ T
                  1              3
   PW                                      EW
                  2                  4
   PB
                                                  EB

                                                       MA


    O                       MO             MPT
                                                        Q

                            Figure I


              Trade Creating Tariff Preferences
              Change in Welfare = (3+4)
        P




PW+ T       E’W

                                      E’B
PB+ T
                  1               3
   PW                                       EW
                  2
   PB
                                                   EB

                                                        MA


    O                        MO       MPT
                                                         Q

                             Figure II


                  Trade Diverting Tariff Preferences:
                  Change in Welfare = (3-2)
              Figure III: External terms of Trade Effects ­ MERCOSUR




Source: Chang and Winters (2002)
