                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               REPOSSESSION AND THE DEMOCRATIZATION OF CREDIT

                                         Juliano J. Assunção
                                          Efraim Benmelech
                                         Fernando S. S. Silva

                                        Working Paper 17858
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17858


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Daniel Carvalho, Lauren Cohen, Ken French, Simon Gervais, Karl Diether,
Todd Gromley, Oliver Hart, Campbell Harvey, Bengt Holmstrom, Laura Jones Dooley, Rafael La
Porta, Marco Pagano, Manju Puri, Adriano Rampini, David Robinson, Andrei Shleifer, Matthew Slaughter,
Jeremy Stein, Vish Vishwanathan, Amir Yaron, Rebecca Zarutskie, and seminar participants at Banca
d’Italia, Brigham Young University, Boston University, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Dartmouth
(Tuck), Duke (Fuqua School of Business), Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance, European
Central Bank, the Grossman and Hart at 25 conference at the Solvay Brussels School of Economics
and Management, Harvard-MIT Applied Theory seminar, HEC Paris, INSEAD, Pontifcia Universidade
Católica do Rio de Janeiro,University of Southern California (Marshall), and Wharton for very helpful
comments. Benmelech is grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation under
CAREER award SES-0847392. Assunção is grateful for financial support from the Consortium on
Financial Systems and Poverty at University of Chicago and CNPq. Silva is grateful for financial support
from CAPES and CNPq. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Juliano J. Assunção, Efraim Benmelech, and Fernando S. S. Silva. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Repossession and the Democratization of Credit
Juliano J. Assunção, Efraim Benmelech, and Fernando S. S. Silva
NBER Working Paper No. 17858
February 2012
JEL No. G21,G28,K22

                                              ABSTRACT

We exploit a 2004 credit reform in Brazil that simplified the sale of repossessed cars used as collateral
for auto loans. We show that the change has led to larger loans with lower spreads and longer maturities.
The reform expanded credit to riskier, low-income borrowers for newer, more expensive cars. Although
the credit reform improved riskier borrowers’ access to credit, it also led to increased incidences of
delinquency and default. Our results shed light on the consequences of a credit reform, highlighting
the crucial role that collateral and repossession play in the liberalization and democratization of credit.


Juliano J. Assunção                                      Fernando S. S. Silva
Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio)          Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio)
Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225                          Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225
22451-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ                             22451-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ
Brazil                                                   Brazil
juliano@econ.puc-rio.br                                  fernandosssilva@yahoo.com.br

Efraim Benmelech
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu
I.    Introduction

Perhaps the most important legal feature of debt contracts is the lender’s right to repossess assets
when borrowers default on promised payments. The legal right to repossess collateral is critical to
the provision of credit because it allows creditors to recover, at least partially, the value of their
loans. We show how a 2004 credit reform that simplified the selling of repossessed cars led to the
liberalization of the auto loan credit market in Brazil. Our evidence suggests that the legal change
has led to larger loans with lower spreads, longer maturities, and higher leverage.
     The development of the Brazilian auto loan market has faced several impediments. Chief among
them was the inefficient process of repossession and resale of autos when borrowers defaulted on
their loans. Banks were allowed to repossess the autos of borrowers who failed to repay their loans.
However, these banks could not resell these repossessed cars without court approval. As a result,
the time from repossession of a car to its resale by the bank averaged more than two years. In
August 2004, the Brazilian government announced a broad credit reform that, among other legal
changes, eased the resale of repossessed autos.
     Although previous research has analyzed some implications of legal reforms to credit markets,
the evidence on the effect of such reforms on lending is mixed. While the improvement in judi-
cial efficiency and creditor rights is correlated with increased supply of external finance (Jappelli,
Pagano, and Bianco (2005), La Porta et al. (1997), Laeven and Majnoni (2005)), the effect of the
reform on financial contracts is ambiguous. On one hand, increased recovery of collateral induces
banks to offer larger loans with lower credit spreads and longer maturities. On the other hand,
however, increased recovery rates enables riskier borrowers who were previously rejected and ra-
tioned out of the market to obtain credit. While enhancing the ability of banks to recover their
loans leads to better contracts for existing borrowers, banks will offer smaller loans, with higher
credit spreads and shorter maturities, to the newly admitted cohort of riskier borrowers.
     We use micro-level data from one of the largest banks in Brazil to provide direct evidence on
the consequences of the reform. Our data enable us to separate the direct effect of the legal change
on contracts from the composition effect that results in increased lending to riskier borrowers. We
show that the reform brought about an expansion of credit, enabling riskier, low-income borrowers
to obtain loans and purchase newer, more expensive cars. We refer to this effect as the “democra-
tization of credit,” in which the strengthening of the ability of lenders to foreclose, repossess, and


                                                  1
sell assets increases the supply of credit to those who need it most.
   Using detailed information on a large sample of auto loans made by one of Brazil’s largest
banks during the years 2003 to 2005 we study the relation between the bank’s ability to seize
and resell collateral and a battery of outcomes pertaining to: (i) financial contracts, (ii) borrower
characteristics, (iii) car characteristics, and (iv) loan performance. Consistent with the predictions
from the financial contracting literature (Hart and Moore (1994), Shleifer and Vishny (1992)),
our analysis shows that the credit reform in Brazil led to larger loans with lower spreads, longer
maturities, and higher leverage.
   We also find that the ability to resell collateral affected not only financial contracts but also the
composition of borrowers in the auto loan market. As the process of reselling repossessed cars was
expedited dramatically with the implementation of the reform, expected loss given default from
a car loan declined sharply. As a result, borrowers with a higher probability of default would be
expected, ex ante, to be more likely to obtain an auto loan. Our regression analysis shows that the
reform enabled riskier, low-income borrowers to obtain loans and purchase newer, more expensive
cars. Further, borrowers who are self-employed were more likely to obtain a car loan. These results
demonstrate a process of the “democratization” of credit – in which an improved legal process to
resell collateral led to an expansion of credit to borrowers who were less likely to obtain a loan
before the reform.
   Further, we study the consequences of the reform for loan performance. A growing body
of empirical evidence suggests that credit expansion leads to subsequent waves of default and
repossession (Keys et al. (2010), Mian and Sufi (2009, 2010)). Given that we find that the reform
led to lending to riskier borrowers, it is likely that loans granted after the reform will have a higher
rate of default. We use three measures to capture the performance of loans: (i) late payment, (ii)
default on one loan installment, and (iii) default on the entire loan. We find that after controlling
for contract terms, personal and car characteristics, macro controls, and time trend, the likelihood
of a late payment and default increased after the law was implemented. The effect of the reform
on the probability that the borrower will be late or default is substantial, implying an increase of
about 20% relative to the mean.
   Our regressions control for a battery of contract, borrower, and car characteristics, in addition
to macro variables. Although our identification strategy hinges on the notion that our results are
driven only by the time-series change in the law, other important polices that affect credit markets

                                                   2
also change over time and potentially coincide with our time-series measure of the reform. Although
our analysis controls for such macro variables as the federal funds rate, inflation, and GDP growth,
it is possible that unobserved contemporaneous shocks affected car loans through channels other
than the law.
   To alleviate concerns about the validity of our identification strategy we add a cross-sectional
dimension to the analysis by utilizing information on the age of the car underlying the loans. Some
asset types such as cars are subject to an accelerated depreciation in which they lose more of their
value upfront. Whereas the legal reform applies to all auto loans, we expect loans on new cars
to be affected more than those backed by older cars. While before the reform it took about two
years to resell a repossessed car regardless of its age, a newer car can be expected to lose more
of its collateral value earlier on, which should affect the terms of loans secured by new cars more
than those secured by used autos. Consistent with this prediction, we find that the effect of the
reform on credit spreads is higher for new cars compared to used cars. We obtain similar results
for each of the other dimensions of the contract. The law prolonged loan maturities and increased
loan amounts for new cars while having a smaller effect on loans secured by used cars.
   Our paper adds to the growing literature on the role that creditor protection plays in the
development of credit and debt markets (e.g., Djankov, McLeish, and Shleifer (2007), Haselmann,
Pistor, and Vig (2010), La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), and Vig (2011)) and in shaping financial
contracts (e.g., Bae and Goyal (2009), Kaplan, Martel, and Stromberg (2007), Lerner and Schoar
(2005), and Qian and Strahan (2007)). Our paper is also related to the vast theoretical literature on
the role of collateral in secured lending (Aghion and Bolton (1992), Bolton and Scharfstein (1996),
Boot and Thakor (1991), Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009), Hart and Moore (1994, 1998), Johnson and
Stulz (1985), and Rampini and Viswanathan (2010)) and to the empirical evidence on the effect
of collateral on financial contracts and lending (Benmelech (2009), Benmelech, Garmaise, and
Moskowitz (2005), Benmelech and Bergman (2008, 2009, 2011), Berger and Udell (1990), Jimenez,
Salas, and Saurina (2006), John, Lynch, and Puri (2003), and van Binsbergen, Graham, and Yang
(2010)).
   The rest of the article is organized as follows: Section II describes the institutional details of the
credit reform in Brazil. Section III describes of our data sources and summary statistics. Section
IV presents the empirical analysis. Section V concludes.



                                                   3
II.       Institutional Details
A.      Background

The development of the Brazilian auto loan market has faced several impediments. Chief among
them was the inefficient process of repossession and resale of autos when borrowers defaulted on
their loans. Brazilian banks could repossess the autos of borrowers who failed to repay their loans.
Without court approval, however, banks could not resell these repossessed cars. As a result, the
time from repossession of a car to its resale by the bank averaged more than two years. In August
2004, the Brazilian government announced a broad credit reform that, among other legal changes,
eased the resale of repossessed autos.1
      The reform dramatically changed the auto loan market. In 2007, Veja, the most popular weekly
newsmagazine in Brazil, wrote:

        Brazilians have never bought so many cars. In 2007, it will be 2.5 million units, an
        unparalleled record for the auto industry. ... And there is only one explanation for this:
        credit. Until recently, in Brazil, credit was scarce and expensive. Now, it is possible
        to buy a car without a down payment and to finance it for up to seven years with
        installments below the (monthly) minimum wage.2

Before the credit reform, auto financing was not an attractive line of business for banks due to
the inefficient legal process in the event of default. The credit reform transformed the auto loans
market, as Veja noted:

        The proceedings dragged on for years, and often the judges gave cause to buyers. This
        situation changed only after the implementation of the “lei de alienação fiduciária,” a
        legal institute that provides for the rapid recovery of car financing in case of default.

To better understand the changes in the credit market, we first describe the auto credit system
before the reform.

B.      The Brazilian Auto Loan Market

We briefly describe the process of obtaining an auto loan in Brazil before moving to the details of
the credit reform. Buyers who need to finance the purchase of a vehicle typically fill out a loan
  1
      One of the government’s official objectives was to reduce costs associated with the recovery rates of auto loans.
  2
      “Propulsão a Crédito,” Veja, October 31, 2007.


                                                            4
application through an auto dealer. The loan is then submitted for bank review and approval. If
the bank approves the application the dealership handles the loan agreement but is not held liable
for the loan. Auto loans can be granted either through “crédito direto ao consumidor” (direct
consumer credit) or “arrendamento mercantil.” Both procedures are similar, and in both cases
the purchaser gains ownership of the vehicle only after having fully repaid the loan. Loans are
amortized and typically mature in three years, with equal monthly installments. If the borrower
defaults on three consecutive payments, the bank issues a report to both the Central Bank of Brazil
and the country’s largest credit agency, Serasa.3 The bank may then either attempt to renegotiate
the loan or trigger the repossession process.

C.      The Credit Reform

Brazilian fiduciary law applied first to capital markets and was later extended to auto and mortgage
loans.4 According to the law, the bank, after granting an auto loan, holds the title to the car until
the loan is paid in full. The borrower is entitled to the daily use of the vehicle used as collateral.
When the borrower pays all loan installments in accordance with the agreement, the bank transfers
the car title to the borrower. In the case of default, the borrower may no longer use the car. The
bank can then repossess the vehicle through a court injunction after proving default. Before the
reform, however, the bank needed to wait for a court decision in order to resell a repossessed car.
During this period the car was stored at a parking facility.
      Initial implementation in the 1960s proceeded smoothly. The legal process was fairly short, and
the court system could handle the number of cases awaiting trial. Over time, however, the process
lengthened. By the late 1990s financial institutions faced lengthy waits for authorization to resell
repossessed vehicles. According to a senior Brazilian bank officer, in many cases banks had to wait
more than three years. The inefficient legal system also hurt borrowers. During the time it took to
resell cars, borrowers’ indebtedness increased at the pace of the loan interest rate while the value
of the underlying collateral, the car, depreciated over time.
      The need for reform was indisputable. To remove inefficiencies in the auto loan and other credit
markets, the government enacted federal law n.10.931/04, the Lei de Alienação Fiduciária (fiduciary
law), which the president signed on August 2, 2004. This legislation, which became effective on its
  3
      Serasa is a private bureau. Its role is to maintain a database on the standing of borrowers.
  4
      The law was implemented in 1965; it was extended to auto loans in 1969 and to mortgages in 1997.




                                                         5
enactment, affected the auto loan, mortgage, and capital markets. Due to political uncertainty, the
banking system was skeptical about the implementation of the law until it was enacted. There was
also considerable uncertainty about the ability of the court system to operationalize the reform.
      The most notable changes introduced by the law that apply to the auto loan market regard the
authorization to resell a repossessed vehicle. This process became simpler and faster. Amendolara
(2006) highlights three differences regarding the process of auto repossession and resale. First, after
the bank gets a court injunction to seize the car, the borrower has five days to pay the debt in full
and recover possession of the vehicle. Second, the borrower has fifteen days to challenge the court
injunction instead of the previously established three days. The main difference in the law here is
that now the bank may resell the car after this period of fifteen days, where previously it could sell
the car only after trial. Third, the borrower has the right to challenge the bank in court. If the
bank is found guilty, it must compensate the borrower by an amount equal to 150 percent of the
total loan.
      Ultimately, the law has reformulated relationships among borrowers, creditors, and courts.
Borrowers and creditors now engage in direct relationships, and courts play a significant role only
when borrowers explicitly request it. The law avoids unnecessary trials, reduces the reliance on
courts, and increases the enforceability of auto loan contracts.
      The new environment marked a dramatic turn for the auto loan market. According to senior
officers from a large Brazilian bank, the process of repossession and resale formerly took between
two and three years. Now this process takes three weeks. Although some borrowers sue the bank
after losing their car, the bank has never been found guilty by the courts. Finally, the supply
of credit for auto loans has grown dramatically. According to the Central Bank of Brazil, credit
for vehicles grew from R$34.7 billion (US$11.5 billion) in August 2004 to R$60.2 billion (US$27.9
billion) two years later.


III.       Data and Summary Statistics

Our proprietary data come from one of the three largest private banks in Brazil.5 As of December
2010 the combined assets value of these banks – Bradesco, Itau Unibanco, and Santander – was
R$1.7 trillion (US$1 trillion). According to the Central Bank, Bradesco, Itau Unibanco, and San-
tander account for 43% of the Brazilian banking system, and their credit portfolio as of December
  5
      We are unable to disclose the bank’s name.


                                                   6
2010 was R$573 billion (US$345 billion).6 The bank that provided us with the data (hereafter “The
Bank”) plays a significant role in the car loan market, having a market share of more than 15% in
2003, the first year of our data.
    We obtained a random yet balanced sample of about 17,000 loan contracts covering the period
from August 2003 to July 2005. Our data span an interval of the 24 months surrounding the
implementation of the law. We chose this time frame in order to incorporate in the analysis the
time needed by The Bank to better understand the law and adjust its lending practices to the
new institutional setting. The symmetry of two equal periods of 12 months before and after the
implementation of the law allows us to account for possible seasonal effects.
    The dataset includes micro-level detailed information for each loan contract on contract terms,
borrower’s characteristics, and the cars against which the loans were made. The loan contract
terms include credit spread (defined as the difference between the monthly interest rate on the loan
and federal rate fund), maturity (in months), down payment (payment the borrower made out of
pocket when buying the car), total financed (loan amount), and proportion financed (loan amount
divided by car value).7 The data also contain a rich set of borrower characteristics, including
consumer leverage, income, risk, gender, job, residence, and marital status. We also know whether
the borrower has been a client of the bank in the past and whether the loan is guaranteed by a
third party. Finally, the data also include information on the underlying car against which the loan
was given. In particular, we know car model, year of manufacture, and whether a priority dealer
made the sale. The Appendix provides detailed information on the definitions of the variables used
here and their construction.
    Table 1 displays descriptive statistics for the variables used in the analysis. As Panel A shows,
the average spread is 1.10% per month with a standard deviation of 66 basis points per month.
Loan maturity is around three years (36.1 months), with the 5th percentile being 18.0 months and
the 95th percentile 48.0 months. Down payments are sizable compared to car value. The average
down payment is R$6,903 (US$2,448), while the amount financed averages R$9,760 (US$3,461).
Borrowers finance, on average, 62.3% of car value. The mean consumer leverage – defined as the
ratio of monthly loan installments to monthly income – is 24.9%, and ranges between 8.0% (5th
   6
     The public sector also plays a major role in the Brazilian banking system. For example, both the largest
Brazilian bank, Banco do Brasil, and Caixa Economica Federal, the fourth commercial bank, are controlled by the
federal government.
   7
     All loans in the data are amortized to equal payments through the life of the loan.



                                                      7
percentile) to 46.1% (95th percentile).
   Panel B of Table 1 presents summary statistics of borrower characteristics. The median bor-
rower’s monthly income is R$1,706 (US$605). There is a wide dispersion in borrowers’ income,
which ranges from a 5th percentile of R$803 ($284.8) to a 95th percentile of R$6,181 ($2,191.9).
The Bank’s clients represent 24% of the borrowers in the sample, and 8% of the contracts have a
third-party guarantor. The Bank classifies borrowers into three categories, “high risk,” “medium
risk,” and “low risk,” where 3% of borrowers are classified as “high risk.” About two-thirds of the
sample consist of males; 40% are single, and 45% are married. Homeowners represent 83% of the
borrowers, and 13% of the borrowers live with their parents. Among the borrowers, 59% are em-
ployees of firms, compared to 26% classified as self-employed or entrepreneurs and 12% identified
as retired or as pensioners.
   Panel C provides more information on the characteristics of the cars against which the loans are
granted. There are two car characteristics. First, we define a dummy variable to indicate whether
the car is new. Only 21% of the cars financed by The Bank are new. The mean car age is 5.32
years, and it ranges from new (5th percentile) to 13 years old (95th percentile). Second, The Bank
classifies car dealers into two categories: priority and not priority. A dealer is considered a priority
dealer if a low proportion of borrowers buying a car through the dealer default. In the sample, 88%
of the cars were purchased from priority dealers.
   Panel D reports summary statistics on three measures of loan outcomes. Late is a dummy equal
to one if the borrower was late on a loan installment, and zero otherwise. Default installment is a
dummy variable equals to one if the borrower was late on two installments at the same time, and
zero otherwise. Whenever a borrower has been late for over 90 days the loan is considered to be in
default. As Panel D demonstrates, the incidence of late payment and default happen in about 8 to
9 percent of the loans in our sample.
   Finally, Panel E exemplifies the macro environment in Brazil during the period we study. As the
Table shows, average monthly federal fund rates were 1.42%, inflation rate was 8.92% and ranged
from 5.89% to 15.14%, and quarterly GDP growth was 1.15% on average.




                                                   8
IV.      Empirical Analysis

In this section, we analyze empirically the effect of the law on a battery of loan terms, borrower
characteristics, and loan outcomes. Starting with a simple univariate analysis, Table 2 reports
for the main variables of interest summary statistics that are calculated separately for the periods
before and after enactment of the law. As Panel A of Table 2 illustrates, average monthly credit
spread declined from 1.18% to 1.02% after the law’s enactment. Likewise, loan maturity increased
from 34.6 to 37.7 months, down payments declined, and as a result the total amount financed (the
size of the loan) increased, resulting in loans with higher loan-to-value ratios and consumers with
increased leverage.
     Similarly, Panel B reports summary statistics of borrower characteristics broken down by pre-
and post-law periods. The key characteristics that changed in a statistically significant manner in
the post-law period pertain to the borrowers’ riskiness and employment status. According to Panel
B, borrowers in the post-law period were more likely to be high risk and to be self-employed or
entrepreneurs than before the law was enacted.
     The evidence in Table 2 suggests that enactment of the law led to larger loans with lower
spreads and longer maturities as well as to expansion of credit to riskier borrowers. We turn now
to regression analysis.

A.     The Legal Reform and Loan Terms

We study the effect of an enhancement in creditor rights on spreads, loan maturity (in months),
loan size, and consumer leverage by estimating the following equation:

         loan characteristicsi,t = α + β1 × lawi,t + Ti,t λ + bi ψ + ci,t θ + mi,t ξ + ei,t γ + i,t   (1)

Where lawi,t is a dummy variable indicating that the loan was initiated after the law was imple-
mented. T is a vector of contract terms that includes spread, maturity, and down payment; b is a
vector of borrower characteristics that includes income, risk, gender, a dummy equal to one if the
borrower has a guarantor, type of job, type of residence, marital status, and whether the borrower
is a bank client; c is a vector of car characteristics and includes a dummy variable equal to one if
the car is new, a dummy indicating whether the borrower took the loan from a priority dealership,
and the year in which the car was made; m is a vector of car model fixed-effects; and e is a vector



                                                     9
of macro controls that includes the federal fund rate, inflation, GDP growth, and a time trend.8
The coefficient of interest is β1 , which measures the effect of the law on contract characteristics.
    Panel A of Table 3 reports results from estimating the effect of the credit reform on spreads,
maturity, loan size, and consumer leverage. Because debt contracts have several facets that are
jointly determined, it is virtually impossible to estimate the simultaneous effect of the reform on
each of these dimensions. Instead, we study each contractual term separately. Our regressions
control for all contract terms (spread, maturity, and down payment) with the exception of the
contractual term, which we use as a dependent variable.9 As the first column of Table 3 shows,
the reform significantly decreased credit spreads charged by The Bank. Controlling for contract,
borrower, and car characteristics as well as macro variables, we find that after the reform, credit
spreads on car loans declined by 10.6 (127) basis points per month (year), representing a decline of
9.4% compared to the unconditional mean spread.
    Moreover, as the second column shows, the reform prolonged the maturity of the loans by 2.07
months (statistically significant at the 1% level), representing an increase of 6% relative to the
unconditional average maturity before the law was enacted. These results are consistent with a
recent A. T. Kearney report, which states that

      automotive credit has grown at consistent rates over the past years. Outstanding volumes
      have risen from R$30 Billion in 2003 to R$100 Billion in 2007. Average loan terms,
      which ranged from 24 to 36 months in the past, today are set, as a standard, at 60
      months. More aggressive financial companies risk contracts of 72 or even up to 99
      months.10

Column 3 shows that average loan size (defined as the natural log of the total amount financed)
increased by about 2%. Likewise, the last column of Table 3 reports the effect of the legal reform
on consumer leverage. Leverage – defined as the ratio of loan installment to income – increases
by 1.841 (7.5% of the unconditional mean before enactment of the law) after controlling for other
contract terms as well as personal and car characteristics and macro variables and year fixed-effects.
   8
     Even though our results hold when we include year fixed-effects, we employ a time trend in order to utilize the
variation in the 24 month surrounding the enactment of the law. In contrast, when we include year fixed-effects, we
can identify only off of variation in the year 2004.
   9
     This approach is similar to Benmelech, Garmaise, and Moskowitz (2005) and Qian and Strahan (2007).
  10
     http://www.atkearney.com/index.php/Our-expertise/financial-brazils-economic-risk-from-accentuated-growth-
in-auto-loans.html.



                                                        10
    As Table 3 demonstrates, the reform led to improvements in contractual terms by prolonging
loan maturity, reducing credit spreads, and increasing loan amounts. Our results are consistent
with previous empirical studies on the effects of collateral values and legal protection on differ-
ent contracts dimensions (Benmelech, Garmaise, and Moskowitz (2005), Benmelech and Bergman
(2009), and Qian and Strahan (2007)).
    Our results so far rely on the assumption that, after controlling for contract, borrower, and
car characteristics as well as macro variables, changes in the law over time affect the outcomes of
interest. That is, the variable law captures only the effects of the reform. However, other important
policies that affect credit markets change over time and potentially coincide with our time-series
measure of the reform. Although our analysis controls for a time trend and for such macro variables
as the federal fund rate, inflation, and GDP growth, it is possible that unobserved contemporaneous
shocks affect car loans through channels other than the law.
    To alleviate concerns about the validity of our identification strategy we conduct several placebo
tests and find that our results are not driven by a time-trend that is unrelated to the enactment of
the law. We define a “placebo law” dummy variable that takes the value of one for some arbitrary
dates unrelated to the timing of the Lei de Alienação Fiduciária, and zero otherwise. Panel B
of Table 3 reports results from such placebo regressions in which we define August 2007 as the
placebo law month, where the placebo dummy equals one for the twelve months after the “law,”
and zero in the twelve months before August 2007.11 We choose this time-period since it does
not overlap with the 24 months surrounding the law enactment period. If our results are driven
by a trend of improvement in contractual terms we should expect further declines in spreads,
prolongation of maturities, and increases of loan amounts and leverage over time. However, as
Panel B demonstrates, loan spread increases slightly during this time period – the opposite of
what should happen if our results were driven by an ongoing trend of contractual improvements.
Moreover, none of the other variables – maturity, loan size, and consumer leverage – is affected by
the placebo law in an economically or statistically significant manner.
    Although the estimates in Table 3 show that average maturity has lengthened, it is unlikely
that all contracts have increased by about two months; more likely, some contracts increased
substantially while the maturity of others was not affected. We analyze the effect of the law on
  11
     Although we have conducted several placebo regressions, we report only the August 2006-July 2008 regressions
for brevity.



                                                       11
loan maturity in more detail in Table 4. We run linear probability OLS regressions to study the
effect of the law on the likelihood that loan maturity is (i) two years or more, (ii) three years or
more, and (iii) four years or more.12 Panel A shows that the likelihood of longer-term loans with
maturities exceeding two, three, and four years increased after enactment of the law. Thus, the law
did not merely increase the maturity of the average loan but instead led to the creation of loans
that are one or two years longer. For robustness, and similar to Panel B of Table 3, we run placebo
regressions and show that the placebo law dummy does not explain the likelihood of longer-term
loans (Panel B).

B.       Collateral and Loan Terms: Cross-Sectional Evidence

We add a cross-sectional dimension to the analysis by utilizing information on the age of the car
underlying the loans. Some asset types, such as cars, are subject to accelerated depreciation, in
which they lose more of their value up front. Indeed, in the United States the Internal Revenue
Service allows accelerated depreciation for newer cars, in which a larger fraction of the asset value
can be deducted in the first two years of the car’s life. Although the legal reform applies to all auto
loans, we expect loans on new cars to be affected more than those backed by older cars. Whereas
before the reform it took banks about two years to resell a repossessed car regardless of its age, a
newer car is expected to lose more of its collateral value earlier on, which should affect the terms
of loans secured by new cars more than those secured by used ones.
       We stratify the sample based on car age and estimate regressions similar to the specification
in equation 1. Panel A of Table 5 reports results based on a new/old car stratification while
Panel B stratifies loans backed by used cars along a five-year age threshold. Similar to the previous
specifications, we control for contract terms, borrower characteristics, car model fixed-effects, macro
controls, and a time trend. The inclusion of car model fixed-effects enables us to isolate the
pure effect of the car’s age in our stratification because the analysis is based on within car-model
variation.13
       As the first two columns of Panel A show, the effect of the reform on credit spreads is higher
for new cars compared to used cars. In a sample of 3,702 new auto loans, the coefficient of β1 is
−0.344 representing a decrease of 29.2% relative to the mean and is significant at the 1% level.
  12
     We use a linear probability model instead of non-linear specifications because of the battery of fixed-effects that
are included in the analysis and the problem of incidental parameters.
  13
     Because we stratify by car age, we do not include it as a car characteristic in the regression.



                                                          12
In comparison, β1 = −0.027 and is statistically insignificant in a sample of 13,645 loans that are
secured by used cars. We obtain similar results for each of the other dimensions of the contract.
The law prolonged loan maturity by 5.882 months for new cars, representing an increase of 17%
compared to a more moderate increase of 1.594 months (4.6% relative to the mean) in loans secured
by used cars. The next two columns show that although the law increased loan size by 12% for
new car loans, it had no effect on used car loans. Finally, the law led to higher leverage ratios for
new cars compared to old cars (5.229% compared to 1.114%).
     We further stratify the data on used cars in Panel B, using five years as our stratification
threshold. There are 5,299 used cars that are five years old or less and 8,346 cars that are older
than five years. Consistent with the findings in Panel A, we find that loans secured by used cars
that are up to five years old have lower spreads, longer maturities, bigger loans, and higher leverage
compared to loans secured by older cars. Taken together, the evidence presented in Table 5 is
consistent with the importance of the legal reform for collateral values and is unlikely to be driven
by a mere improvement in the underlying economic environment.

C.     The Effect of the Law on Borrower Characteristics

We next examine the effect of the law on borrower characteristics. We hypothesize that the law
affected not only financial contracts but also the population of borrowers.14 Indeed, the summary
statistics in Table 2 show that enactment of the law has led to an increase in the fraction of
borrowers who are classified as high risk (from 0.02 to 0.04, significant at the 1% level). The table
also documents an increase in the share of borrowers who are self-employed or entrepreneurs, from
0.24 in the 12 months preceding the law to 0.29 in the 12 months after the law. As the process
of reselling repossessed cars has been expedited dramatically with the reform, the expected loss
given default from a car loan has declined sharply. We argue that by increasing collateral values,
the law relaxes constraints in the ability of borrowers to pledge their car as collateral. As a result,
borrowers with a higher probability of default will be more likely to obtain an auto loan. That is,
we expect the bank to expand credit to riskier borrowers given that, in the event of default, the
collateral is now more valuable.
     Specifically, we test the effect of the law on the following borrower characteristics: (i) income,
  14
     See Jappelli, Pagano, and Bianco (2005) for a formal model of the effect of judicial enforcement in credit markets
on the composition of borrowers in the market.




                                                          13
(ii) borrower risk, and (iii) whether the borrower is self-employed or an entrepreneur and hence
may lack a stable income. We estimate the following regression:

      borrower characteristici,t = α + β1 × lawt + Ti,t λ + bi ψ + ci,t θ + mi,t ξ + ei,t γ + i,t   (2)

Where the vectors T, b, c, m, and e are defined as before and the coefficient β1 captures the effect
of the law on borrowers’ characteristics. Table 6 presents the results.
   The first column of Table 6 reports the effect of the law on the borrower’s income. We define
the dependent svariable as the natural log of monthly income. Given that in Column 1 we estimate
a semi-log specification, the coefficient β1 suggest that the monthly income of an average borrower
is 3.2% lower after the reform – an effect that is robust to the inclusion of controls that pertain to
contract terms as well as car and other personal characteristics, time-series-based macro controls,
and a time trend. That is – consistent with our conjecture – the reform succeeded in extending car
loans to lower-income borrowers who were otherwise constrained in their ability to borrow given
low collateral values.
   Next, we study the effect of the law on the risk profile of borrowers. Whereas our first measure
of borrower’s income is likely correlated with the risk of default, we now turn to a more direct
measure of risk that is used by The Bank for credit analysis. We regress our measure for high-risk
borrowers on the law dummy and the battery of control variables used before: contract terms,
personal characteristics, macro controls, and a time trend. As the second column of Table 6 shows,
β1 =0.014, indicating an increase in the proportion of high-risk borrowers among the population
of borrowers after the reform. The economic magnitude of this effect is sizeable, representing an
increase of 70.0% compared to the unconditional mean in the period before enactment of the law.
   Finally, in the last column of the table we test whether the law has had an effect on the likelihood
that a borrower is self-employed or an entrepreneur. We hypothesize that, given that The Bank
can now put more weight on collateral in its credit allocation, it will have less need to rely on a
stable source of income that is more typical for those employed by firms than for the self-employed.
As Table 6 shows, and consistent with the evidence from the summary statistics in Table 2, we
find that the reform had a significant effect on the likelihood that someone who is self-employed
or an entrepreneur will be able to obtain a car loan from The Bank. The coefficient of the law
dummy β1 =0.051 (significant at the 1% level) represents an increase of 21.3% compared to the
unconditional mean in the period before the reform.

                                                  14
     Taken together, our results suggest that, after the reform, The Bank expanded financial services
to higher-risk, lower-income borrowers. Moreover, The Bank was more likely to extend credit to
self-employed borrowers. The evidence shows that improvement in creditor rights leads to better
and broader access to finance. Our findings point to the importance of legal protection for creditors
and are consistent with the ample evidence gained from cross-country regressions (Benmelech and
Bergman (2011), Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007), La Porta et al.(1997, 1998). As far
as we know, this article is the first to provide evidence that stronger creditor rights lead to a
“democratization of credit” – as lower-income, riskier borrowers were now granted a loan from The
Bank.

D.     Changing Borrower Characteristics and Loan Terms

The evidence in Table 6 clearly demonstrates that enactment of the law enabled The Bank to
grant loans to borrowers who would have been previously rejected. In addition to improving loan
terms by reducing spreads and increasing maturities and loan amounts, the law has also led to the
provision of credit to riskier borrowers, which in turn leads to higher spreads, shorter maturities
and smaller loan amounts. That is, the average effect of the law on contracts is masked by its effect
on increasing the supply of credit to riskier borrowers.
     In this section we study the differential effect of the legal reform on loan terms conditional on
borrower characteristics. Given that the reform led to an influx of riskier, low-income borrowers, we
stratify the data on measures of risk and income to evaluate the law’s effect on contracts separately
for each group. Panel A of Table 7 reports results based on risk stratification. We split the sample
into borrowers with a credit score of 1 (low risk) and those with the highest level of risk (score of
3) and estimate separate regressions within each group. There are 12,623 individuals classified as
low risk and 464 at the highest risk of default.
     As the first two columns of Panel A show, the effect of the reform on credit spreads is higher
for low-risk borrowers compared to high-risk individuals. In a sample of 12,623 loans to low-risk
borrowers, the coefficient of β1 is −0.117, representing a decrease of 11.5% relative to the mean
(significant at the 1% level). In comparison, β1 = 0.027 and is statistically insignificant in the
high-risk sample. Likewise, loan maturity increased by 1.991 months, representing an increase of
5.9% relative to the pre-law mean, while there is no statistically significant effect of the law on loan
maturity of risky borrowers. The next two columns show that although the law increased loan size


                                                   15
by 2.8% for low-risk borrowers, it had no effect on loans to high-risk individuals. Finally, the law
led to higher leverage ratios for risky borrowers but had no effect on risky borrowers.
      We conduct similar analysis in Panel B, comparing the differential effect of the law on the first
and the fourth quartiles of income. Consistent with the evidence in Panel A, we find that for high-
income borrowers β1 is −0.173, representing a decrease of 17.0% relative to the mean (significant at
the 1% level). In comparison, for low-income borrowers β1 = 0.035 and is statistically insignificant.
Similar results are obtained for maturity and leverage in which the effect is higher for high-income
borrowers, while we do not find a statistically significant effect of the law on the loan size of either
high- or low-income borrowers.

E.      The Effect of the Law on Car Characteristics

We now analyze the effect of the law on the type of car securing the loans. As shown in the previous
section, the reform led to larger loans, lower spreads, and longer contracts and enabled lower-income,
self-employed, and high-risk borrowers to obtain loans. We conjecture that the improvements in
contractual terms may lead borrowers to choose newer, more expensive cars.
      We report the results in Table 8 with odd columns showing results from regressions that in-
clude car model fixed-effects and even columns presenting results without car model effects. All
regressions control for personal characteristics as well as macro variables and a time trend. Unlike
our previous specifications we do not control for contractual terms. There is a strong correlation
between loan maturity and car attributes such as car age and whether the car is new, since newer
cars are more likely to receive longer-term funding due to their durability.15 When we include loan
maturity in the regressions, the effect weakens considerably both economically and statistically,
suggesting that the effect of the law on the types of cars that borrowers purchase is through a
contractual channel.
      The first column of Table 8 displays the results from a regression in which the dependent variable
is the log of car value. As Column 1 demonstrates, the value of cars financed by The Bank after the
reform increased by 2.0% (significant at the 1% level). The estimate in Column 1 is a within model
estimate since we control for car model fixed-effects. When we do not difference out car model
effects, the coefficient is almost fourfold because it captures not only within-model price variation
but also cross-car model variation due to borrowers shifting to more expensive model types.
 15
      Benmelech (2009) documents similar effects for nineteenth-century American railroads.



                                                         16
     Likewise, Columns 3 and 4 show that the age of cars financed by The Bank declined by 0.436
and 0.599 years, respectively. Finally, we define a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the
car is new and zero otherwise, and estimate the probability that The Bank will finance a new car
after the reform. Columns 5 and 6 show that a new car is between 4.8 and 6.1 percentage points
more likely to be financed by The Bank – representing an increase of between 22.9% and 29.1%
relative to the mean.
     Our results suggest that the reform enabled consumers to buy newer, more expensive cars.
Further, the improvement in car characteristics was obtained through better contractual terms –
mostly by prolonging maturities. That is, the improvement in The Bank’s ability to sell foreclosed
cars led to better contracts that had an income effect on borrowers: their ability to borrow for
longer terms and for lower spreads enabled them to buy newer, more expensive cars.

F.    The Effect of the Law on Delinquency and Default

The results in Table 6 show that the credit reform led to the “democratization of credit” in that
lower-income borrowers and borrowers with a higher risk of default were more likely to obtain
car loans after the law was passed. But what about the performance of these loans? A growing
body of empirical evidence suggests that credit expansion leads to subsequent waves of default and
repossession (Keys et al. (2010), Mian and Sufi (2009, 2010)). Did the reform lead to lax screening
of borrowers?
     We use three loan outcomes to capture the performance of loans: (i) late payment – a dummy
variable that takes the value of one if the borrower was late on at least one payment even if it did
not lead to a default, (ii) installment default – a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the
borrower defaulted on at least one installment, and (iii) loan default – a dummy variable equal to
one if the borrower was late for more than 90 days on at least one monthly installment.
     We estimate the following equation using a linear probability model:

           loan outcomei,t = α + β1 × lawi,t + Ti,t λ + bi ψ + ci,t θ + mi,t ξ + ei,t γ + i,t      (3)

where the vectors T, b, c, m, and e are defined as before and the coefficient β1 captures the effect
of the law on borrowers’ characteristics. Results are presented in Table 9.
     The first column of the table reports the results from a linear probability regression in which the
dependent variable is a late payment dummy variable. We find that after controlling for contract


                                                   17
terms, personal and car characteristics, macro controls, and a time trend, the likelihood of a late
payment increased after the reform. The effect of the law on the probability that the borrower will
be late on at least one installment is fairly large – implying an increase of 18.8% relative to the
mean. Similar results are obtained when we use – as our dependent variable – a dummy variable
that takes the value of one if the borrower has defaulted on at least one installment (Column 2).
As Table 9 shows, the coefficient on law, β1 , is significant at the 5% level and implies an increase
in the likelihood of default of 21.3% relative to the sample mean. Likewise, a borrower is 18.8%
more likely to be 90 days late on at least one installment – which, according to the Brazilian law,
allows the bank to repossess the car – after the reform.
   Taken together, the results in Table 9 demonstrate that auto loans signed after the implemen-
tation of the law performed worse than loans given in the 12 months before August 2004. It is
important to note that once the law was passed, it affected all outstanding loans, including those
that predated the law. We argue that the law enabled The Bank to expand credit to riskier bor-
rowers because recovering collateral in the event of default became easier. Indeed, our previous
results reported in Table 6 are consistent with the notion that the reform was associated with the
provision of credit to riskier borrowers. The results in Table 6 that suggest that the law enhanced
lending to riskier borrowers are based on observable characteristics such as income, risk, and job
type. Interestingly, the results in Table 9 show that the likelihood that a borrower will be late on
a loan and will eventually default is higher after the law was implemented even when we control
for all observable borrower characteristics.
   We now analyze the effect of the law on loan performance conditional on the borrower’s risk and
income. In Panel A of Table 10 we split the sample into low- and high-risk borrowers. None of the
estimates are statistically significant, probably owing to the small sample size of the high-risk group
(464 observations) and the relatively low frequency of late payments and default. Nevertheless, the
coefficients are much larger in the high-risk compared to the low-risk group.
   We conduct a similar analysis in Panel B, comparing the differential effect of the law on loan
performance in the first and the fourth quartiles of income. Low-income individuals are more
likely to be late on their payment (first two columns of Panel B) or default on their loan (last
two columns). The economic significance of these effects is substantial, and it implies that the
probability that a borrower will be late on a payment or default on a loan increases by 30.0% and
28.8%, respectively.

                                                  18
     The results in Table 10 demonstrate again that even as the credit reform led to the “democ-
ratization” of access to credit, it also led to an expansion of credit to borrowers who were riskier
and, indeed, increased the incidence of default and repossession.


V.      Conclusion

We provide evidence from a 2004 credit reform in Brazil that simplified the selling of repossessed
cars used as collateral for auto loans. Our evidence suggests that the legal change has led to
larger loans with lower spreads, longer maturities, and higher leverage. It has also brought about
a “democratization” of credit, enabling riskier, low-income borrowers to obtain loans and purchase
newer, more expensive cars. Although the credit reform has improved access to credit by expanding
credit to riskier borrowers, it has also led to increased incidences of default and repossession. In
sum, this article provides evidence on the consequences of a credit reform, highlighting the crucial
role that collateral plays in credit markets.
     The evidence in this article shows that the ability to resell collateral enables banks to expand
credit, mitigates financial shortfalls, and enhances the ability of borrowers to purchase newer, more
expensive cars. Although we study the effect of a credit reform in Brazil using comprehensive
data from one bank, our results propose a broader link, not confined only to Brazil or to the bank
that provided us the data. An efficient legal system that enables creditors to repossess and resell
collateral facilitates credit provision, in particular to borrowers who would be otherwise left out of
credit markets.




                                                  19
Appendix: Variable description and construction

For reference, the following is a list of the variables used, their sources, and a brief description of
how each is constructed.



  1. Spread : The difference between the monthly interest rate paid by the borrower and the federal
      fund rate (in percentage points).

  2. Maturity: Loan maturity (in months).

  3. Down payment: The amount paid by the buyer that was not financed (in R$).

  4. Loan size: The total amount financed by The Bank (in R$).

  5. Law : A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the loan was initiated after the law
      was implemented, and zero otherwise.

  6. Placebo law : A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the loan was initiated after
      August 2007, and zero otherwise.

  7. Consumer leverage: The ratio of monthly loan installment to monthly borrower income.

  8. Income: The borrower’s (estimated) monthly income calculated by The Bank (in R$).

  9. Client dummy: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the borrower is a client of
      The Bank, and zero otherwise.

 10. High risk dummy: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the borrower is classified
      as a high risk, and zero otherwise.

 11. Guarantor dummy: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the loan has a guarantor,
      and zero otherwise.

 12. Gender dummy: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the borrower is a male, and
      zero otherwise.

 13. Type of job: A five-category variable: employee, retired/pensioner, self-employed, entrepreneur,
      and other.

                                                  20
14. Type of residence: A four-category variable: homeowner, lives with parents, renter, and other.

15. Marital status: A five-category variable: single, married, divorced, widower, and other.

16. New car : A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the car is new, and zero otherwise.

17. Car value: Car value (in R$).

18. Model : Car model.

19. Car age: The difference (in years) between the date that the loan was signed and the date
    that the car was manufactured.

20. Dealer priority dummy: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the consumer bought
    the car from a priority dealer, and zero otherwise.

21. Federal fund rate: The federal fund interest rate.

22. Inflation: The inflation rate over the last 12 months.

23. GDP growth: Quarterly GDP growth.

24. Late: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the borrower was late on at least one
    installment, and zero otherwise.

25. Installment default: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the borrower was late
    on at least two installments at the same time, and zero otherwise.

26. Default: A dummy variable that takes the value of one if the borrower was at least 90 days
    late, and zero otherwise. (This the criteria used by the Central bank).




                                               21
References
Aghion, P., and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting,
Review of Economic Studies 59, 1473-1494.
Amendolara, Cesar, 2006, Alienação fiduciária como instrumento de fomento a concessao de credito,
in Ivo Waisberg and Marcos R. F. Fontes, eds.: Contratos Bancarios (Quartier Latin).
Atanasov, V., Bernard Black, Conrad Ciccotello, and Stanley Gyoshev, 2010, How does law affect
finance? An examination of equity tunneling in Bulgaria, Journal of Financial Economics 96,
155-173.
Bae, Kee-Hong, and Vidhan K., Goyal, 2009, Creditor rights, enforcement, and bank loans, Journal
of Finance 64, 823-860.
Beck, Thorsten, 2000, Impediments to the development and efficiency of financial intermediation
in Brazil, Working paper, World Bank Policy Research.
Benmelech, Efraim, 2009, Asset salability and debt maturity: Evidence from 19th century American
railroads, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545-1583.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman, 2008, Liquidation values and the credibility of financial
contract renegotiation: Evidence from U.S. airlines, Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 1635-
1677.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman, 2009, Collateral pricing, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 91, 339-360.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman, 2011, Vintage capital and creditor protection, Journal
of Financial Economics 99, 308-332.
Benmelech, Efraim, Mark J. Garmaise, and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2005, Do liquidation values affect
financial contracts? Evidence from commercial loan contracts and zoning regulation, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120, 1121-1154.
Berger, A., and Gregory Udell, 1990, Collateral, loan quality and bank risk, Journal of Monetary
Economics 25, 21-42.
Bertrand, Marianne, Antoinette Schoar, and David Thesmar, 2007, Banking deregulation and
industry structure: Evidence from the French banking reforms of 1985, Journal of Finance 62
597-628.
van Binsbergen, J., John Graham, and Jie Yang, 2010, The cost of debt, Journal of Finance 65,
2089-2136.
Bolton, P., and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal debt structure and the number of creditors,
Journal of Political Economy 104, 1-25.
Boot, A., and Anjan Thakor, 1991, Off-balance sheet liabilities, deposit insurance and capital
regulation, Journal of Banking & Finance 15, 825-846.
Coelho, Christiano A., Buno Funchal, and Joao M. P. de Mello, forthcoming, The Brazilian payroll
lending experiment, Review of Economics and Statistics.
Costa, Ana C. A., and Joao M. P. de Mello, 2006, Judicial risk and credit market performance:
Micro evidence from Brazilian payroll loans, Working paper, NBER.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine, 2004, Regulations, market structure, institu-
tions, and the cost of financial intermediation, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36, 593-622.

                                                22
Djankov, S., Oliver Hart, C. McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, Debt enforcement around the
world, Journal of Political Economy 116, 1105-1149.
Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, 2007, Private credit in 129 countries, Journal of
Financial Economics 84, 299-329.
Einav, Liran, Mark Jenkins, and Jonathan Levin, The impact of information technology on con-
sumer credit markets (Stanford University, mimeo).
Eisfeldt, A., and Adriano Rampini, 2009, Leasing, ability to repossess, and debt capacity, Review
of Financial Studies 22, 1621-1257.
Hart, O., and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841-879.
Hart, O., and John Moore, 1998, Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of debt, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113, 1-41.
Haselmann, R., Katharina Pistor, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, How law affects lending, Review of
Financial Studies 23, 549-580.
Jappelli, Tullio, Marco Pagano, and Magda Bianco, 2005, Courts and banks: Effects of judicial
enforcement on credit markets, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 37, 223-244.
Jimenez, G., Vicente Salas, and Jesus Saurina, 2006, Determinants of collateral, Journal of Finan-
cial Economics 81, 255-281.
John, K., Anthony Lynch, and Manju Puri, 2003, Credit ratings, collateral, and loan characteristics:
Implications for yield, Journal of Business 76, 371-409
Johnson, H., and Rene Stulz, 1985, An analysis of secured debt, Journal of Financial Economics
14, 501-521.
Kaplan, S., Frederic Martel, and Per Stromberg, 2007, How do legal differences and experience
affect financial contracts?, Journal of financial intermediation 16, 273-311.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did securitization lead
to lax screening? Evidence from subprime loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307-362.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, Legal determinants
of external finance, Journal of Finance 52, 2803-2834.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, Law and finance,
Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Laeven, Luc, and Giovanni Majnoni, 2005, Does judicial Efficiency lower the cost of credit?, Journal
of Banking and Finance 29, 1791-1812.
Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Does legal enforcement affect financial transactions?
The contractual channel in private equity, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 223-246.
Liberty, Jose, and Atif Mian, 2010, Collateral spread and financial development, Journal of Finance
65, 147-177.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2009, The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from
the U.S. mortgage default crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1449-1496.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2010, The great recession: Lessons from microeconomic data, American
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 100, 1-10.


                                                23
Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2007, The benefits of lending relationships: Evi-
dence from small business data, Journal of Finance 62, 2803-2834.
Qian, Jun, and Philip E. Strahan, 2007, How laws and institutions shape financial contracts: The
case of bank loans, Journal of Finance 62, 2803-2834.
Rampini, A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, risk management, and the distribution of debt
capacity, Journal of Finance 65, 2293-2322.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 143-166.
Vig, V., 2011, Access to collateral and corporate debt structure: Evidence from a natural experi-
ment, EFA 2008 Athens Meetings Paper.




                                               24
                                        Table 1:
                                    Summary Statistics
This table provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the empirical analysis.



                             Panel A: Contract characteristics
                                           5th                 95th                     Standard
                                Mean    Percentile Median Percentile                    Deviation

Spread                             1.10         0.20         1.08         2.20             0.66
Maturity                           36.1         18.0         36.0         48.0             10.9
Down payment                      6,903        1,487        4,461        16,249           35,269
Total financed (R$)               9,760        3,287        8,545        20,119           5,819
Car value (R$)                    16,663       6,716        14,127       30,590           35,813
Consumer leverage                  24.9          8.0         23.9         46.1             21.4

                             Panel B: Borrower characteristics
                                           5th                 95th                     Standard
                                 Mean   Percentile Median Percentile                    Deviation

Income (R$)                        3,065        803          1,706        6,181           23,986
Client of the bank                  0.24        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.43
Guarantor                           0.08        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.26
High risk                           0.03        0.0           0.0          0.0             0.16
Medium risk                         0.25        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.43
Low risk                            0.73        0.0           1.0          1.0             0.45
Male                                0.66        0.0           1.0          1.0             0.47
Single                              0.40        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.49
Married                             0.45        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.50
Homeowner                           0.83        0.0           1.0          1.0             0.38
Lives with parents                  0.13        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.33
Employee                            0.59        0.0           1.0          1.0             0.49
Retired/pensioner                   0.12        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.32
Self-employed/entrepreneur          0.26        0.0           0.0          1.0             0.44

                                Panel C: Car characteristics
                                            5th              95th                       Standard
                                 Mean    Percentile Median Percentile                   Deviation

New                                0.21          0.0          0.0          1.0             0.41
Age                                5.32          0.0          5.0         13.0             4.28
Dealer priority                    0.88          0.0          1.0          1.0             0.33




                                                 25
                                     Table 1 - cont’d
                                   Summary Statistics


                           Panel D: Loan outcome characteristics
                                                   5th                     95th       Standard
                                          Mean Percentile Median         Percentile   Deviation

Late                                         0.08         0.0    0.0        1.0         0.27
Installment default                          0.09         0.0    0.0        1.0         0.29
Default                                      0.08         0.0    0.0        1.0         0.26

                                  Panel E: Macro Controls
                                                    5th                    95th       Standard
                                           Mean Percentile      Median   Percentile   Deviation

Federal fund rate (monthly)                  1.42%     1.24%    1.37%     1.67%        0.15%
Inflation rate (12 months)                   8.92%     5.89%    7.60%     15.14%       2.90%
GDP growth (quarterly seasonally adjusted)   1.15%    -0.22%    1.26%     2.36%        0.84%




                                                     26
                                           Table 2:
                          Summary Statistics: Before and after the law
This table reports descriptive statistics for the main variables used in the empirical analysis before and after enactment
of the law.



                                       Panel A: Contract characteristics

                                              before                               after

                                                       Standard                             Standard        difference
                                  Mean     Median      Deviation      Mean      Median      Deviation        p-value

Spread                            1.18       1.15         0.57         1.02       0.98         0.74            0.00
Maturity                          34.6       36.0         10.1         37.7       36.0        11.2             0.00
Down payment                     7,400      4,435        47,975       6,333      4,512        5,328            0.05
Total financed                   9,115      7,983         5,407       10,501      9,127       6,176            0.00
Car value                        16,514     13,381       15,530       16,834     15,284       8,392            0.56
Consumer leverage                 24.5       23.0         18.4         26.5       24.2         24.4            0.00

                                       Panel B: Borrower characteristics

                                              before                               after

                                                       Standard                             Standard        difference
                                  Mean     Median      Deviation      Mean      Median      Deviation        p-value

Income                            3,105      1,673       12,997        3,021     1,760       32,285            0.82
Client of the bank                0.24        0.0         0.49         0.24       0.0         0.43             0.79
Guarantor                          0.08       0.0         0.27         0.07       0.0         0.25             0.00
High risk                          0.02       0.0         0.13          0.04      0.0         0.19             0.00
Medium risk                        0.25       0.0         0.43          0.24      0.0         0.43             0.26
Low risk                           0.73       1.0         0.44          0.72      1.0         0.44             0.07
Male                               0.66       1.0         0.47          0.66      1.0         0.48             0.54
Single                             0.39       0.0         0.49         0.40       0.0         0.49             0.42
Married                            0.45       0.0         0.50          0.44      0.0         0.50             0.46
Homeowner                          0.83       1.0         0.38          0.83      1.0         0.38             0.74
Lives with parents                 0.13       0.0         0.34          0.13      0.0         0.33             0.21
Employee                           0.61       1.0         0.49         0.58       1.0         0.49             0.00
Retired/pensioner                  0.12       0.0         0.32          0.11      0.0         0.31             0.02
Self-employed/entrepreneur         0.24       0.0         0.43          0.29      0.0         0.45             0.00




                                                           27
                                                Table 3:
                               The Effect of the Law on Loan Contracts
Panel A of this table reports results from regressing loan characteristics on law, and Panel B reports results from regressing
loan characteristics on a placebo law. We use four measures of loan characteristics: spread, loan maturity, loan size, and
consumer leverage. All regressions include an intercept. The regressions control for contract terms (spread, maturity,
and down payment), borrower characteristics (income, borrower type of risk, gender, presence of a guarantor, type of job,
type of residence, marital status, and whether the borrower is a client of The Bank), car characteristics (a dummy for new
car, car age, and dealer priority), macro variables (inflation, federal fund rate, quarterly GDP growth, and time trend),
car model fixed-effects, and state fixed-effects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at both the state and month
levels. Variables definitions are provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.


                        Panel A: Treatment Regressions (August 2003 - July 2005)

Dependent                            spread                 maturity              log(loan size)              leverage
Variable=

Law                                -0.106***                2.073***                 0.019***                 1.841***
                                    (0.028)                  (0.290)                  (0.006)                  (0.401)

Contract terms                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Personal characteristics              Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Car characteristics                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Car model fixed-effects               Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Macro controls                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Time trend                            Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
State fixed-effects                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Observations                         17,349                  17,349                   17,349                   17,349
Adjusted R2                           0.587                   0.269                   0.770                     0.335

                         Panel B: Placebo Regressions (August 2006 - July 2008)

Dependent                            spread                 maturity              log(total size)             leverage
Variable=

Placebo law                        0.057***                   -0.260                   -0.004                   -0.399
                                    (0.021)                  (0.477)                  (0.005)                  (0.514)

Contract terms                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Personal characteristics              Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Car characteristics                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Car model fixed-effects               Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Macro controls                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Time trend                            Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
State fixed-effects                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Observations                         30,375                  30,375                   30,375                   30,375
Adjusted R2                           0.599                   0.402                   0.801                     0.300




                                                             28
                                       Table 4:
                       Speed of Repossession and Loan Maturity
Panel A of this table reports results from regressing measures of loan maturity on law, and Panel B reports
results from regressing measures loan maturity on placebo law. We use three measures of loan maturity: a
dummy variable that takes the value of one if maturity is 2 years or longer, 3 years or longer, and 4 years
or longer. All regressions include an intercept. The regressions control for contract terms (spread, and down
payment), borrower characteristics (income, borrower type of risk, gender, presence of a guarantor, type of
job, type of residence, marital status, and whether the borrower is a client of The Bank), car characteristics
(a dummy for new car, car age, and dealer priority), macro variables (inflation, federal fund rate, quarterly
GDP growth, and time trend), car model fixed-effects, and state fixed-effects. Standard errors are calculated
by clustering at both the state and month levels. Variables definitions are provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗,
and ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                  Panel A: Treatment Regressions (August 2003 - July 2005)

Dependent                          maturity                    maturity                    maturity
Variable=                     (2 years or longer)         (3 years or longer)         (4 years or longer)

Law                                0.031***                    0.063***                    0.070***
                                    (0.007)                     (0.011)                     (0.013)

Contract terms                        Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Personal characteristics              Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Car characteristics                   Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Car model fixed-effects               Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Macro controls                        Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Time trend                            Yes                         Yes                         Yes
State fixed-effects                   Yes                         Yes                         Yes

Observations                         17,349                     17,349                       17,349
Adjusted R2                           0.096                      0.189                        0.271

                   Panel B: Placebo Regressions (August 2006 - July 2008)

Dependent                          maturity                    maturity                    maturity
Variable=                     (2 years or longer)         (3 years or longer)         (4 years or longer)

Placebo law                          -0.001                      -0.006                      -0.010
                                    (0.005)                     (0.008)                     (0.015)

Contract terms                        Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Personal characteristics              Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Car characteristics                   Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Car model fixed-effects               Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Macro controls                        Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Time trend                            Yes                         Yes                         Yes
State fixed-effects                   Yes                         Yes                         Yes

Observations                         30,375                     30,375                       30,375
Adjusted R2                           0.064                      0.172                        0.346




                                                     29
                                                   Table 5:
                                      The Effect of the Law on Loan Contracts
                                               Stratified by Car Age
This table reports results from regressing loan characteristics on law. Panel A stratifies the sample into new car (odd columns) and used
car (even columns). Panel B stratifies the sample into used car up to 5 years (odd columns) and more than 5 years (even columns). We
use four measures of loan characteristics: spread, loan maturity, loan size, and consumer leverage. All regressions include an intercept.
The regressions control for contract terms (spread, maturity, and down payment), borrower characteristics (income, borrower type of
risk, gender, presence of a guarantor, type of job, type of residence, marital status, and whether the borrower is a client of The Bank),
car characteristics (a dummy for new car, car age, and dealer priority), macro variables (inflation, federal fund rate, quarterly GDP
growth, and time trend), car model fixed-effects, and state fixed-effects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at both the state
and month levels. Variables definitions are provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.


                                                       Panel A: New versus Used

Dependent Variable=                    spread                   maturity                log(loan size)                 leverage
                                         car                      car                         car                         car
                                new             used         new       used            new        used             new        used

Law                          -0.344***       -0.027        5.882***    1.594***      0.120***       0.004       5.229***      1.114***
                              (0.038)       (0.032)         (0.826)     (0.385)       (0.016)      (0.010)       (1.395)       (0.383)
Contract terms                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Personal characteristics        Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Car characteristics             Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Car model fixed-effects         Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Macro controls                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Time trend                      Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
State fixed-effects             Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes

Observations                   3,702         13,645         3,702       13,645         3,702        13,645        3,702        13,645
Adjusted R2                    0.309          0.451         0.367        0.330         0.623         0.690        0.414         0.315

                                                       Panel B: Used Cars only

Dependent Variable=                  spread                     maturity               log(loan size)                  leverage
                                       car                         car                       car                          car
                               up to      more than         up to    more than        up to    more than          up to     more than
                              5 years      5 years         5 years     5 years       5 years     5 years         5 years      5 years

Law                           -0.071*        0.003         2.157***    1.178***      0.0274*        -0.008       1.472*        0.974**
                              (0.037)       (0.030)         (0.654)     (0.358)      (0.016)       (0.015)       (0.762)       (0.493)
Contract terms                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Personal characteristics        Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Car characteristics             Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Car model fixed-effects         Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Macro controls                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Time trend                      Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
State fixed-effects             Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Observations                   5,299         8,346          5,299        8,346         5,299        8,346         5,299         8,346
Adjusted R2                    0.272         0.434          0.308        0.354         0.607        0.689         0.307         0.387




                                                              30
                                  Table 6:
             The Effect of the Law on Borrower Characteristics
This table reports results from regressing borrower characteristics on law. We use three borrower
characteristics as dependent variables: income, borrower risk, and whether the borrower is self-
employed/entrepreneur. All regressions include an intercept. The regressions control for contract
terms (spread, maturity, and down payment), borrower characteristics (income, borrower type of risk,
gender, presence of a guarantor, type of job, type of residence, marital status, and whether the bor-
rower is a client of The Bank), car characteristics (a dummy for new car, car age, and dealer priority),
macro variables (inflation, federal fund rate, quarterly GDP growth, and time trend), car model fixed-
effects, and state fixed-effects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at both the state and
month levels. Variables definitions are provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent                         log(income)                 high risk              self-employed/
Variable=                                                                             entrepreneur

Law                                 -0.032**                  0.014***                  0.051***
                                     (0.015)                   (0.004)                   (0.013)

Contract terms                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Personal characteristics               Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Car characteristics                    Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Car model fixed-effects                Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Macro controls                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Time trend                             Yes                       Yes                       Yes
State fixed-effects                    Yes                       Yes                       Yes

Observations                         17,349                    17,349                     17,349
Adjusted R2                           0.357                     0.058                      0.071




                                                   31
                                                  Table 7:
                                   The Effect of the Law on Loan Contracts
                                        Stratified by Risk and Income
This table reports results from regressing loan characteristics on law. Panel A stratifies the sample into low risk (odd columns) and
high risk (even columns). Panel B stratifies the sample into low income (odd columns) and high income (even columns). We use
four measures of loan characteristics: spread, loan maturity, loan size, and consumer leverage. All regressions include an intercept.
The regressions control for contract terms (spread, maturity, and down payment), borrower characteristics (income, borrower type
of risk, gender, presence of a guarantor, type of job, type of residence, marital status, and whether the borrower is a client of
The Bank), car characteristics (a dummy for new car, car age, and dealer priority), macro variables (inflation, federal fund rate,
quarterly GDP growth, and time trend), car model fixed-effects, and state fixed-effects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering
at both the state and month levels. Variables definitions are provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                   Panel A: Stratified by risk

Dependent Variable=                    spread                 maturity               log(loan size)               leverage
                                         risk                   risk                       risk                      risk
                                 low            high        low      high             low       high          low         high

Law                          -0.117***       0.027       1.991***       0.513      0.028***      -0.034    1.950***         0.945
                              (0.031)       (0.075)       (0.354)      (1.572)      (0.007)     (0.036)     (0.506)        (2.805)
Contract terms                  Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Personal characteristics        Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Car characteristics             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Car model fixed-effects         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Macro controls                  Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Time trend                      Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
State fixed-effects             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes

Observations                   12,623         464         12,623         464        12,623        464       12,623           464
Adjusted R2                     0.583        0.662         0.264        0.537        0.761       0.909       0.364          0.440

                                                 Panel B: Stratified by income

Dependent Variable=                    spread                 maturity               log(loan size)               leverage
                                       income                   income                   income                    income
                                 low            high        low        high           low       high          low         high

Law                            0.035       -0.173***     2.227***     2.716***       0.003       0.022       0.693        2.144***
                              (0.041)       (0.037)       (0.424)      (0.593)      (0.012)     (0.014)     (0.992)        (0.789)
Contract terms                  Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Personal characteristics        Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Car characteristics             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Car model fixed-effects         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Macro controls                  Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Time trend                      Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
State fixed-effects             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes

Observations                   4,365         4,301         4,365        4,301        4,365       4,301       4,365          4,301
Adjusted R2                    0.652         0.456         0.374        0.255        0.771       0.666       0.500          0.202




                                                             32
                                                 Table 8:
                               The Effect of the Law on Car Characteristics
This table reports results from regressing car characteristics on law. We use log(car value), car age, and a dummy variable
indicating whether the car is new as dependent variables. All regressions include an intercept. The regressions on odd columns
control for borrower characteristics (income, borrower type of risk, gender, presence of a guarantor, type of job, type of residence,
marital status, and whether the borrower is a client of The Bank), car characteristics (dealer priority), macro variables (inflation,
federal fund rate, quarterly GDP growth, and time trend), car model fixed-effects, and state fixed-effects. The regressions in
even columns do not control for car model fixed-effects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at both the state and
month levels. Variables definitions are provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.



Dependent                     log(car value)     log(car value)       car age          car age         new car           new car
Variable=

Law                              0.020***          0.077 ***         -0.436***        -0.599***        0.048***         0.061***
                                  (0.006)           (0.014)           (0.081)          (0.120)          (0.012)          (0.013)

Personal characteristics            Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Car characteristics                 Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Car model fixed-effects             Yes                No                Yes              No              Yes               No
Macro controls                      Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Time trend                          Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
State fixed-effects                 Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Observations                      17,349             17,349            17,349           17,349          17,349            17,349
Adjusted R2                        0.849              0.332             0.550            0.285           0.345             0.198




                                                               33
                                Table 9:
           The Effect of the Law on Delinquency and Default
This table reports results from regressing loan outcomes on law. We use three measures of loan
outcomes: late payment, installment default, and default . All regressions include an intercept.
The regressions control for contract terms (spread, maturity, and down payment), borrower char-
acteristics (income, borrower type of risk, gender, presence of a guarantor, type of job, type of
residence, marital status, and whether the borrower is a client of The Bank), car characteristics
(a dummy for new car, car age, and dealer priority), macro variables (inflation, federal fund rate,
quarterly GDP growth, and time trend), car model fixed-effects, and state fixed-effects. Standard
errors are calculated by clustering at both the state and month levels. Variables definitions are
provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.



Dependent                           late                 installment                 loan
Variable=                         payment                  default                  default

Law                                0.015**                 0.014 **                 0.015**
                                   (0.007)                  (0.007)                 (0.007)
Contract terms                       Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Personal characteristics             Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Car characteristics                  Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Car model fixed-effects              Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Macro controls                       Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Time trend                           Yes                      Yes                     Yes
State fixed-effects                  Yes                      Yes                     Yes

Observations                        17,148                  17,148                  17,148
Adjusted R2                          0.099                   0.101                   0.010




                                               34
                                               Table 10:
                           The Effect of the Law on Delinquency and Default
                                     Stratified by Risk and Income
This table reports results from regressing loan outcomes on law. We use three measures of loan outcomes: late payment,
installment default, and default. Panel A stratifies the sample into low risk (odd columns) and high risk (even columns). Panel
B stratifies the sample into low income (odd columns) and high income (even columns). Panel C stratifies the sample into
low leverage (odd columns) and high leverage (even columns). All regressions include an intercept. The regressions control
for contract terms (spread, maturity, and down payment), borrower characteristics (income, borrower type of risk, gender,
presence of a guarantor, type of job, type of residence, marital status, and whether the borrower is a client of The Bank), car
characteristics (a dummy for new car, car age, and dealer priority), macro variables (inflation, federal fund rate, quarterly GDP
growth, and time trend), car model fixed-effects, and state fixed-effects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at both
the state and month levels. Variables definitions are provided in the Appendix. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                               Panel A: Stratified by risk

Dependent Variable=                 late payment                      installment default                   loan default
                                         risk                                 risk                              risk
                                  low          high                    low           high                  low         high

Law                              0.009              0.017             0.008             0.017             0.009          0.017
                                (0.006)            (0.095)           (0.006)           (0.095)           (0.006)        (0.095)
Contract terms                    Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Personal characteristics          Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Car characteristics               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Car model fixed-effects           Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Macro controls                    Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Time trend                        Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
State fixed-effects               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes

Observations                     12,623              464             12,623              464             12,623           464
Adjusted R2                       0.090             0.350             0.092             0.350             0.092          0.350

                                             Panel B: Stratified by income

Dependent Variable=                 late payment                      installment default                   loan default
                                        income                               income                            income
                                  low          high                    low           high                  low         high

Law                             0.024*              0.002            0.024*             0.001            0.023*          0.001
                                (0.014)            (0.011)           (0.014)           (0.010)           (0.014)        (0.001)
Contract terms                    Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Personal characteristics          Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Car characteristics               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Car model fixed-effects           Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Macro controls                    Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
Time trend                        Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
State fixed-effects               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes

Observations                     4,365              4,301             4,365             4,301             4,365          4,301
Adjusted R2                      0.134              0.119             0.135             0.121             0.134          0.116




                                                             35
