NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIG BRICS, WEAK FOUNDATIONS:
THE BEGINNING OF PUBLIC ELEMENTARY EDUCATION IN BRAZIL, RUSSIA, INDIA, AND CHINA
Latika Chaudhary
Aldo Musacchio
Steven Nafziger
Se Yan
Working Paper 17852
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17852

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

For very helpful comments and suggestions, the authors would like to thank Peter Lindert, David Mitch,
Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, and the participants at seminars at the University of Pennsylvania and Caltech
and at the Economic History Association meeting in Evanston, IL. Nafziger and Yan received support
from NSF (SES-0922531). Yan also acknowledges support from NSSFC grant (Project No. 09CJL009).
Any remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Latika Chaudhary, Aldo Musacchio, Steven Nafziger, and Se Yan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Big BRICs, Weak Foundations: The Beginning of Public Elementary Education in Brazil,
Russia, India, and China
Latika Chaudhary, Aldo Musacchio, Steven Nafziger, and Se Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 17852
February 2012
JEL No. I22,I28,N30,O15
ABSTRACT
Our paper provides a comparative perspective on the development of public primary education in four
of the largest developing economies circa 1910: Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC). These four
countries encompassed more than 50 percent of the world’s population in 1910, but remarkably few
of their citizens attended any school by the early 20th century. We present new, comparable data on
school inputs and outputs for BRIC drawn from contemporary surveys and government documents.
Recent studies emphasize the importance of political decentralization, and relatively broad political
voice for the early spread of public primary education in developed economies. We identify the former
and the lack of the latter to be important in the context of BRIC, but we also outline how other factors
such as factor endowments, colonialism, serfdom, and, especially, the characteristics of the political
and economic elite help explain the low achievement levels of these four countries and the incredible
amount of heterogeneity within each of them.

Latika Chaudhary
1030 Columbia Avenue, #4072
Claremont, CA 91711
latika.chaudhary@scrippscollege.edu
Aldo Musacchio
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 279
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
amusacchio@hbs.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17852

Steven Nafziger
Department of Economics, Williams College
Shapiro Hall, 24 Hopkins Hall Dr.
Williamstown, MA 01267
steven.nafziger@williams.edu
Se Yan
Department of Applied Economics
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
seyan@gsm.pku.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Economists have argued that the “Great Divergence” between the developed and
underdeveloped world in the 19th century was reinforced – if not caused – by rapid
improvements in schooling that occurred in the advanced economies. For example, the leading
positions of the US and German economies in 1900 have been linked to their highly developed
education systems (Goldin and Katz, 2008; and Becker et al., 2009). Few nations in the last
century have undergone growth convergence without also experiencing sustained increases in
human capital investment. Therefore, explaining differences in economic development today
may hinge on understanding why most societies failed to develop adequate primary education in
the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
This challenge was laid down by Richard Easterlin in “Why isn’t the Whole World
Developed?” his famous 1980 presidential address to the Economic History Association
(Easterlin, 1981). Thirty years later, our paper takes up this challenge. Unlike most comparative
research on the economic history of education, which focuses on differences among developed
societies, or between developed and developing countries, our paper investigates the limited
provision of public primary schooling in four of the largest developing economies at the turn of
the 20th century: Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC).1 These countries comprised more than
50 percent of the world’s population in 1910, but only 12, 20, 8, and 4 percent of school-age
children in Brazil, Russia, India and China, respectively, were enrolled in primary school,
compared to more than 80 percent in Germany, UK and the USA.2 A comparative study of the

1

Important recent works that do take a broader comparative perspective on the emergence of mass schooling include
Frankema (2010) and Lindert (2004 and 2010).
2
See Table 1. Note that Lindert’s figures differ from the ones we provide. This stems from different geographic
units he considers, as well as slightly different numbers for the school-age populations.
2

slow emergence of public schooling in BRIC offers a valuable contrast to works that focus on
more advanced nations.
Collectively, these four countries enjoy recognition today for their common status as fast
growing emerging economies. But their relevance for studying the origins of public primary
education in the late 19th and early 20th century lies in their level of comparative economic and
political underdevelopment, the large scale and variability of their politics and geography, and
the availability of previously unexplored data on basic schooling. The main contribution of our
paper lies in presenting an analytical framework to understand new empirical evidence on the
variation of educational development within and between these four different societies.
Investigating the heterogeneous experiences of the four countries is useful not because of the
BRIC acronym’s modern connotations, but rather because it broadens the discussion of
Easterlin’s important question. We also view the BRIC experiences as representative of the
majority of the world that had limited publically provided schooling by the early 20th century.
Conditions in BRIC were fundamentally different from the more educationally advanced
countries by the late 19th century. Clearly, high incomes and structural economic changes
increased the demand for schooling in the United States and Germany, but broad political
participation also played an important complementary role in these and other successful cases of
early publicly financed primary education (Lindert, 2004; and Gallego 2010). In more advanced
economies, the spread of primary education typically entailed a shift towards more progressive
tax policies and away from the private provision of schooling. Granting larger shares of the
population formal voice over education and fiscal policies prevented elites from blocking the
expansion of publically funded mass schooling. The impact of democracy was also reinforced by
the relative homogeneity of the populations (in terms of income, ethnicity, or religion), which

3

enabled majorities to coalesce around support for public schools (Go and Lindert, 2010; and
Goldin and Katz, 2008).
Unlike these successful cases, BRIC was less developed, had more restricted political
participation, and, exhibited low levels of public schooling despite decentralized political
structures. As with most of the world in the early 20th century, these developing economies
exhibited low per capita incomes, which limited private and public funding for primary
schooling. These primarily agrarian economies may have had limited demand for high skilled
labor, and rural households may have faced substantial opportunity costs to educating their
children.3 But even accounting for low incomes and potentially low demand for education, we
argue that a political economy framework involving public sector capture by local elites helps
explain not only the limited overall supply of schooling in BRIC but also the variation within and
between the four countries.
In the face of weak central authorities, decentralization of education led to the capture of
local public resources and political institutions by elites in all four societies. Resources were
often funneled towards private or secondary education catering to the elites, and poor
communities were forced to rely on scarce public funds or voluntary contributions to finance
primary schools. However, we do not find that a unified elite was always trying to block
expenditures on education, because decentralization and subsequent local capture did not always
constrain the development of primary schooling. In more commercial, higher-growth areas,
where there was more demand for education, many elites supported the expansion of mass
schooling because they needed skilled labor and could more easily afford the resulting taxes. In
3

.Schultz (1971 and 1983) and others have argued for relatively high returns to literacy and basic numeracy in
developing agricultural economies. We acknowledge that this may have been true to some degree within BRIC, but
data limitations prevent us from explicitly comparing the returns to education in our four societies. We also note that
the nature of child labor might have affected demand for basic schooling in BRIC.

4

other areas of BRIC, elites supported public education because they perceived direct political
benefits. Finally, in all four cases, changes in the composition of, and mobility into and out of,
the elites – whether defined by wealth, status, or political power – influenced the support for
publically financed primary education.
The composition and policy preferences of the local elite varied across and within BRIC
according to economic conditions, barriers to entry into elite circles and the (endogenous)
progressiveness of the fiscal structure. In applying a common political economy framework, a
key contribution of our study is to characterize the heterogeneity of the elite (or the economic
and political conditions they faced) within and across each country and relate how such variation
accounts for the differences in educational outcomes. We also show how the mechanisms of elite
control of education were delineated by the structure of central – local government relations.
From Brazil’s adoption of federalism in the 1891 Constitution, to the deterioration of central
authority in China in the late-Qing and the Republican periods, to British colonialism in India,
the national governments in our countries generally exhibited little substantive involvement in
basic education. Only in the case of Tsarist and Soviet Russia after 1900 were central authorities
directly active in subsidizing the local provision of primary schooling.
We develop our argument in three steps. First, we present and discuss data on primary
school enrollment rates and expenditure levels for BRIC and a set of comparison countries, circa
1910. Drawing on a variety of unexplored contemporary publications and official sources, we
move beyond simple cross-country comparisons to also report and comment upon within-country
variation in BRIC. In the second step, we outline a simple theoretical framework explaining how
the provision of public education in developing societies might be subject to capture by local
elites. A key insight is that heterogeneity among elites is an important factor behind variation in

5

schooling, especially in the contexts of decentralized policymaking and imperfect local
democracy that characterized all of our cases. The third step of the analysis applies this
theoretical framework to analyze the early development of public primary education in Brazil,
Russia, India, and China, roughly over the period 1880-1930. While acknowledging the negative
effects of low income levels, we show how variation in income, economic and political
conditions, and the social status of the elites interacted with decentralized fiscal policies across
the four countries to influence the provision of public primary education.

2. Comparative Perspective
In Table 1 we present data on primary education from BRIC and a set of comparison
countries around 1910. We include high-income countries such as England, Germany, and the
United States; middle-income European countries such as Italy and Spain; Japan – the leading
economy in Asia at the time; other middle-income countries such as South Africa, Uruguay,
Chile, and Mexico; and several low-income countries like Peru, Jamaica, and Sri Lanka. The
education data for BRIC are from contemporary surveys, government reports, and other original
materials, while the data for the other countries come from the Commissioner of the U.S.
Department of Education (United States, 1910).4 We match these indicators to Maddison’s
(2006) per capita income figures and to Lindert’s (2004) enrollment rates for comparison.
[Insert Table 1 about here]
Table 1 starkly reveals the low education levels and expenditures in BRIC relative to the
rest of the world. Estimated primary school enrollment rates averaged 8.3 percent, well below

4

There are a variety of other sources on education attainment and investments that cover our time period (e.g.
Frankema, 2009; Lindert, 2004; and Morrison and Martin, 2009), but we focus on the sources and countries
documented in Tables 1-3 because we view them to be representative. Extending the sample in Table 1 in different
ways does not alter the points we are making here.

6

less developed parts of Europe (Italy – 38 percent, Spain – 46 percent), middle-income countries
in Latin America (Chile – 28 percent, Mexico – 20 percent), and even poorer countries such as
Jamaica (41 percent) and Peru (24 percent).5 The poverty of BRICs was clearly an important
factor driving the low enrollment rates, as GDP per capita averaged a mere $762 for BRIC in
1913 (in 1990 PPP-adjusted dollars). But income alone cannot fully account for the observed
differences in educational performance. A graph of enrollment rates against income in Figure 1
suggests that primary school enrollment rates in BRIC were below what would be expected
given their income levels.6 Although we provide evidence only for the 1910 cross-section, this
picture is representative of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
We find similar patterns for primary school expenditures. BRIC averaged $0.6 per school
age child (nominal US$, c1910), compared to over $20 in the United States and over $1 in Japan
and Mexico. Russia was the leader among BRICs, spending $2.80 per child, followed by Brazil
at almost $1.32. India and China – two of the three poorest countries in our sample – spent only
$0.10 and $0.16 respectively.
Beyond per capita expenditures or enrollment rates, we think it is valuable to look at
primary school expenditures per pupil as a measure of how elitist the education system was
within BRIC. On average, BRIC spent $3.6 per enrolled student, higher than Spain, Japan, and

5

We measure enrollment rates as the number of enrolled children in public primary schools over the total schoolage population, which we take from censuses and other sources. “Primary students” refers to students in surveyed
institutions of basic or elementary education below secondary schools. The original data gatherers may have missed
some schools, but we are confident that our measures for BRIC are improvements on the existing literature. Finally,
note that the data for BRIC are meant to cover public primary schooling and expenditures only (i.e. schooling
financed out of formal fiscal resources), but other sample countries may include some private schooling. To a
limited degree, we take up the issue of private schooling in the case studies.
6
The relatively low provision of schooling in BRIC persists even if the sample of countries in Table 1 is extended to
include other observations available in Lindert (2004). Additional evidence that income cannot explain all of the
variation in schooling within Brazil, Russia, India, and China may be found in Martinez-Fritscher et al., 2010;
Nafziger, “Political,” 2011; Chaudhary, 2009 and 2010; and Bai and Kung, 2011.
7

close to the level of expenditures in Italy. Governments in BRIC spent significant resources on
the very few students that actually attended any school. In most of our cases, the children of
elites or of upper middle classes close to the ruling elites were significantly overrepresented in
publically financed primary schools. For instance, in the case of Brazil, mostly white children
attended school and, in India, education catered largely to the privileged upper castes.
The patterns in school size and teachers per school age population further reinforce the
evidence on spending. Students in BRIC attended schools of a similar or in some cases even
smaller size (31 students per teacher) than in developed parts of the world.7 School size averaged
34 students in the United States and the UK and 48 students in Japan. Yet, there were very few
teachers available to serve the school-age population in BRIC with only 3.7 teachers per 1000
children of school age compared to 28 in the United States, 10 in Japan and 4.8 in Bolivia. Table
1 broadly suggests the educational system in BRIC favored the very small number of students
who were able to attend school compared to the vast majority of the school age population that
was not enrolled.
In addition to the similarities and differences in outcomes between BRIC and the rest of
the world, there was enormous variation in educational outcomes (enrollments) and inputs
(expenditures) within BRIC.8 Table 2 reports primary school enrollment rates by region or
province, and Table 3 reports primary school expenditures per children of school age, both for
roughly the year 1910. These tables highlight the wide variation in each country. The provinces
7

One must be cautious in drawing strong conclusions from such an indicator because it says nothing about the
quality of instruction. Moreover, because we are measuring school size with students per teacher, we may be
missing the emergence of a small number of multi-grade schools in BRIC. Recent work by McKinnon and Minns
(2009) shows that the shift to multi-grade schools in British Columbia led to substantial improvements in
educational outcomes in the early 20th century.
8
Admittedly, such intra-country variation was not uncommon in the early 20th century. In 1907, spending per
school-age child varied from less than $5 in Mississippi and South Carolina to more than $40 in Nevada and
Washington (U.S., 1910). The coefficient of variation for state-level spending per capita on primary education in
Mexico in 1907 was 0.73 (Engerman, Mariscal and Sokoloff, 2009).

8

in Brazil and India with low levels of enrollment had comparable enrollment to the typical
province in China. Yet provinces with above average enrollment in Brazil or India look more
like Russia, which had a much higher GDP per capita. It is worth noting that these numbers are
themselves averages over very large regions – in the Russian case, individual provinces had
enrollment rates as low as 15 percent (Right Bank Ukraine) and as high as 33.5 percent (Baltic
Provinces).
[Insert Table 2 about here]
The substantial heterogeneity is also on display in Table 3, which shows the variation in
elementary expenditures per children of school age within BRIC. In the richer regions of Russia,
such as the Baltic and Capital (Moscow and Petersburg) provinces, spending was almost double
the level in the less developed interior regions. In Brazil the variation was such that in rich states
like São Paulo the level of expenditures per school age child was comparable to the more
developed parts of Russia.9 Yet the poorest provinces in Brazil had expenditures of less than 10
cents per child, a level comparable to China and India. The Brazil-Russia comparison also
suggests that factors other than income influenced enrollment and expenditures. Despite being
poorer than Russia, Brazil spent $11 per enrolled student, compared to $7 in Russia (Table 1),
and Brazil exhibited far greater geographic inequality in both spending and enrollment (Tables 2
and 3).
[Insert Table 3 about here]
We identify similar parallels between China and India. Even if India enjoyed a higher
GDP per capita, expenditures per enrolled student were only 35% of the level in China (Table 1).
Overall, expenditures per school age population in China also exceeded India’s average (16 cents
9

Note that while these expenditures are in comparable 1910 dollars, they do not take into account differences
(across or even within countries) in the relative costs of educational inputs such as school buildings, instructional
supplies, and teacher salaries.
9

compared to 10 cents), while regional variation was considerable in each country. Less
developed parts of British India such as the United Provinces were spending 5 cents per school
age population compared to 28 cents in Bombay. The variation within China was also large:
Henan province spent 13 cents compared to $1.12 in Liaoning province.
As we show in the case studies, elites in China were less constrained by social status and
by higher levels of government compared to India. On account of these differences, local elites
in China may have been more successful at promoting public education when it suited their
economic interests. These comparisons suggest supply side factors may have influenced the
individual education systems that developed in BRIC. Drawing on the literatures on the United
States (e.g., Go and Lindert, 2010; Margo, 1990; and Naidu, 2010), Latin America (e.g.,
Engerman, Mariscal and Sokoloff, 2009; and Vaughan, 1982), and elsewhere (e.g. Gallego,
2010) that identify factors such as policy decentralization, the nature of elites and the extent of
the franchise as important for the emergence of public education, we sketch a theoretical
framework in the next section to understand the provision of primary schooling in BRIC.

3. Towards a Theoretical Framework
In this section, we outline how three interrelated political factors – democratic
mechanisms of governance (even if imperfect); fiscal and policy decentralization; and the
composition and exclusiveness of the economic and political elite – influenced the development
of publicly funded mass schooling in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Of course, we recognize
that other reasons such as the levels of personal and government incomes, the relative demand
for skilled workers, the availability of private alternatives, and cultural factors were also relevant.

10

In the case studies, we try to take these other factors into account, but here we focus on
developing a political framework to understand what transpired in BRIC.
The emergence of public education in more developed economies has often been tied to
the broadening of democracy in the 19th century. Before the extension of the franchise in
Western Europe and its offshoots, national political and economic elites saw little need to
redistribute fiscal resources towards education and resisted state policies to support mass
schooling. Even where some form of representative politics existed, it was often limited to a
select few in what Lindert (2004) has termed an “elite democracy.” But as property
qualifications and other voting restrictions were lifted, the political economy shifted in favor of
more redistributional policies, including publically provided education.10
It was the decentralization of school policy and financing that enabled the early
development of mass schooling in the 19th century in countries such as Prussia and the United
States. In theory, decentralization allows for a tighter fit between local preferences and policies,
and a closer monitoring of politicians by constituents (see Bardhan and Mookherjee, eds., 2006).
When decentralization also includes the devolution of fiscal authority (i.e., by allowing for local
taxes), this may ease the budget constraints of local governments. In both Prussia and the United
States (as well as in Canada and, later, Japan, the United Kingdom, and elsewhere), the
responsibility of financing public schooling was decentralized to local authorities.11

10

Acemoglu and Robinson (2000) and Lizerri and Persico (2004) study the expansion of the franchise in the 19th
century. Aidt et al. (2006), Gallego (2010) and Lindert (2004) provide cross-country evidence of positive
relationships between various measures of democratization and school enrollments and public spending on primary
education in the long 19th century. Engerman, Mariscal and Sokoloff (2009) document how variation in the
provision of schooling in late 19th early 20th century Latin America was related to the extent of voting rights.
Stasavage (2005) provides modern empirical evidence for a link between democratization and primary school
support across Africa.
11
On public school provision in Prussia and the United States, see Lindert (2004) and Go and Lindert (2010).
11

While Prussia – and later Imperial Germany – retained central oversight of primary
education, public schooling in the United States was entirely left to states and communities.12
The decentralization of schooling to local authorities led communities in the North and Midwest,
with relatively representative politics, homogenous populations, and high incomes, to
increasingly finance public education through property taxes over the 19th century (Go and
Lindert, 2010; and Goldin and Katz, 2008).13 In contrast, racial biases and unequal political
rights in the South resulted in limited local funding of schooling for African Americans and
lower overall expenditures on public education (Margo, 1990; and Naidu, 2010).
The U.S. case directly relates to the third element of our framework – the role played by
elites in the functioning of local governments. Well-functioning local democracies can overcome
elite resistance to decentralized and publically financed schooling via political channels.14 But
decentralization does not always lead to more provision of public goods such as education when
local institutions and, hence, policymaking are controlled by an elite minority with interests that
possibly diverge from the majority (Bardhan, 2002).15 The availability of private schools and the

12

From the 18th century onwards, the highly centralized Prussian state mandated that local governments provide
public schools according to a national model and was eventually adopted in Meiji Japan (Duke, 2009). The
decentralization of financial authority that this required – whether conducted through local governments or the
church – was effective in generating relatively high enrollment rates by the mid-19th century (Herbst, 2002; and
Lindert, 2004). Post-Napoleonic France enacted a strongly centralized school system that required departments and
local communities to create and fund public schools. After Falloux’s Law was passed in 1850, special education
taxes were supposed to be enacted by each community, although central government subsidies were also available
(Grew and Harrigan, 1991). Lindert (2004) notes the lagging education performance of the United Kingdom was
due, in part, to the inadequacy of decentralized fiscal resources before the Fees Act of 1891.
13
From private tuition and “rate bills” of the early 19th century, the decentralized provision of primary education in
the United States increasingly became more “public” with the installation of state and local property taxes under the
control of communities and local school boards (Go and Lindert, 2010).
14
Engerman, Mariscal, and Sokoloff (2009) emphasize that the highly unequal societies of late 19th century Latin
America led to elite capture of local and national governments and the formation of institutions – including school
systems – that perpetuated inequality. They contrast this with relatively equal societies of northern United States and
Canada. The political economy model of Go and Lindert (2010) – which assumes a well-functioning local
democracy – generates a positive relationship between inequality and support for public schooling in the 19th
century U.S. because the wealthy, taxable elites were in the minority.
15
For example, and as we examine further below, Wenegast (2010) argues that the traditional landed elite strongly
resisted mass schooling in Imperial and Republican Brazil. As Bandiera and Levy (2010) have also recently pointed
12

burden of taxation necessary to fund public schooling frequently reduces elite support for mass
education.16 Moreover, local elites may constrain educational opportunities to limit upward
mobility into elite circles; thereby, allowing them to hold on to power, even if a broadening of
education would fuel economic development (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006).17
At the same time, exactly who comprises the “local elite,” and their preferences regarding
publically financed schooling, may be very different in different places and may change within a
society over time. For example, commercial interests, civic engagement, fears of unrest, or other
idiosyncratic factors may make some elites willing or especially unwilling to expand educational
(and political) opportunities to the local population. Furthermore, significant differences may
exist between “national elites” and local ones, and the problem of elite capture may also vary
between levels of government. As a result, national policies may aim to undermine local elite
resistance to public schooling or other forms of redistribution.18 Alternatively, weak central
governments may create openings for local elites to enact their own education policies.
We argue that differences in what constituted the “elite” in each country are key to
understanding the variation in the development of schooling across BRIC. Most models of the
provision of public education assume an undifferentiated elite, defined by wealth or political
power (i.e. Gallego, 2010; or Galor and Moav, 2006).19 Hence, such models tend to generate at
most two equilibriums – one without mass schooling (and privately provided education for the

out, an elite may be able to take advantage of preference heterogeneity among the poor majority in a party-based
democracy to shift policy outcomes in their favor.
16
For a formal model of how private school alternatives affordable only to the elite may limit public investments in
schooling under imperfect democracy, see De la Croix and Doepke (2009).
17
In this sense, local or national religious “elites” in many European countries may have resisted efforts at creating
publically funded secular schooling in the late 19th century (West and Woessman, 2008).
18
Prussia and Meiji Japan possessed strong, centralized governments that enacted and enforced decentralized school
provision across widely varying constituencies.
19
Ansell (2010) offers a formal model of public schooling that assumes an existence of an elite that do not wish to
be taxed to finance schooling for the non-elite (due to the burden and to the loss of scarcity rents from skilled labor).
He defines the elite in terms of wealth only.
13

elite) and one with publically financed education, with “democratization” or other factors
shifting the equilibrium from one to the other. In contrast, we argue and provide evidence that
local and national elites, or rather their preferences, varied across the four cases. Consequently,
elite capture – i.e., the shift of policies away from those preferred by the majority – under
decentralized policymaking resulted in multiple “equilibriums” in the provision of schooling.
Brazil, Russia, India, and China had very different political structures by the early 20th
century. Although each country possessed some form of “elite democracy,” none of the countries
allowed broad representation in policymaking bodies.20 The absolutism of Qing China gave way
to some elected bodies after the 1911 revolution, but these highly circumscribed bodies gave
little voice to the non-elites. Colonial India had no substantive elections before 1919, and British
officials chaired provincial and local councils with some feedback from appointed locals. In
Russia, while most provinces possessed quasi-representative local governments after 1864 (the
zemstvo – see below), and an elected national assembly existed after 1906, the nobility continued
to hold sway in both institutions. After 1889, Brazil possessed national and state elections with a
restricted and easily co-opted electorate dominated by various elite groups.
Central governments in all four countries largely absolved themselves from the direct
provision of public education, and substantial autonomy was devolved, formally or by default, to
local government institutions. In post-1889 Brazil, a strong form of federalism entailed the
devolution of fiscal authority – especially export tax revenues – to provinces, which contributed
to extreme inter-regional disparities in education spending and outcomes. The creation of the
zemstvo in much of European Russia transferred some property taxes and authority over how to
spend them into local government hands. While central colonial authority was strong in British

20

The Polity IV database gives a democracy score of 1 / 10 for Brazil, Russia, and China in 1910. As a colony,
British India was not given a score. See Marshall et al., 2009.
14

India, the provision of education was decentralized to local councils, but without any tax
authority. In China, decentralization was more accidental than policy driven. Political instability
in the late Qing and the Republic allowed local actors to take military or political power relative
to the central authorities.
In such decentralized polities with little or limited democracy, elites were able to capture
local governments and influence education policy. However, in the face of relatively low per
capita incomes among the masses, the unwillingness of most elites to engage in redistributive
policymaking led to low public financing of primary education, as most models of the political
economy of education would suggest (e.g. Ansell, 2010). But variation in local economic and
social conditions, as well as heterogeneity within the elite, meant that the willingness (or ability)
to fund mass schooling differed from place to place and over time. Furthermore, the possibility
of mobility into and out of the elite likely influenced policies towards advancing education. For
instance, in more commercially developed areas of Brazil and China, traditional local elites –
often with roots in land ownership – were under political and economic pressure from newer
groups of elites with closer ties to more modern sectors of the economy. It is precisely in those
places where we find governments spending more on education.

4. Case Studies of Public Primary Education in Brazil, Russia, India, and China: 1880-1930
The following case studies focus on the level of decentralization, democracy, and
commercial orientation to explain the variation in the provision of public education across
provinces and over time in each BRIC country. We, however, acknowledge that a number of
other factors – from income to religion – may have also been important in the emergence of
publically provided primary schooling. At the same time, we do not wish to oversell the

15

comparison between developments in these large countries, because each possessed a primary
school system that arose from a specific historical context. In the conclusion, we discuss the
similarities and differences between the four cases and describe how the development of
education in these and other less developed and less democratic countries departed from the
model of the United States and other successful nations by the early 20th century.
4.1 Brazil
After independence in 1822, the provision of elementary education in Brazil was
decentralized. The Constitution of 1824 put states in charge of providing publically funded
elementary education, with some transfers coming from the central government.21 Yet these
transfers and other sources of funds available to local governments were relatively low. Hence,
between 1824 and 1891, the overall level of expenditures and enrollments remained low. The
first education data published in the early 1870s show that expenditures per school-age child
were less than US$ 0.30 (1910 dollars) and enrollment rates were approximately 12 percent of
the school age population. At that time, there was also wide disparity in funding per student,
enrollment, and literacy across states. Literacy rates fluctuated from 12 percent in states like
Minas Gerais and Paraíba to 26 percent in Pará and Paraná (de Carvalho, 1878).22
Until 1878, the Brazilian education system was similar to that of Russia in that all of the
4,500 public schools included Catholicism as a core part of the curriculum, and there were also
721 private schools that were mostly Catholic parochial schools. These public and private
schools were located predominantly in states controlled by the landed elites that dominated

21

Prior to 1889, state-level legislation often put the actual provision of schools and teachers in the hands of
municipalities and other local government bodies. These entitites financed education with property and commercial
taxes. For a brief discussion of local public finances in São Paulo in the late 19 th and early 20 th centuries, see de
Carvalho Filho and Colistete (2010).
22
Slavery and the limited demand for skilled labor in the agrarian and commodity-driven Brazilian economy likely
reduced demand for even basic education in the mid-19th century.
16

politics during the colonial period (e.g., the sugar elite of Pernambuco). Moreover, these schools
served the children of the free, mostly white population of Brazil (de Carvalho, 1878).
A significant decentralization of Brazilian public finances occurred after 1891. Before the
Constitution of 1891, the federal government collected the majority of taxes (mostly from
exports and imports) and spent most of the total budget in the capital or on defense (Villela,
2007). The new Constitution gave states the sole right to tax exports, property, industries and
professions, land transfers, and other transactions. Just the transfer of the right to tax exports
from the central government to the states significantly increased revenues at the state level
(Martinez-Fritscher, 2009). Furthermore, articles 55 and 56 of the Constitution also gave
autonomy to municipalities to organize public finances, collect taxes, and spend on schools if
they wished to do so.
Following this fiscal decentralization, the elementary school system in Brazil improved
steadily over the four decades of the Republic (1889-1930) as states used their new fiscal
authority to increase education funding. Literacy increased from less than 20 percent to 40
percent, and enrollment rates went from 12 percent to 23 percent by 1930.23 Education levels,
however, were still low compared to other countries, and expenditures per school age population
were small (Table 1). We interpret the high level of expenditures per enrolled student (in
comparison to low overall expenditures) and the low enrollment rate as evidence of the persistent
elite bias against publically provided education.

23

There were some efforts at improving the quality of education prior to these changes in fiscal federalism. The
Ministry of the Interior pushed for a shift away from the Lancaster system of education and improvements in the
quality of teacher preparation after 1878. However, the limited resources invested in these efforts reduced their
effectiveness and the decentralization of education allowed states to adopt only the reforms they deemed
appropriate. There is evidence that in states controlled by more positivist Republican elites, schools modernized
more rapidly, including subjects like science, math, and physical education as individual courses sometimes taught
by different teachers. See Martinez-Fritscher et al. (2010).
17

One important outcome of Brazil’s decentralization of tax revenues was that more trade
oriented states ended up spending more on education, as they were able to collect greater export
taxes. Indeed, the amount of the revenues collected depended on the exact export mix and
international commodity prices. States such as Para and Amazonas saw greater revenues because
they exported high value wild rubber; São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Minas Gerais exported
coffee, which saw rising prices in the late 19th century; but other states like Pernambuco and
Bahia exported primarily sugar in the face of falling international prices. According to MartinezFritscher et al (2010) the correlation between exports per capita and expenditures on education is
almost 0.6, even after controlling for basic state characteristics.
The variation in commercial orientation among Brazilian states is similar to what we find
for China, where the elites in provinces with maritime ports had incentives to spend more on
education to improve the skills of the local labor force. In Brazil, higher exports per capita
usually led state elites to invest more on education. Exports were positively associated with
income level, but merchants, trading companies, and small industries in more commercially
developed areas also required a larger pool of educated labor.
Decentralization of export tax revenues cannot explain all of the variation in Brazilian
schooling in the Republican period. Similar to what we observe in the other BRIC countries, the
variation in education expenditures and enrollment rates in Brazil was closely related to specific
incentives of local (state) elites.24 Topik (1989), and others have emphasized that in the late 19th
century, the traditional Imperial landed elites increasingly splintered into local and regional
groups, often with ties to new export sectors. Heterogeneity also existed in the extent to which
local elites were able or willing to capture state and municipal governments. In particular,
24

After 1889, the structures of muncipal politics and revenues echoed those at the state level. As a result, many of
the factors driving the state-level variation that we emphasize here are evident at the municipal level as well
(Carvalho Filho and Colistete, 2010).
18

variation in the rate of mass political participation in local and national elections influenced the
scope of elite capture and education policies in the Republican period.
Before 1889, state politicians had few incentives to provide mass education because the
electoral system minimized political accountability and limited participation to a few. Between
the 1820s and the 1880s Brazil was a constitutional monarchy with a handpicked senate, and
congressmen and municipal governments elected by a few voters who passed stringent income
and literacy requirements to vote. A reform in 1881 eliminated indirect elections through
electoral colleges and introduced secret ballots and direct elections for all electoral posts (except
senate seats). Then, between 1889 and 1890, the Republican movement overthrew the monarchy
and introduced direct elections for president and governors. The income requirement to vote was
eliminated and replaced with a stricter literacy requirement.25 After 1889, states with a larger
number of voters as a percentage of the population saw higher education expenditures. This
suggests a positive relationship between political voice and education, one where elites spent
more on education to increase the number of voters, rather than greater political participation
directly leading to larger investments in public schooling.
In other contexts, Engerman, Mariscal and Sokoloff (2009) and Lindert (2004) have
argued that the causality goes from franchise expansion to expenditures on education. In Brazil,
however, competition in presidential elections created incentives for state politicians and parties
to increase expenditures on education as a way to increase the number of literate white male
voters, either through adult education in the short run, or through public primary education for
children over the long run (Martinez Fritscher et al., 2010). The incentives to do this emerged
because the federal executive and the ruling coalition in Congress during the Republic were
under the control of the Republican parties of the states of São Paulo and Minas Gerais. Elites
25

After 1889, voters had to write their names and birthdates to get a voter registry card.
19

and their political allies in these and other states used their capacity to mobilize voters in
presidential elections as a bargaining chip with this dominant coalition in the federal
government. In exchange, they received transfers, less political or military intervention, and
support during elections against opposition parties in their respective states.26 Since Congress
scrutinized elections and electoral disputes, it was easy for the ruling coalition to disqualify
unwanted opposition in state elections (Porto, 2002). 27
The importance of elite electoral control via educational policies is evident when we look
closer at state-level differences. For example, the state of Pará had twice the export tax revenues
per capita as São Paulo, yet it spent less than half of what São Paulo spent on education per
school age population. The pressure São Paulo elites felt to mobilize a larger electorate to
maintain their influence at the federal level led state politicians to increase education spending as
a way to increase the number of voters.28 In contrast, the small political elite in Pará represented
the interests of rubber exporters, who were not politicians with national aspirations. There was

26

On the evolution of electoral politics and this “politics of governors” system in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, see Love (1980). He goes on to note that this quasi-patronage system extended to lower levels of
government.
27
The demand for skilled labor by industrialists or immigrant demand for schools may have also increased pressures
for education in particular locations (i.e., São Paulo), but these pressures were not that important in Brazil as a
whole, because industrialization did not occur with technology that was especially complementary with skilled labor
(Goldin and Katz, 1998). Moreover, the bulk of immigrants that went to Brazil between 1889 and 1930 came from
Italy, Spain, and Portugal (with Germans only in fourth place), countries that Lindert (2004) associates with low
expenditures on education. De Carvalho Filho and Colistete (2010) find evidence that the presence of more foreignborn farm workers was associated with greater municipal spending on education in São Paulo at the turn of the
century, but econometric work at the state level shows no correlation between immigration and education
expenditures (Martinez-Fritscher et al.2010).
28
In contrast, local political bosses (coronéis) in the state of São Paulo did not need to increase the number of voters
as a way to win local elections. The Republican Party of São Paulo won sweeping victories in all local elections
during the Republican period. Yet, the Republican Party of São Paulo needed to show its capacity to mobilize voters
in national elections as a way to convince the Republican Party of Minas Gerais to keep them in the ruling coalition
(their coalition broke twice during the Republican period). See Love (1980).

20

no significant threat from local opposition or federal authorities to cause the state’s governors to
increase education spending to mobilize voters for elections.29
The majority of investment in education between 1889 and 1930 came from state
governments, and this is where we see the variation in elite interests and behavior having the
largest impact. While many decisions over building and staffing schools were delegated to
community and municipal education officials, municipality-financed schools only held 25
percent of total enrollment in the country at the turn of the century, and most policymaking
remained under the authority of the state government. States were able to provide the bulk of
public school finances because the majority of them collected significant revenues from taxes on
exports; while municipalities collected more limited property and land transfer taxes. Although
elites avoided sending their children to public schools, enrollment in private schools was only 20
percent of total primary enrollment, and, over time, municipal and private schools lost
enrollments to state schools. That did not mean that state schools were equally available to all
Brazilians. Census data shows that the cohort of students who attended elementary schools in
Brazil between 1900 and 1920 were mostly white Brazilians, even though a third of the
population was composed of blacks and mixed race citizens (Martinez-Fritscher et al., 2010).
The case of the state of Pernambuco also illustrates how variation in elite behavior
influenced educational policies. In overwhelmingly rural Pernambuco, the traditional landed
elites dominated politics. Most of the local political elites that portrayed themselves as
“Republican,” were in fact the same families, which controlled state and local politics during the
Imperial period. Rural political bosses, coronéis, mobilized voters using a combination of
violence and patronage. This elite behavior existed in other states, including São Paulo, but
29

For further accounts of elite conflict and dominance across states in Brazil see De Souza (1984). Like Love (1980)
and others, we emphasize the central policymaking role of the state governors. We estimated electoral participation
rates using the voting data reported in the Diario do Congresso.
21

elsewhere, political pressure from local voters, national political competition, and greater
commercial opportunities provided different incentives that led to better education outcomes.
Elites in Pernambuco, in contrast, controlled power with patronage, did not face intense political
competition, and were not exposed to a major commercial boom because its main export, sugar,
faced stagnant prices from the late 19th century onwards. Thus, the government in this state had
one of the lowest expenditures on education and did not see any major improvement in literacy
rates during the period 1889-1930.30
In the Brazilian case, the significant regional variation in expenditures and enrollment
was related to state-level differences in export tax revenues and the political incentives of elites.
These factors often determined whether and how the dominant elite in a state (or municipality)
captured the local electoral system and influenced (and financed) educational policy. Even
though Brazil had a lower GDP per capita than Russia in 1910, public expenditures per pupil
exceeded those in Russia, perhaps because local elites were less constrained by higher levels of
government and perceived greater rewards in directing expenditures toward education.
Moreover, the provision of education in Brazil shares certain parallels to China where again local
elites successfully expanded public education to meet their economic needs for skilled labor.
4.2 Russia
Between serf emancipation in 1861 and the onset of World War I, the share of the schoolage population enrolled in formally recognized primary institutions in European Russia rose
from less than 5 percent to roughly 20 percent (Nafziger, “Political,” 2011). To some extent, this
came at the expense of informal and unregulated schools, especially among ethnic and religious
minorities. Literacy rates did slowly increase, but by World War I, just slightly more than 40

30

This account is based on Levine’s (1978) political history of Pernambuco during the Republican period.
22

percent of the population older than 9 years old could read.31 This record placed Russia near the
bottom in Europe, with schooling outcomes that looked much more like those in BRIC than in
the West.
As in the other BRIC, the primary explanation for the low provision of basic schooling is
that Tsarist Russia was poor, and both private and public funding for education were limited as a
result. Per capita income levels in the countryside or among the urban working classes were quite
low (Table 1).32 Until the last decades of the period, the central government, primarily through
the Ministry of Education (the MNP) and the state-sponsored Orthodox leadership (the Holy
Synod), provided only limited funding for primary schooling.
In 1861, neither central nor local state authorities in Russia expended much public
attention or money on education. Private schools and tutors catered to the landed and urban
elites, while only a small number of villages and towns (and even fewer serf owners) supported
primary schools out of their own resources. In 1864, the state established an administrative
structure for oversight of the Empire’s schools under the MNP, but this reform did not entail the
release of any new resources from the center, nor did it extend to the thousands of schools under
the supervision of the Holy Synod.33
Over the ensuing fifty years, conflict emerged between the MNP, the Holy Synod, and
local actors over control of primary education, as decentralized policymaking was never fully

31

On pre-1917 literacy, see Mironov (1991). Over 50 percent of the population older then 9 years old was recorded
as literate in the 1926 census (Perrie and Davies, 1991).
32
Tables 2 and 3 show that the richer Baltic, Capital, Central Industrial, and “New” Russian provinces exhibited
higher expenditures per school-age child and greater enrollment rates. Despite possibly high returns to education in
agriculture, a greater share of the population in agricultural employment was associated with lower investments in
schooling (Nafziger, “Political,” 2011). On per capita income levels over our time period, see Gregory (1982).
33
The 1864 Reform granted the right to open primary schools to state ministries, to the Holy Synod, to private
citizens, and to towns and rural communities. Formally, these different entities were supposed to submit school
proposals for approval by newly created district school councils. Prior to 1861, the Ministry of State Domains did
make some efforts to encourage basic education among the state peasantry, but these attempts were ill-funded and
resulted in relatively few schools.
23

endorsed by the central authorities. The MNP slowly expanded control over curriculum and
teaching personnel until the early 1880s, when reactionary policies led to a shift towards church
control of schooling during the last years of Alexander III’s reign (1881-1894).34 But under
Nicholas II, the MNP responded to the growing public awareness of Russia’s poor educational
record by expanding its school inspection system and increasing its involvement in local
educational affairs. With the Educational Statute of 1908, the MNP formally took over the
management of all primary schools in the Empire. This late shift towards centralization was
accompanied by an increase in state funding to subsidize local efforts at building and
maintaining schools. This brought total central government spending on primary education from
less than 0.6 percent of the state’s budget in 1902 to just over 2.2 percent in 1913 (Hans, 1964;
and Nafziger, “Financing,’ 2011). Although significant in comparison to the other BRIC
countries, this was a small increase when compared to the United Kingdom, for example, where
central government spending on human capital investments accounted for 16.1 percent of total
expenditures in 1910-12 (Davis and Huttenback, 1986).35
While local education policies were subject to interference from above, the funding of
Russian primary schools was decentralized to local communities and sub-provincial governments
prior to the 1890s. For many “public” schools, a village or town assessed its own citizens to fund
the construction or rental of a building and to pay someone to provide instruction. Such
arrangements may have suffered from significant collective action problems, including intra34

Throughout the post-reform period, religious instruction remained a core component in the curriculum of almost
every primary school. Schools in the Holy Synod’s system generally had instruction provided by the local priest and
were financed by local (community) contributions. It was during Alexander III’s reign that the parochial system took
over many of the remaining informal peasant literacy schools (shkoly gramotnye). On the evolution of institutional
control over schooling, see Eklof (1986), Nafziger (“Political,” 2011), Sinel (1972), and Sorenson (1992).
35
In Davis and Huttenback (1986), education is the dominant category of human capital expenditures, which also
include spending on medicine, charity, relief, and immigration. and on occasion religion. It is unclear whether the
numbers for UK include the National Insurance Act of 1911, which may bias their expenditures upwards. Even so,
human capital expenditures accounted for 11.6 percent of the budget in the earlier period between 1905-09 and were
consistently larger than the Russian average in the 19th and early 20th century.
24

community conflicts between groups (ethnic, religious, wealth, generational, etc.) that held
different preferences over schooling. In towns and cities, local elites continued to send their
children to private academies rather than the public school (e.g. Lieven, 1989). In the
countryside, the largest property owners – the landed gentry, merchants, and rich townsmen –
were not liable for local assessments by exclusively peasant institutions.36 In the absence of more
formal local fiscal mechanisms for enforcing contributions from larger property owners, funding
for rural primary education would have remained limited.
For a large part of European Russia, a newly created, all-class institution of local selfgovernment known as the zemstvo functioned as just such a mechanism. A reform of 1864
established district and provincial-level zemstvo in 34 of the 50 provinces of European Russia, a
region that included most of the Russian heartland. Members of zemstvo assemblies were elected
by different groups of property owners: private rural property owners (mostly from the landed
nobility), owners of urban property, and peasant communes. These new bodies were granted the
power to levy property taxes on all local land holdings and fixed capital. Moreover, the zemstvo
was explicitly called on to engage in programs encouraging local economic development, a
calling that quickly came to include education.
Although intended to include representation from all social classes, the zemstva electoral
system was biased in favor of the local non-peasant elites. Peasants were allocated few seats
relative to their population shares, and the elections that did occur frequently attracted little
interest or simply reinforced the existing structure of political power. Therefore, the policies

36

Township-level units of peasant self-government (volosti) also contributed to primary school funding in some
areas, although their contributions were less than direct expenditures by village communities. While initiative for the
school often came from the village itself, township authorities frequently stepped in to fund the initial outlays out of
their own tax collections. According to data on local government expenditures in 1905, rural societies
(administrative versions of the traditional peasant commune) in European Russia spent about two times as much as
township governments did on education: 4 million vs. 2 million rubles. See Russia. Statisticheskoe, Mirskie, 1909.
25

enacted by a given zemstvo were frequently dictated by the composition of the private propertied
elite that formed the assembly majority (Nafziger, “Did,” 2011). The resulting heterogeneity of
this form of local “elite democracy,” coupled with the absence of the zemstvo in 16 provinces of
European Russia, helps explain the variation in expenditures on education evident in Table 3.37
Where the institution existed, zemstvo funds came to supplant financing from rural
communities. Between 1880 and 1894, the share of total expenditures on rural primary schools
(in European Russia) undertaken by village communities – either directly or through the local
Orthodox parish – fell from 36 to 18 percent.38 In provinces that did not possess zemstvo, village
(and township) and town governments held almost all responsibility for school funding. In these
provinces, not only was spending on primary education per capita less (about 10 percent lower in
1911), but enrollments and the growth in the number of formal schools per 1000 people were
also lower. This variation is reflected in Tables 2 and 3, where the non-zemstvo right-bank
Ukraine and Byelorussian provinces exhibited lower spending and lower enrollments.39
Therefore, the decentralized “democracy” of the zemstvo seemed to have supported
greater investments in public education. Those districts where the zemstvo assemblies included
relatively more representatives from peasant communities exhibited greater spending on primary
schools that catered to the rural majority. But this correlation was strongest in those districts that
also possessed a greater number of nobles with small-sized holdings. In contrast to the traditional
37

Other factors – religion, economic structure, etc. – contributed to this variation beyond income differences and the
zemstva (Nafziger, “Political,” 2011). The interaction between communal villages, township authorities, and district
and provincial administrators varied substantially across European Russia, even within the non-zemstvo region. In
the Baltics, all rural education finance came from township governments.
38
As early as 1879, over 40 percent of funds allocated to rural primary education in European Russia came from
zemstvo budgets. By 1894, this share had reached 54 percent. These and other numbers on rural primary school
expenditures are taken from ibid. By 1905, provincial and district zemstvo were spending approximately 25 million
rubles on education, or about 4 times the expenditures of all townships and rural societies together (Russia,
Statisticheskoe, Dokhody, 1909). Expenditures on primary education occasionally took the form of loans to
communities; but, more often, spending involved grants and the direct hiring of teachers as zemstvo employees.
39
In 1911, enrollment rates (out of the school age population) were 3.5 percent higher (32.9 versus 29.4) in zemstvo
provinces. Between 1860 and 1911, the annualized rate of growth in the number of formal schools was 6.5 percent
in non-zemstvo and 7.5 percent in zemstvo provinces. See Nafziger, “Political,” 2011.
26

large landed gentry, these nobles were more likely to be involved in commercial activities and
hold civil service positions obtained though merit.40 They formed the basis for a movement that
historians have labeled “zemstvo liberalism,” which tended to support broader schooling for the
masses. The imperfect democracy embedded in the zemstvo meant that the composition of the
local property-owning elite was critical in determining the level of decentralized school
provision (Nafziger, “Did,” 2011).
Similar to British India, the heterogeneity of the Russian population limited the
development of public schooling. This was especially true in peripheral areas where the zemstvo
did not exist. Peasants in these areas maintained informal or confessional schools that relied
exclusively on community contributions and were often of poor quality.41 In contrast, the
consolidation of local fiscal authority in the zemstvo enabled some catch-up growth in rural
schooling by overcoming collective action problems and allowing a broader tax base to be
tapped. This was more likely to take place where the composition of the nobility involved in the
zemstvo was favorable to mass education and willing to help foot the bill (even though most of
these nobles utilized private education for their own children).42 We focus here on the distinction

40

Although he was from a slightly earlier period, the character of Konstantin Levin in Leo Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina
provides an example of such a liberal noble estate owner. We thank a referee for reminding us of this comparison.
41
This was especially true among Jewish and Muslim communities, which preferred to maintain informal schools
rather than give up any authority over education. By 1894, there were still 16779 informal literacy schools, 5949
Jewish kheders, and 11589 Islamic madrases in the Empire. Comparing the 1894 and 1911 data for peripheral
provinces in European Russia suggests that despite aggressive efforts by the MNP, many informal religious schools
remained outside the formal administration system in 1911. Inequality or other forms of heterogeneity among the
peasantry likely compounded local collective action problems when it came to the local financing of a school.
However, the fact that many peasant communinities did support informal or village-funded schools suggests that
there was considerable demand for basic education, perhaps independent of its economic return (see Eklof, 1986)..
42
Most zemstvo funding for education went towards rural primary schools that catered almost exclusively to the
peasantry – local nobility and other social classes sent few of their children to such village schools. For more on the
internal debates within the zemstvo over schooling, see Nafziger (“Did,” 2011; and “Political,” 2011) and Eklof
(1986). The actually decisions to build school, hire staff, or change curriculum generally resided with the local
school district committees, which often included representatives of the zemstvo and relied on zemstvo funding for
their initiatives. These and other bodies involved in education policies were all subject to intervention by powerful
local elites and outside bureaucrats. Of course, even where the peasantry held more power in the zemstvo or other
local institutions, their representatives may not have given voice to their (median) interests.
27

between the traditional nobility and a growing group of more liberal ‘middling’ gentry, but
ethnicity, religion, profession, and other characteristics also divided the local elite. These
divisions varied regionally and over time, especially as economic development reduced the
competitive viability of agriculture in less productive areas, and trade and industrial growth
generated newly wealthy elites elsewhere (Becker, 1985; and Hamburg, 1984).
Decentralization, variation in local democracy, and characteristics of the elite help
explain the within-country differences in Russian public primary schooling by the early 20th
century. Other factors – such as the religious composition of the population, the level of
commercial development, and the institutional legacy of serfdom – contributed to this variation,
and these factors had parallels in the experiences of India and China. However, we view the
relative success of Russia among the BRIC countries as the outcome of slightly higher per capita
income and the increased financial involvement of the central government after the mid-1890s.
Intriguingly, the timing of the acceleration of central government spending – especially with the
Education Act of 1908 – suggests that the advent of a limited form of national elections (for the
Duma) after the revolution of 1905 may have had positive consequences for schooling.43
Similar to all the BRIC, but especially the Brazilian case, Russian political reforms led to
more resources being invested in public schooling, specifically through the decentralization of
fiscal resources (via the zemstvo) in those areas where local elites founds it in their interest to
support education. But unlike the Brazilian case (or India and China, for that matter), the
increased fiscal and policy involvement of the central government appears to have catalyzed a
shift towards widespread schooling. However, despite these gains, primary education in Russia
43

Duma voting rights were limited by property ownership and social estate, but the parliaments that met in the last
decade of the Tsarist regime included peasant and non-elites representatives and possessed some central budget
oversight. The broader political participation at the national level after 1905 may have partially overcome or
compensated for local elite resistance to schooling in particular regions, a shift that fits the frameworks of Lindert
(2004) and Gallego (2010).
28

compared unfavorably with other parts of Europe by World War I. The achievement of nearuniversal primary schooling in Russia only occurred in the 1930s under a decidedly nondemocratic Soviet regime that left little autonomy to local governments (Fitzpatrick, 1979).44
4.3 India
By the early 20th century, India had made limited progress in increasing mass primary
education. Crude literacy rates were under 10 percent and less than 1 in 10 children of ages 5 to
14 was enrolled in any primary school. Only China had a lower enrollment rate, but even China
had higher spending per school age population. A relatively low level of GDP per capita
certainly constrained the amount of public and private funds available for education, but low
income alone cannot explain the low spending. Public educational spending in areas under direct
colonial control (British India, which accounted for almost two thirds of the Indian subcontinent)
was among the lowest in the world, lower than countries at similar levels of development and
even lower than neighboring Indian ‘Princely States’ under indirect colonial control (Davis and
Huttenback, 1986). The following discussion focuses on the constraints in British India.45
British officials were cognizant of the inadequate provision of schooling. Official reports
often bemoaned the low levels of spending, but the goal of extending mass education was never
seriously promoted (Nurullah and Naik, 1951; Chaudhary, 2009). As a dependent colony, any
potential benefits of educating a large share of the population were outweighed by both the
monetary costs (additional taxes to fund public education) and the non-monetary costs (the

44

School enrollments actually decreased in the chaotic early 1920s before recovering by the end of the decade
(Holmes, 1989). Soviet authorities then passed compulsory schooling laws, which led to near universal primary
enrollment by the mid-1930s.
45
The Princely States were local kingdoms of varying size ruled by individual kings that maintained their autonomy
in local affairs while deferring to colonial authority in matters of defense and foreign policy. Although many of the
same forces were likely at work, we focus on British India because it was a single administrative unit with the same
institutional organization. In comparison, there is significant heterogeneity among the numerous Princely States in
both the set up of educational systems and educational outcomes although recent work suggests educational
outcomes on average were higher in the Princely States compared to British India (Iyer, 2010).
29

potentially destabilizing effects of a more educated populace). On account of the meager public
funds, the colonial government actively encouraged private schooling and made some limited
efforts to increase schooling among groups with traditionally low levels of education such as
Muslims, the lower castes and tribal groups.46
Beginning in the early 1880s, the provision of primary education was decentralized to
rural and urban local boards, although they received important grants from provincial
governments. The boards managed some schools in addition to providing grants to private aided
schools. In general, there was significant heterogeneity across provinces in school systems, grant
rules and subsidy amounts. Even though public revenues funded local boards, upper caste Indian
elites were disproportionately represented on the local boards and in principle could influence
public allocation decisions.47 However, the boards had no power of taxation. They received a
fixed pot of money partially based on the land taxes collected in their district and, they allocated
the money between primary education, local infrastructure and medical services. Unlike in Brazil
and Russia (at least prior to the 1900s), central and provincial authorities dictated the levels of
local public expenditure in India.
Within this institutional framework, colonial policies influenced regional public spending
patterns, often exacerbating pre-existing economic differences between provinces. Both
enrollment and literacy rates were twice as high in the coastal provinces of Bengal, Bombay and
46

For example, larger public grants were made available to schools in “backward districts,” scholarships were
introduced to encourage schooling among these groups, and training schools for teachers were established.
47
The rules on the exact composition of district boards varied from province to province. A British colonial officer,
often the district magistrate was the board chairman in most provinces. He was assissted by nominated and elected
Indian members. Despite the presence of non-official members, historians have argued that official control over
these bodies was strong and the elective principle was not widely implemented (Cross, 1922). Nominated members
were almost always important landlords, while traders and lawyers accounted for many of the elected members
(Cross, 1922; Gopal, 1953; Tinker, 1968). In subsequent decades especially in the 1920s, minority group leaders for
Muslims and lower castes were also among the nominated members. Thus, the acts of local self-government were
not enacted with the view of introducing democratic self-government with equal representation of all groups. While
we focus on rural districts here, self-government and revenue reforms brought similar debates over education to the
fore in municipalities over our period (e.g. Bayly, 1971).
30

Madras (7.1 percent literacy in 1911) compared to the interior provinces of Central Provinces
and United Provinces (3.5 percent in 1911). The coastal provinces had big urban centers with
larger bureaucracies such as Bombay and Calcutta that offered more opportunities for educated
workers. This likely increased the private demand for education. Nonetheless there were regional
differences even among the coastal provinces. From 1881 to1931, Bombay led the way in public
education expenditures and developed a large network of public schools. But, public spending in
Bengal, Bihar and Orissa lagged relatively behind both Bombay and Madras.
Much of the difference in public expenditures was due to heterogeneity of land tax
revenues. Bombay and Madras had higher land revenues on average, and hence, they had more
public money available to spend on education (and other local services) when compared to
Bengal, where land revenues were lower on account of the Permanent Settlement. The
Settlement was a contract between the English East India Company and the landlords of Bengal
and Bihar whereby the revenue demand on land (land tax) was fixed in cash for perpetuity in
1793. In comparison, Temporary Settlement areas such as Bombay and Madras were assessed
land taxes at higher rates that were periodically adjusted to account for changes in price levels
and productivity. Thus, public education spending varied with the land tax regime and, along
with private spending on education, jointly influenced the development of mass schooling.48
Roughly, land revenues explain approximately 32 percent of the district-level variation in total
spending on education (Chaudhary, 2010). Thus, colonial policies influenced national spending
per capita, as well as the regional variation in public spending on primary education.49

48

Private revenue sources accounted for a larger share of total spending (40 percent) in Bengal than in Bombay (20
percent). On the sources of the numbers provided here, see Chaudhary (2009 and 2010).
49
Of course, private school fees and the high opportunity costs of lost child labor were key factors in reducing
enrollments in many parts of India. As in the other case studies, our focus on the political economy of publically
provided education at the district level is meant as a complement rather than a substitute for these underlying microlevel factors that likely helped determined school provision and take-up.
31

While colonial rule probably constrained the development of primary education and
created strong interregional disparities in spending, this does not necessarily imply that India
would have enjoyed better outcomes as an independent state. Indian elites, the chief beneficiaries
of English education under the colonial system, were often complicit in blocking the extension of
primary education to the rural masses. For example, in the province of Bengal, the elites actively
opposed George Campbell’s (Bengal’s Lieutenant Governor) policy of providing more public
support for mass education in the 1870s: “The Bengali Hindu bhadraloks, a newly emerging
social group mostly consisting of persons belonging to higher Hindu castes, after imbibing the
best fruits of western education were trying desperately in the second half of the nineteenth
century to assume the social leadership of the Bengalis. This social group, ambitious and
ruthless, wanted to keep the masses ignorant in order to maintain their leadership over them”
(Mandal, 1975).50 Although colonial rule created such new elites, there was considerable overlap
between the traditional land owning elites and the new western educated elites. In fact,
researchers have argued that the colonial educational system may have increased inter-caste
inequality (Srinivas, 1996).51
Such resistance frequently occurred at the district level, either through actions of local
boards, or through direct lobbying of colonial officials responsible for education policy. For
example, Mr. C. T. H. Johnson, a district officer in Madras province, told the committee working
on The Report of the Royal Commission upon Decentralization in India in 1908 that, “The Local
Boards represent the monied, educated and land-owning classes; they are not really in favor of

50

See Mukhopadhyay (1984) for more details on how elites in Bengal successfully petitioned colonial officials to
restrict the extension of mass primary schooling.
51
Srinivas argues that the new opportunities from western education “had the twin effect of increasing the cultural
and ideological divide between the high and the low castes, as well as making the new opportunities doubly
desirable. In the first place, they were well paid and prestigious, and in the second, only the high castes had access to
them” (1996, p. 78).
32

increased primary education, because it makes labor more difficult to handle; they are not in
favor of a reduction of lower secondary education because they like to have the lower secondary
schools to which men of their type send their children.” While the initial emphasis on English
medium secondary education was due to colonial policies, many upper caste Indians actively
embraced English instruction and became the chief promoters of secondary education.52
The influence of elites is also visible in the provision of private aided schools receiving
public subsidies. Despite public subsidies, the Government had limited control over these
schools because private individuals pooled the necessary resources, set up the school, applied for
a grant, and managed the school. Chaudhary (2009) finds that characteristics of the local elite
strongly influenced the provision of the different types of primary schools. Brahmans and other
educated upper castes successfully directed private and, to a smaller extent, public resources
toward establishing secondary schools for their children. Districts with a larger share of
Brahmans, the traditional elite caste of Hindus, had more public and private secondary schools
plus a smaller ratio of primary to secondary schools. However, upper castes were unable to
completely co-opt the public policy-making process because districts with larger proportions of
lower castes and Muslims also had more public secondary schools.53
Colonial and elite-dictated policies occurred amidst hierarchical divisions among Hindu
castes that further constrained the provision of mass primary education. Districts with high levels
of caste and religious diversity had fewer private aided and unaided primary schools as well as a
smaller ratio of primary to secondary private schools. The presence of many religions with

52

See Nurullah and Naik, 1951 and Basu, 1974. For example, according to Basu (1974), the number of English
secondary schools and arts colleges more than doubled from 1881/82 to 1921/22 from 2,133 to 4,904, while the
number of pupils more than quintupled from 149,233 to 823,416 (p. 105). Most of this increase was in private aided
(private schools that received some funds from public revenues) and unaided schools.
53
This was a misguided outcome of colonial policy, which set up these schools (as opposed to primary schools) in
educationally backward districts hoping they would increase literacy in these districts.
33

heterogeneous preferences over public and private education compounded the situation. For
example, Muslims in heavily Muslim dominant districts had worse literacy outcomes because the
Muslim religious schools were less effective at the margin at promoting literacy compared to
secular colonial schools (Chaudhary and Rubin, 2011).
While colonial rule did not create the divisions in Indian society, colonial policies did not
ameliorate the situation. Overall, public spending was low and susceptible to elite capture at the
local level. Lower castes and the aboriginal tribes were rarely represented on the councils.
Hence, they had limited political voice to influence local education policy. In contrast, landed
and educated elites – defined by caste, wealth, and profession – did hold positions on district
councils and utilized these to influence local spending.54 Colonial attempts to secure greater
representation for marginalized groups and improve educational outcomes for the non-elites
were generally insubstantial and weakly implemented.55
India’s experience both parallels and contrasts with the other BRIC countries. Similar to
China, there were big differences in spending and enrollments between the coastal and interior
provinces linked to commercial development and new types of economic activity. However, the
size of the colonial bureaucracy and potential for educated employment were perhaps more
important in accounting for these differences than income and economic development—
urbanization rates in the coastal and interior provinces were similar, and the pattern of spending
54

For example, Brahmans and other upper castes comprised over 80 percent of lawyers and almost 75 percent of
landowners in Bengal, and these were the two most common occupations of district council members.
55
Ghurye (1961) discusses this issue. For example, as early as 1856, a court case was filed in the district of Dharwar
of Bombay where a lower caste boy was denied admission to the government school. In 1858 the courts released the
following press-note “Although the Governor-in-Council does not contemplate the introduction of low caste pupils
into schools, the expenses of which are shared with Government by local contributors and patrons who object to
such a measure, he reserves to himself the full right to refusing the support of Government to any partially aided
school in which the benefits of education are withheld from any class of persons on account of caste or race, and
further resolved that all schools maintained at the sole cost of Government shall be open to all classes of its subjects
without distinction.” This stated policy was not seriously implemented. Schools that relied on government aid
continued to receive grants regardless of their policy towards lower castes (Nurullah & Naik, 1951). It was not until
1923 that a government resolution was passed stipulating that government grants would be unavailable to any
schools that denied admission to the lower castes.
34

on education is not fully explained by differences in income levels (Chaudhary, 2009 and 2010).
But unlike China, Indian elites were more anti-schooling because they were unlikely to
economically benefit from an extension of mass primary education. Like Brazil and Russia, the
extent of political participation in India did influence public spending, but since political
representation was generally limited to land and caste based elites public spending was targeted
to secondary education and away from mass primary education. Nonetheless, colonial policies
and the associated fiscal system based on centrally dictated land taxes were important drivers of
inter-regional differences. This system paralleled Brazil’s constitutionally mandated
decentralization of export taxes to provincial governments. Like in Tsarist Russia, the
decentralization of primary education to local district councils in British India made the
distribution of public funds a function of the preferences and ethnic, religious, and
socioeconomic composition of the elites who sat on these councils.
4.4 China
With the lowest per capita income among the BRIC countries, it is not surprising that
China possessed the lowest enrollment rates and one of the lowest levels of expenditures on
education per school-aged child among our sample countries (Table 1). However, certain areas
(the lower Yangzi; coastal regions – see Ma, 2008; and Mitchener and Yan, 2010) did experience
some hints of industrial development and higher economic growth in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, which contributed to heterogeneity in educational outcomes in the late-Qing and
Republican periods (Tables 2 and 3). But we argue that differences in schooling across China
were also a product of policies enacted by heterogeneous local elites, who acquired considerable
power in the face of Qing decline and the weak central governments of the Republican era.

35

China experienced a structural break in education in 1905. Prior to that, the primary
education system was based upon Confucian classics and aimed at success in the Imperial Civil
Service Exam (ICSE).56 The rewards to high achievement on this exam generated considerable
demand for privately provided traditional schooling (sishu) throughout the country. Such schools
were frequently financed by contributions from wealthy households, lineages, or local voluntary
associations such as guilds. As a result, these schools catered to the children of local elites, and
county quotas on the number of passing exam grades capped the returns to such human capital
investment.57 In the wake of the Taiping rebellion of the 1850s and 1860s, the Qing dynasty
expanded these quotas and encouraged the development of additional classical academies
(Woodside and Elman, 1994; and Keenan, 1994). There was some growth in the number of
“community” or charitable schools catering to the non-elite, but these were generally funded by
contributions of local elites from lineage or clan wealth. Overall, not only was there essentially
no publically financed mass schooling in the late Qing, but the particular structure of the exam
system, although avowedly meritocratic, limited entry into the bureaucratic elite.58 While as
many as 40 percent of males attended sishu for at least a few years by the end of the 19th century,
many students achieved only limited literacy and gained few applied skills (Borthwick, 1983;
and Yuchtman, 2010).

56

The ICSE was the main avenue to wealth and power in late imperial China. In the words of Ping-ti Ho’s, the exam
was “the ladder to success” (1955), while a Chinese proverb called it “the gate that fishes jump through and become
dragons.”
57
In the traditional education system, the initial stages of training and preparing a son for the civil service was the
private responsibility of families seeking to attain or maintain elite status as “official” families. Clans and families
had, whenever possible, mobilized their financial and cultural resources to provide young boys with the tools of
classical literacy. The government, central or local, maintained a hands-off approach towards funding mass primary
education.
58
Under the Qing, provincial civil servants and county magistrates were rotated frequently, which made them
somewhat distinct from traditional local elite, often defined as those achieveing the lowest exam rank of sheng-yuan.
On the exam system and the perpetuation of an elite class across Qing China, see Elman (1991).
36

Growing economic openness and industrialization in the late nineteenth century
generated rising demand for modern education, particularly in science, technology, and other
applied topics (Yan, 2008; and Yuchtman, 2010). Although attempts to build modern schools
started in some coastal cities as early as the 1860s, the abolishment of the ICSE in 1905 marked
the beginning of a nationwide remodeling of the education system and the structure of
government support of basic schooling.59 A Ministry of Education was established in 1905, and
Offices of Provincial Education were founded in many provinces (along with similar county
level institutions known as “Education Exhorting Offices” – see Abe, 1987; and Bailey, 1990).
After 1905, the Ministry of Education called on community, county, and provincial officials to
enact compulsory and modern primary schooling, but central and provincial authorities allocated
very limited funds towards this goal.60
Instead, new modern primary schools were typically financed by a combination of county
tax receipts, the reallocation of endowments from traditional schools, and private contributions
by local elites (Thøgersen, 2005; and Vander Ven, 2005).61 The devolution of fiscal authority
that occurred after the Taiping Rebellion (and was formalized in local government reforms of
the 1900s) left most tax revenues to provincial and county-level authorities.62 Private

59

These “New Policies” (xinzheng) were enacted locally by the existing elite, often with substantial conflict
(Prazniak, 1980).
60
An influential proposal for education reform – Zhang Zhidong’s Exhortation to Study (1898) – called for a
national three-tiered system of modernized schools located in provincial, prefecture, and county capitals, along with
a network of basic primary schools in towns and villages. This system was to incorporate existing traditional
academies and other types of schools (Ayers, 1971; and Baily, 1990). The village primary schools were to be funded
by local resources, while the other two tiers were to have access to funds from central or provincial treasuries (on
Shandong province, see Buck, 1974).
61
According to data gathered by Thøgersen (2005), less than one percent of public primary school funding in three
counties of Shandong province in 1908 came from extra-county government sources. For similar numbers from
Zhejiang province in 1907-1909, see Rankin (1986)
62
Some of this was unwilling, as local authorities refused to remit taxes back to the (weakening) center. Measures in
1908-1909 created elected institutions of self-government at the national, provincial, and county levels. Voting
rights were determined by property ownership, and, as a result, each body was dominated by landed and commercial
elites. These decrees paralleled growing movements for more local self-government in a number of provinces (e.g.
Zhang, 2000; on Henan). In the 1900s, the central government also encouraged the establishment of various civil
37

contributions by lineages, specific endowments, or associations of local elites continued to be
important sources of school finance, especially in less developed, more isolated areas.63 Whether
funded from public, private, or a mix of sources, the initiative to build new schools in the last
decades of the Qing era generally resided with local elites who either possessed the necessary
wealth or held positions of authority in public or quasi-public institutions.
These decentralizing administrative and fiscal reforms of the late Qing did generate some
growth in the provision of primary schooling. By 1909, roughly 51,700 modern primary schools
catered to over 1.5 million students, and by 1912, over 86,000 schools enrolled roughly 2.8
million students (Abe, 1987; and First Education Yearbook of China, 1934).64 These
developments in primary education, however, did not put China in a favorable position when
compared to other BRICs. China still had the worst education indicators when the Qing Empire
fell in 1911. Moreover, there was considerable provincial variation in the pace of new school
formation and in the share of education funding dedicated to primary education.65 This carried
over into the Republican period.

society institutions which were intended to be led by local elites under the oversight of the bureacracy. These
included chambers of commerce, professional bodies, agricultural associations, and educational associations, the
latter of which was meant to support local and provincial education promotion offices. Efforts to re-centralize fiscal
revenues and government authority met strong reesistance in the 1910s and 1920s.
63
Rankin (1986) and Chen (2007) discuss the growing importance of formal and informal elite institutions for the
provision of local public services in the late Qing and early Republican periods. In the treaty ports (which were
mostly located along the coast), rising entrepreneurs were one of the major patrons financing primary education.
According to the First Education Yearbook of China, the total amount of education donations from private parties
amounted to 11,414,253 Yuan in the first twenty years of the Republic, and the leading two provinces in private
donation were Jiangsu and Zhejiang, where modern industry and commerce were most prevalent.
64
This movement towards school building and education modernization overshadowed the few thousand schools
(with no more than 100,000 students) founded by Christian missionaires in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that
Bai and Kung (2011) focus on.
65
Between 1907 and 1909, the number of official lower primary schools in Shandong province increased by a factor
of nine, from 3,200 to over 31500, while in Guangxi and inland Xinjiang, the number actually declined. While some
provinces dedicated a considerable share of total education funding from the provincial treasury to primary schools
(e.g. Guangdong or Liaoning) in 1909, others favored more advanced or specialized education (e.g. Gansu or
Shanxi). See Baily (1990, pps. 44-45; from official Board of Education statistics).
38

While the structure of local school finance remained relatively constant after China
became a republic in 1912, decentralization and local capture by elites continued to influence the
provision of mass schooling. All funding for primary education in the Republican period came
from provincial and, especially, district or local sources.66 Much of the administrative system of
the late Qing period continued as before, including the new Ministry of Education and various
provincial and county-level bodies.67 But political instability grew as the death of President and
self-proclaimed emperor Yuan Shikai in 1916 initiated a period of internal conflict, when local
and regional elites fought to expand their holdings and take control of the central government.
During the “warlord” period (1916-1927), and under the Nationalist regime (1927-1937), the
administrative and fiscal structures remained intact, but military expenditures frequently
siphoned resources away from local public services such as schooling. The geography of military
conflict and heterogeneity in local-central government relations contributed to the variation in
the supply of basic education across Republican China (Wong, 2000; and Zhang, 2000).
Throughout the Republican period, traditional and new types of elites controlled local
institutions responsible for education (Chauncey, 1992). Government and other local institutions
rarely offered political opportunities to the masses, and there were few, if any, democratic

66

In the 1910s and 1920s, education accounted for less than 3 percent of the Republic’s central budget, out of which
primary education was 64.3 percent, secondary education 21.4 percent and tertiary education 14.3 percent
(calculated from The First Education Yearbook of China, 1934; also see Bailey, 1990; and Buck, 1974).
67
The education promotion bureaus, elite education associations, and provincial-level education administrations
initially set up in the late Qing continued to operate during much of the Republican period. The division of
responsibilities between them and various other local government appointees continued to differ from province to
province (Baily, 1990). The new Republican government did initiate a new national school system (lasting from
1912 to 1922), but it was essentially identical to the multi-tiered structure set up in the late Qing. The national,
provincial, and country-level elected assemblies had elections and, in many cases, began conducting business in
1912 and 1913. They were abolished by Yuan Shikai in 1914, although some coninued to meet after his death.
39

elements in local public policy.68 Therefore, decentralization occurred with little democratization
and considerable elite capture.
However, the “policy” preferences of the local elites, and the particular institutions
through which they were exercised, varied considerably from place to place. In some areas, the
more traditional landed elite with ties to the old exam-based system of education often supported
private schools, while in others, a newly emerging “modern” elite tended to work within the new
local government and non-governmental institutions to encourage publically financed schools.
As a result, funding for primary education continued to come from a varied combination of
public sources (based on remitted taxes or specific local land or business tax surcharges) and
private funds (endowments, individual contributions, lineage or clan funds, etc.).69
Both before and after 1911, a variety of local economic, security, and political conditions
influenced the nature of elite capture of decentralized policymaking (Esherick and Rankin, eds.,
1990; and Schoppa, 1982). Such heterogeneity helps explain much of the variation that we
observe in provincial enrollment rates and expenditures on education in 1912 (Tables 2 and 3).
Particularly telling are the high expenditure levels and enrollment rates for Jiangsu, Liaoning,
and Zhejiang, all of which were coastal provinces with significant commercial development.70

68

Chang and Nathan (1978) summarize the electoral processes for the National Assembly of 1913. They also
provide provincial data on the share of the population with voting rights in the Assembly election. These data are
completely uncorrelated with the variation in school expenditures per school-age child (Table 3), suggesting that,
unsurprisingly, this national and quasi-representative structure played almost no role in education decisions.
69
In some provinces where a new generation of elites were supportive of primary education, education constituted a
large part of total government expenditure. A famous example is Liaoning. The leader, Zhang Zuoling, committed to
a share of education spending out of government fiscal expenditures of at least 40 percent. This partly explains why
Liaoning stood out in terms of the development of primary education in the Republic era. See also the evidence on
provincial and county budgets for the 1910s and 1920s provided in Buck (1974 – Shandong), Van de Ven (1996 –
Liaoning), and Duara (1987 – Hebei and Shandong).
70
On the increasingly commercialized elites of Zhejiang, see Schoppa (1982). According to Culp (1994), who
studied elite activities in support of schooling in two counties of Zhejiang province, the level of commercial
development and bureaucratic capacity of local state institutions dictated how and whether elites actively supported
public education. In the poorer interior county of Lanqi, any support for education came not from local government
institutions, but through funds provided by lineages to private (sili) schools. In Jiashan county, which was near the
coast and much more developed, local economic elite controlled more substantive government budgets and various
40

The “new” elites in these and other areas were especially interested in developing a skilled
workforce, and they saw modern public education as a necessary element of a new China. Elites
in the commercially developed areas were more frequently exposed to western ideas regarding
politics and education. For example, Yan Xishan, governor of Shanxi, and Tang Jiyao, governor
of Yunnan, both had some experience with modern education. The concentration of power in the
hands of these and other such westernized “warlords” and local elites made the channeling of
resources towards modern primary education more likely in the Republican period (e.g., Barkan,
1990, on Jiangsu).
Provinces with relatively high levels of schooling were less subject to the political and
social chaos of the 1910s and 1920s. Some areas of provinces, such as coastal Jiangsu, were
under a degree of control by various western powers, which allowed them to avoid civil wars and
conflicts. In these and other “quiet” parts of the Republic, a stable political regime allowed local
elites to allocate more resources to primary education. Unfortunately, such areas of relative
peace and calm were rather rare. Banditry and locally controlled militia, along with civil war and
foreign conflict, gripped much of China over the period (McCord, 2009, on Hunan; and Buck,
1974, on Shandong). Therefore, despite local control and efforts by some elites and the (weak)
central government to initiate a national public school system, the chaos and poverty of much of
Republican China limited the widespread development of publically financed primary education.
In sum, despite the shift towards a more modern system of schooling after 1905, public
primary education in China was the least developed of BRIC. In the late Qing and Republican
periods, the feedback between low income levels and political instability created conditions
where resources were not available to finance schooling, and where the state was too weak to

school committees. This allowed them to fund the expansion of different types of public (gongli) schools, which
were typically larger and followed a more modern curriculum than did the private schools of Lanqi.
41

prevent local elites from capturing political structures and educational institutions. There were
practically no formal representative bodies with real authority over education, and communities
were generally left to their own devices (and resources) when it came to decisions over primary
schooling. However, and in contrast to Brazil or Russia, relatively few elites were supportive of
expanding modern educational opportunities through greater public funding – only in the most
commercially developed and politically stable areas did this process take place. When compared
to other BRICs in and around 1911, China’s political situation was the least settled, least
“democratic,” and most beholden to provincial and local elites who had little interest in
supporting mass education.

5. Conclusion
Our study sheds new light on the comparative experiences of BRIC during the formative
years of their primary education systems. Brazil, Russia, India, and China were among the
largest and poorest states in the world in the early 20th century, and their low level of
development limited investments in mass schooling. Central authorities in each country mostly
absolved themselves of the responsibility of providing primary education. As a result, the
provision of education was frequently decentralized to lower levels of government, where the
absence of accountable and representative democracy allowed local elites to capture political
institutions, limit redistributive taxation, and dictate how public resources were allocated.
However, variation among elites or in the political and economics conditions they faced (whether
across space or over time) generated multiple schooling equilibriums across and within BRIC.
In India and China, the lack of functional democracy and weak central authorities meant
elites were able to fully capture the local government institutions responsible for public funding

42

of education. Colonial restrictions on fiscal resources and caste and religious divisions among
local elites limited public spending on primary schooling in India. Indian elites and colonial
policies jointly contributed to India having the lowest levels of primary school expenditures per
school age population. In China, the devolution of political and fiscal authority in the late-Qing
and Republican eras was associated with the collapse of central authority, growing local political
involvement by old and new elites, and rising social and military conflict. There was a shift
towards modern forms of primary education supported by public funds, but elite-control of
school policies and limited local fiscal resources constrained this development. Only more
commercially developed areas and places where the traditional elite gave way to one interested
in modern education saw any substantive investments in mass public schooling. Such new elites
in China were less constrained by central authorities and were often more pro-schooling because
of their economic needs, unlike Indian local elites, who were perhaps more anti-public schooling
because it presented fewer direct political or economic benefits.
Brazil and Russia – marginally richer and possessing slightly broader forms of elite
democracy – saw greater investments in public primary schooling than India and China. In
Brazil, fiscal federalism and literacy restrictions on voting after 1891 increased elite support for
education in states and municipalities that had high export tax revenues or where the elite
required greater voter turnout to maintain political power. Until the 1900s, variation in the
support for mass pubic education in Russia was driven by differences in who controlled political
institutions at the local level. The zemstvo offered some channels for the expression of broad
popular interest in schooling, but elite control of this and other local institutions meant that it was
generally those districts with more liberal nobility that invested more in public education. The
founding of a national assembly in 1906 with some popular representation coincided with more

43

funding for basic education from the central government, but it took the Soviet Union’s
centralized policies to push the country towards universal primary education.
New data and detailed analyses of the political economy of schooling in the early 20th
century BRIC countries lend support for the basic framework we laid out in Section 3.
Decentralization in the face of weak or absent democratic mechanisms led to local elite capture
of political institutions, compounding the constraints of low income, high opportunity costs, and
limited public funds. This meant that relatively little was spent on mass schooling, as the elites
tended to utilize private education and saw little need to engage in redistributive policies that
might have brought challenges to their political and economic control (as also described for Latin
America in Engerman and Sokoloff, 2002). Democratically driven central government policies
and investments may have helped overcome low incomes and local constraints (i.e. Gallego,
2010), as was perhaps evident following the (slightly) representative national elections in Tsarist
Russia after 1906. But as the Soviet example, or even the cases of Meiji Japan and 19th century
Prussia, would suggest, strong but relatively undemocratic initiatives can force backward
countries towards universal primary schooling.
We view the limited and heterogeneous expansion of public primary education in BRIC
over our period as a series of local stories. Only where the characteristics or preferences of the
local elite and their decentralized freedom to influence local policies coincided with the
advancement of basic public schooling were initiatives put in place to build schools, hire
teachers, and reform curricula.71 In all four cases, local economic conditions and the “liberalism”
of the elite were two such characteristics, but what constituted the elite, and what determined
variation in their composition differed between each country. We have argued that in the context
71

A similar argument is proposed Persson and Zhuravskaya (2011), who note that elite capture may actually
substitute for fully accountable local governments when their preferences are aligned with majority interests.

44

of poor, relatively undemocratic societies such as BRIC, the heterogeneity of the elites and the
policies they proposed help explain both the cross-country differences observed in Table 1 and
the within-country variation of Tables 2 and 3.
Given the wideness of our comparative lens, we do not attempt to explain all of the
variation in schooling outcomes evident in Tables 1-3. Our theoretical framework is intended as
a tool to help understand just one set of possible mechanisms behind the unsuccessful cases of
educational development that Easterlin’s original question targeted and that we explore in our
analytical surveys of the experiences of Brazil, Russia, India, and China. In laying out our
argument regarding decentralization, imperfect democracy, and elite capture in BRIC, we have
left open a number of important issues for future research.
It is evident from the case studies that there was persistent variation in the extent to which
primary education was “public,” (i.e., financed with some form of tax revenue and open to the
majority of the population) or “private” (supported by endowments, student fees, and religious
organizations and exclusive in some respect). An important topic that demands more attention is
the extent to which private education for elites crowded out spending on public schooling à la De
la Croix and Doepke (2009). Furthermore, we have focused on public primary schooling, mostly
as a compromise over data availability and the scope of the paper. But the allocation of resources
by governments and elites also took place between different levels of education. In terms of the
returns to public spending, each of our countries likely overcommitted funds to secondary and
tertiary schooling at the expense of primary education. To fully evaluate the costs of such
misallocation, comparable data on upper levels of schooling are necessary.
Finally, we have limited our analysis to the decades around 1910. This covers the
consolidation of mass public financed education in much of the developed world, but

45

developments in the BRIC countries took very different trajectories. The Soviet Union quickly
moved towards universal schooling after 1920, but India, China, and Brazil continued to provide
relatively limited basic education well into the 20th century. Only in the last 30 years have these
three countries made substantial inroads in primary education. It is worth considering whether
the recent advances of education in these countries – which some scholars have linked to
decentralized policymaking – have historical roots, and if regional variation today is similar to
what we find a century ago.

46

Works Cited
Abe, Hiroshi. "China's First Modern Educational System." In China's Education and the
Industrialized World, edited by Ruth Hayhoe and Marianne Bastid. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe,
Inc., 1987. 57-80.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, 2000. "Why Did The West Extend The Franchise?
Democracy, Inequality, And Growth In Historical Perspective," The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115, no. 4 (2000): 1167-1199.
Aidt, T. S., Jayasri Dutta, and Elena Loukoianova. "Democracy Comes to Europe: Franchise
Extension and Fiscal Outcomes 1830-1938." European Economic Review 50 (2006): 249-283.
Allender, Tim. "Surrendering a Colonial Domain: Educating North India, 1854-1890." History of
Education 36, no. 1 (2007): 45-63.
Ayers, William, Chang Chih-tung and Educational Reform in China. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1971.
Allen, Robet C. "Real Wages in Europe and Asia: A First Look at the Long-Term Patterns." In
Living Standards in the Past: New Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and Europe, edited by
Robert C. Allen, Tommy Bengtsson and Martin Dribe. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press, 2005. 111-130.
Ansell, Ben W. From Ballot to the Blackboard: The Redistributive Political Economy of
Education. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Bai, Ying, and James Kai-sing Kung. "Religion or Knowledge Diffusion: A Protestant Economic
History of China, 1840-1920." Working paper, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, 2011.
Bailey, Paul J. Reform the People: Changing Attitudes Towards Popular Education in Early
Twentieth-Century China. Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh University Press, 1990.
Bandiera, Oriana, and Gilat Levy. "Diversity and the Power of the Elites in Democratic
Societies: A Model and a Test." Working paper, London School of Economics and Political
Science, 2010.
Bardhan, Pranab. "Decentralization of Governance and Development." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 16, no. 4 (2002): 185-205.
-----, and Dilip Mookherjee, eds. Decentralization and Local Governance in Developing
Countries. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2006.

47

Barkan, Lenore. "Patterns of Power: Forty Years of Elite Politics in a Chinese County." In
Chinese Local Elites and Patterns of Dominance, edited by Joseph W. Esherick and Mary
Backus Rankin, 191-215. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1990.
Basu, Aparna. The Growth of Education and Political Development in India, 1898–1920. Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 1974.
Bayly, C. A. "Local Control in Indian Towns - the Case of Allahabad 1880-1920." Modern Asian
Studies 5, no. 4 (1971): 289-311.
Becker, Sasha O., and Ludger Woessman. "Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of
Protestant Economic History." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 2 (2009): 531-596.
-----, Eric Hornung, and Ludger Woessmann. "Catch Me If You Can: Education and Catch-up in
the Industrial Revolution." IZA Discussion Paper Series No. 4556, November 2009.
Becker, Seymour. Nobility and Privilege in Late Imperial Russia. Dekalb, IL: Northern Illinois
University Press, 1985.
Benavot, Aaron, and Phyllis Riddle. "The Expansion of Primary Education, 1870-1940: Trends
and Issues." Sociology of Education 61, no. 3 (1988): 191-210.
Borthwick, Sally. Education and Social Change in China: The Beginnings of the Modern Era.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1983.
Brazil. Estatística da Instrucção. Vol. I. Rio de Janeiro: Diretoria Geral de Estatística, 1917
-----. Anuário Estatístico do Brasil V/1939-1940. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de
Geografia e Estatística, 1940.
Brazil, Ministério da Agricultura, Indústria e Comércio. Estatística das Finanças do Brasil. Rio
de Janeiro: Ministério da Agricultura, Indústria e Comércio, 1926
-----. Recenseamento do Brasil, 1920. Rio de Janeiro: Directoria Geral de Estadística, 1923.
Broadberry, Stephen, and Bishnupriya Gupta. "The Early Modern Great Divergence: Wages,
Prices and Economic Development in Europe and Asia, 1500-1800." Economic History Review
LIX, no. 1 (2006): 2-31.
Broomfield, J. H. "The Regional Elites: A Theory of Modern Indian History." Indian Economic
and Social History Review 3 (1966): 279-291.
Buck, David D. "Educational Modernization in Tsinan, 1899-1937." In The Chinese City between
TwoWorlds, edited by Mark Elvin and G. William Skinner, 171-212. Stanford, CA: Stanford
UniversityPress, 1974.
de Carvalho, Carlos Leoncio. Directoria Geral de Estatistica: Relatorio e Trabalhos Estatisticos, Rio de

48

Janeiro, Typographia Nacional, 1878.
de Carvalho Filho, Irineu, and Renato Colistete. "Education Performance: Was It All Determined 100
Years Ago? Evidence from São Paulo, Brazil." MPRA Paper No. 24494. Munich, Germany, 2010.
Chang, P'eng-yuan, and Andrew J. Nathan. "Political Participation and Political Elites in Early
Republican China: The Parliament of 1913-1914." The Journal of Asian Studies 37, no. 2 (1978):
293-313.
Chaudhary, Latika. "Determinants of Primary Schooling in British India." The Journal of
Economic History 69, no. 1 (2009): 269-302.
-----. "Land Revenues, Schools, and Literacy: A Historical Examination of Public and Private
Funding of Education." Indian Economic and Social History Review 47, no. 2 (2010): 179-204.
-----, and Jared Rubin. "Reading, Writing and Religion: Institutions and Human Capital
Formation." Journal of Comparative Economics 39, no. 1 (2011): 17-33. .
-----, and Manuj Garg. "Long Run Effects of Colonial Education Policy? " Working paper, 2010.
Chauncey, Helen R. Schoolhouse Politicians: Locality and State During the Chinese Republic.
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press, 1992.
Chen, Zhongping. "Beneath the Republican Revolution, Beyond Revolutionary Politics: Elite
Associations and Social Transformation in Lower Yangzi Towns, 1903-1912." Late Imperial
China 28, no. 1 (2007): 92-127.
Culp, Robert J. "Elite Associations and Local Politics in Republican China: Educational
Institutions in J'iashan and Lanqi Counties, Zhejiang, 1911-1937." Modern China 20, no. 4
(1994): 446-477.
Davis, Lance E. and Robert A. Huttenback. Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: The Political
Economy of British Imperialism, 1860–1912. New York: 1986.
De La Croix, David, and Matthias Doepke. "To Segregate or to Integrate: Education Politics and
Democracy." Review of Economic Studies 76 (2009): 597-628.
Duke, Steven T. "Educating Non-Russians in Late Imperial Russia: An Historical Study of
Educational Development in a Multiethnic Setting, 1885-1914." Ph. D. dissertation. Indiana
University, 1999.
Easterlin, Richard A. "Why Isn't the Whole World Developed?" The Journal of Economic
History 41, no. 1 (1981): 1-19.
Eklof, Benjamin. Russian Peasant Schools: Officialdom, Village Culture, and Popular
Pedagogy, 1861-1914. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1986.

49

Elman, Benjamin A. "Political, Social, and Cultural Reproduction Via Civil Service Examinations in
Late Imperial China." The Journal of Asian Studies 50, no. 1 (1991): 7-28.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. "Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of
Development among New World Economies." Economia 3 (2002): 41-102.
-----, -----. “The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in the New World,” Journal of Economic
History 65 (2005): 891-921.
-----, Elisa Mariscal, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. "The Evolution of Schooling in the Americas,
1800-1925." In Human Capital and Institutions: A Long Run View, edited by David Eltis, Frank
D. Lewis and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, 93-142. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
2009.
Epstein, Simon. "District Officers in Decline: The Erosion of British Authority in the Bombay
Countryside, 1919 to 1947." Modern Asian Studies 16, no. 3 (1982): 493-518.
Esherick, Joseph W., and Mary Backus Rankin, eds. Chinese Local Elites and Patterns of
Dominance. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1990.
Fitzpatrick, Sheila. Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union, 1921-1932. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Frank, Zephyr L. "Elite Families and Oligarchic Politics on the Brazilian Frontier: Matto Grosso,
1889-1937." Latin American Research Review 36, no. 1 (2001): 49-74.
Frankema, Ewout. “The Expansion of Mass Education in Twentieth Century Latin America: A
Global Comparative Perspective.” Revista de Historia Economica XXVII, no. 3 (2010): 359396.
Gallego, Francisco A. “Historical Origins of Schooling: The Role of Democracy and Political
Decentralization.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 2 (2010): 228-243.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. "Das Human-Kapital: A Theory of the Demise of the Class
Structure." Review of Economic Studies 73 (2006): 85-117.
Ghiraldelli, Paulo (Jr.). História da Educação Brasileira. São Paulo, Cortez, 2008.
Ghurye, G. S. Caste, Class, and Occupation. Bombay: Bhatkal Publishers, 1961.
Go, Sun, and Peter Lindert. “The Uneven Rise of American Public Schools to 1850.” The
Journal of Economic History 70.1 (2010): 1-26.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz. “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics August (1998): 693-732.

50

-----, and -----. The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2008.
Government of India, Census of India. 1901 and 1911.
-----. Progress of Education in India: Quinquennial Reviews. 1907-1912.
Gregory, Paul R. Russian National Income, 1885-1913. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1982.
Grew, Raymond, and Patrick J. Harrigan. School, State, and Society: The Growth of Elementary
Schooling in Nineteenth-Century France -- A Quantitative Analysis. Ann Arbor, MI: The
University of Michigan Press, 1991.
Hamburg, Gary. Politics of the Russian Nobility, 1881-1905. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 1984.
Hanushek, Eric, and Ludger Wossman. "The Role of School Improvement in Economic
Development." NBER Working Paper 12832, 2007.
Hans, Nicholas. History of Russian Educational Policy (1701-1917). New York: Russell &
Russell, Inc., 1964.
Herbst, Jurgen. "Nineteenth-Century Schools between Community and State: The Case of
Prussia and the United States." History of Education Quarterly 42, no. 3 (2002): 317-341.
Ho, Ping-ti. The Ladder of Success in Imperial China. New York, NY: Wiley and Sons, 1962.
Holmes, Larry E. "Soviet Schools: Policy Pursues Practice, 1921-1928." Slavic Review 48, no. 2
(1989): 234-253.
Kumar, Dharma (Ed.). The Cambridge Economic History of India. Volume. 2. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Iyer, Lakshmi. "Direct Versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-Term Consequences."
Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 4 (2010): 693-713.
Keenan, Barry. "Lung-Men Academy in Shanghai and the Expansion of Kingsu's Educated
Elite, 1865-1911." In Education and Society in Late Imperial China, 1600-1900, edited by
Benjamin A. Elman and Alexander Woodside, 493-524. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1994.
Korf, N. A. Russkaia nachal'naia shkola. 3rd ed. St. Petersburg, Russia: D. E. Kozhanchikov,
1871.

51

Kumar, Dharma ed., The Cambridge Economic History of India, Vol. 2. Cambridge, 1982.
Levine, Robert M. Pernambuco in the Brazilian Federation, 1889-1937. Stanford, Ca., Stanford
University Press, 1978.
Lindert, Peter H. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the Eighteenth
Century. 2 vols. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
-----. “The Unequal Lag in Latin American Schooling since 1900: Follow the Money.” Revista
de Historia Economica 28, no. 2 (2010): 375-405.
-----. "Voice and Growth: Was Churchill Right?" The Journal of Economic History 63, no. 2
(2003): 315-350.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico. "Why Did the Elites Extend the Suffrage? Democracy
and the Scope of Government with an Application to Britain's 'Age of Reform'." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119, no. 2 (2004): 707-765.
Love, Joseph L. São Paulo in the Brazilian Federation, 1889-1937. Stanford Ca.: Stanford
University Press, 1980.
Ma, Debin. "Economic Growth in the Lower Yangzi Region of China in 1911-1937: A
Quantitative and Historical Analysis." The Journal of Economic History 68, no. 2 (2008): 355392.
Maddison, Angus. 2006. The World Economy: historical statistics, OECD, 2006. Data Appendix
available at http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/, accessed August 5, 2010.
Mandal, A. "The Ideology and the Interests of the Bengali Intelligentsia: Sir George
Campbell’sEducation Policy (1871–74)." Indian Economic and Social History Review 12, no.
1(1975):81–98.
Margo, Robert A. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History. Chicago,
IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Marshall, Monty G., Ted Robert Gurr, and Keith Jaggers. Polity IV Database, 2009.
Martinez-Fritscher, André C. “Bargaining for Fiscal Control: Tax Federalism in Brazil and
Mexico, 1870-1940.” Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Boston University. 2009.
-----, Aldo Musacchio, and Martina Viarengo. "The Great Leap Forward: The Political Economy
of Education in Brazil, 1889–1930." Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 10-075,
March, 2010.

52

McCord, Edward A. "Local Bullies and Armed Force Entrepreneurs: Militia Leadership in
Republican Hunan." Twentieth-Century China 34, no. 2 (2009): 5-29.
McKinnon, Mary, and Chris Minns. "The Impact of School Provision on Pupil Attendance:
Evidence from the Early 20th Century." Working paper, McGill University and the London
School of Economics, 2009.
Melton, James Van Horn. Absolutism and the Eighteenth-Century Origins of Compulsory
Schooling in Prussia and Austria. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Miguel, Edward, and Mary Kay Gugerty. "Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions, and Public Goods
in Kenya." Journal of Public Economics 89 (2005): 2325-2368.
Mironov, Boris. "The Development of Literacy in Russia and the Ussr from the Tenth to the
Twentieth Centuries." History of Education Quarterly 31, no. 2 (1991): 229-252.
Mitch, David. "The Local Political Economy of the Rise of Mass Schooling in Victorian
England." Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of Maryland - Baltimore
County, 2007.
Mitchell, B.R. International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia, and Oceania , 1750-2000.
London : Palgrave MacMillan, 2003.
Mitchell, B.R. International Historical Statistics: The Americas, 1750-2000. London : Palgrave
MacMillan, 2003.
Mitchell, B.R. International Historical Statistics: Europe, 1750-2000. London : Palgrave
MacMillan, 2003.
Mitchener, Kris, and Se Yan. “Globalization, Trade & Wages: What Does History tell us about
China?” NBER Working Paper No. 15679: January 2010.
Mukhopadhyay, Gopal. Mass Education in Bengal (1882–1914). Calcutta, 1984.
Nachal'nyia narodnyia uchilishcha i uchastie v nikh pravoslavnago Russkago dukhovenstva. St.
Petersburg, Russia, 1865.
Nafziger, Steven. “Did Ivan’s Vote Matter? The Political Economy of Local Democracy in
Tsarist Russia.” European Review of Economic History (forthcoming, 2011).
-----. “The Political Economy of Rural Primary Education in Tsarist Russia.” Working Paper,
Williams College, 2011.
Naidu, Suresh. "Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South." Working
Paper, Columbia University, 2010.

53

Nurullah, Syed and J.P. Naik. A History of Education in India (During the British Period).
London, 1951.
Perrie, Maureen, and R. W. Davies. "The Social Context." In From Tsarism to the New
Economic Policy, edited by R. W. Davies, 29-46. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991.
Persson, Petra, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. "Elite Capture in the Absence of Democracy:
Evidence from Backgrounds of Chinese Provincial Leaders." Working paper, Paris School of
Economics, 2011.
Pokrovskii, V.I., ed. Odnodnevnaia perepis' nachal'nykh shkol Rossiiskoi Imperii proizvedennaia
18 Ianvaria 1911 goda. 16 vols. St. Petersburg, Russia: Russia, Ministerstvo narodnago
prosveshcheniia, 1916.
Prazniak, Roxanne. “Tax protest at Laiyang, Shandong, 1910.” Modern China 6, no 1 (1980):
41-71.
Porto, Walter Costa. O Voto no Brasil: Da Colônia à 6ª. República. Rio de Janeiro: Topbooks,
2002.
Rankin, Mary B. Elite activism and political transformation in China: Zhejiang Province, 18651911. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1986.
Republic of China, Ministry of Education, The First Education Yearbook of China, Kaiming
Press, Shanghai, China, 1934
Russia. Statisticheskoe otdelenie, Departament okladnykh sborov, Ministerstvo finansov.
Dokhody i raskhody zemstv 34-kh gubernii po smetam na 1903 [and 1906]. Multiple vols. St.
Petersburg, Russia, 1908-1909.
-----. Mirskie dokhody i raskhody za 1905 god. St. Petersburg, Russia, 1909.
Russia. Tsentral'nyi statisticheskii komitet, Ministerstvo vnutrennykh del. Statisticheskii
ezhegodnik Rossii 1911 g. St. Petersburg, Russia, 1912.
Schoppa, Keith R., Chinese Elites and Political Change: Zhejiang Province in the Early
Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982.
Schultz, Theodore W., Investment in Human Capital. New York: Free Press and Macmillan,
1971.
-----. Transforming Traditional Agriculture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
Sinel, Allen. The Classroom and the Chancellery: State Educational Reform in Russia Under
Count Dmitry Tolstoi. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1972.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Eric Zolt. "Inequality and the Evolution of Institutions of Taxation:
Evidence from the Economic History of the Americas." In The Decline of Latin American
54

Economies: Growth, Institutions and Crises, edited by Sebastian Edwards, Geraldo Esquivel and
Graciela Marquez, 83-138. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Sorenson, Thomas C. "Pobedonostsev's Parish Schools: A Bastion against Secularism." In
Religious and Secular Forces in Late Tsarist Russia, edited by Charles E. Timberlake. Seattle,
WA: University of Washington Press, 1992. 182-205.
de Souza, Maria do Carmo Campello. “O Processo Político-Partidário na Primeira República” in
Carlos Guilherme Mota (org.) Brasil em Perspectiva. Corpo e Alma do Brasil vol. XIII. São
Paulo: Difel, 1984, pp. 162–226.
Srinivas, M.N. Village, Caste, Gender and Method: Essays in Indian Social Anthropology. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Stasavage, David. "Democracy and Education Spending in Africa." American Journal of
Political Science 49, no. 2 (2005): 343-358.
Thøgersen, Stig. A County of Culture: Twentieth-Century China Seen from the Village Schools of
Zouping, Shandong. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press, 2005.
Topik, Steven. "The Old Republic." In Modern Brazil: Elite and Masses in Historical
Perspective, edited by Michael L. Conniff and Frank D. McCann, 83-102. Lincoln, NE:
University of Nebraska Press, 1989.
Van de Ven, Hans J. "Public Finance and the Rise of Warlordism." Modern Asian Studies 30, no.
4 (1996): 829-868.
Vander Ven, Elizabeth. "Village-State Cooperation: Modern Community Schools and Their
Funding, Haicheng County, Fengtian, 1905-1931." Modern China 31, no. 2 (2005): 204-235.
Vaughan, Mary Kay. The State, Education, and Social Class in Mexico, 1880-1928. Dekalb, IL:
Northern Illinois University Press, 1982.
Villela, André. “Distribuição Regional das Receitas e Despesas do Governo Central no II
Reinado, 1844-1889.“ Estudos Econômicos, 37, no. 2 (2007): 247-274.
United Kingdom, House of Commons. “Review of Progress of Education in India, 1897–98 to
1901–02. Fourth Quinquennial Review (East India: Education),” Sessional Papers, Vol. LXV,
paper Cd. 2181, 2182, 1904.
United States, Department of Education. Report of the Commissioner of Education for the Year
Ended June 30, 1909. Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 1910.
United Nations Development Program (UNDP). Human Development Report 2010 - The Real
Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan,
2010.

55

Wenegast, Tim. "Cana, Cafe, and Cacau: Agrarian Structure and Educational Inequalities in
Brazil." Revista de Historia Economica 28, no. 1 (2010): 103-137.
West, Martin R., and Ludger Woessman. "'Every Catholic Child in a Catholic School': Historical
Resistance to State Schooling, Contemporary Private Competition, and School Achievement
across Countries." IZA Discussion Paper Series, no. 3818 (2008).
Willcox, Walter F., “The Population of China in 1910.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 23, no. 161 (1928): 18-30
Wileman, J. P. The Brazilian Year Book. Rio de Janeiro and London, 1909.
Wong, R. Bin. China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European Experience.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000.
Woodside, Alexander, and Benjamin A. Elman. "Afterword: The Expansion of Education in Ch'ing
China." In Education and Society in Late Imperial China, 1600-1900, edited by Benjamin A. Elman
and Alexander Woodside, 525-560. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1994.
Yan, Se. “Real Wages and Skill Premia in China, 1860 to 1936.” Unpublished Ph. D. Dissertation,
UCLA. 2008.
Yuchtman, Noam. "An Economic Analysis of Traditional and Modern Education in Late Imperial and
Republican China." Working paper, Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley, 2010.
Zhang, Xin. Social Transformation in Modern China: The State and Local Elites in Henan,
1900-1937. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

56

Figure 1: BRIC Primary School Enrollments in Comparative Perspective, c. 1910
Note: The data underlying this Figure are taken from Table 1.

57

58

59

60

