                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INSURANCE AS DELEGATED PURCHASING:
                      THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM HEALTH CARE

                                          Robin McKnight
                                          Jonathan Reuter
                                           Eric Zitzewitz

                                       Working Paper 17857
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17857


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




None of the authors received any outside funding for this research project. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robin McKnight, Jonathan Reuter, and Eric Zitzewitz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insurance as Delegated Purchasing: Theory and Evidence from Health Care
Robin McKnight, Jonathan Reuter, and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 17857
February 2012
JEL No. G22,I13

                                              ABSTRACT

Household demand for actuarially unfair insurance against small risks has long puzzled economists.
One way to potentially rationalize this demand is to recognize that (non-life) insurance is an incentive-
compatible means of engaging an expert buyer. To quantify the benefits of expert buying, we compare
prices paid by the insured and uninsured for health care. In categories of health care where uncompensated
care is more difficult to obtain (drugs, doctor office visits, and hospital outpatient visits), we find that
insurers pay 10-20% less than the uninsured. For forms of care where payment by the uninsured is
more likely to be negotiated after services are rendered (hospitalizations and emergency room visits)
the uninsured pay about 30% less on average, due largely to the nontrivial share of uninsured who
pay 5% or less of their billed charges. At least in settings where free services are difficult to obtain,
expert buying is an important benefit of insurance. We discuss the implications of the delegated-purchasing
view of insurance for con-sumer-driven health insurance and for self-insurance by employers.


Robin McKnight                                       Eric Zitzewitz
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Wellesley College                                    Dartmouth College
106 Central Street                                   6106 Rockefeller Hall
Wellesley, MA 02481                                  Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                             and NBER
rmcknigh@wellesley.edu                               eric.zitzewitz@dartmouth.edu

Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu
1. Introduction

       Economists have long been puzzled by two facts about consumer demand for insurance.

On the one hand, consumers often neglect to purchase heavily subsidized insurance against large

risks, such as the flood insurance offered by the U.S. government. On the other hand, consumers

often purchase actuarially unfair insurance against small risks, such as extended warranties and

service contracts (e.g., Cicchetti and Dubin (1994)). Because purchasing actuarially unfair in-

surance against small risks can only be rationalized in an expected utility framework by assum-

ing an implausibly high level of risk aversion, this behavior is often cited as evidence of loss

aversion or endowment effects (e.g., Rabin and Thaler (2001)).

       In this paper, we offer a complementary explanation for the purchase of actuarially unfair

insurance. Because experts can typically obtain goods and services at lower prices than other

consumers, individuals might want to engage an expert to purchase items on their behalf. We do

see some examples of expert buyers (securities brokers, travel agents, concierges), but their

popularity is limited by agency problems. Namely, the expertise that makes these agents good

buyers also enables them to take advantage of their principals.

       In some settings, an insurance contract can solve this problem. Suppose that consumers

all face the same probability of developing a problem (an appliance malfunction, a car crash, a

health problem) that will have an uncertain cost to fix. Suppose also that the true cost of fixing

the problem is unobservable to consumers, but is readily observable to any expert, after the con-

sumer incurs a small, non-reimbursable inconvenience cost associated with having the problem

evaluated. A consumer can buy insurance from an expert, who contracts to fix any problems that

arise in exchange for a payment that is agreed upon ex ante, or the consumer can self-insure and

pay an expert to fix any problems that arise.




                                                1
        In this setting, even risk-neutral consumers may buy insurance. They will not be buying

for insurance motives per se; rather they will be buying because the insurance contract is an effi-

cient means of engaging the purchasing expertise of the insurer. If the consumer attempts to buy

an expert’s services after the problem develops, the expert will use the fact that there is a search

cost associated with having the problem evaluated to extract the ex post monopoly price from the

consumer (Diamond (1971); see also Stahl (1989) and Ellison and Wolitzky (2011)). Now con-

sider insurance sold by a competitive industry of providers who purchase repair services at com-

petitive prices. Even if that insurance is actuarially unfair (due, for example, to administrative

costs), if the difference between the competitive and ex post monopoly prices is large enough,

even risk-neutral consumers will benefit from purchasing the insurance.1

        Whether the benefits of expert buying are large relative to the well-understood inefficien-

cies associated with insurance (administrative costs, adverse selection, moral hazard) is an em-

pirical question. Clearly, there are no such benefits for life insurance, where claims are settled

with pre-defined monetary payments. But almost all other forms of insurance, such as property,

liability, and health insurance, involve the insurer purchasing services on a claimant’s behalf.

Anecdotal evidence suggests that the benefits of purchasing expertise can be large. One author

was once quoted $450 by an auto glass company to replace a cracked windshield and then, on the

advice of a colleague, filed a claim with his insurer, despite having a $500 deductible. Doing so

gave him access to the insurer’s negotiated price, allowing him to obtain the same windshield,

from the same company, for $175. Likewise, many readers will have received “explanation of

benefits” statements, in which we observe our health insurers paying significantly less than the

1
  Mayers and Smith (1982) develop a positive theory of demand for insurance by (risk-neutral) corpora-
tions. Their list of seven potential benefits includes “real-service efficiencies”, arising from the fact that
“Insurance firms develop a comparative advantage in processing claims because of economies of scale
and gains from specialization” (p. 285). Our argument is related, in that the purchasing of expertise re-
quired to negotiate competitive prices can be viewed as an additional source of “real-service efficiency.”


                                                      2
initial charges demanded by medical providers. Another author was billed $2,161 for emergency

room care, which was settled by the insurance company for only $619. Medical billing can be

even more aggressive. A study of extreme charges by out-of-network providers found many ex-

amples in which out-of-network buyers were charged more than four times the Medicare pay-

ment for the identical procedure (AHIP (2009)). The most extreme case was $29,998 for an up-

per GI endoscopic visual diagnostic exam with biopsy for which the Medicare fee was $388.64.

These anecdotes clearly suggest a role for buying expertise, but whether expertise translates into

systematic differences in ultimate prices paid by privately insured and uninsured individuals is

an empirical question.

       For more systematic empirical evidence on the delegated purchasing benefits of insur-

ance, we use data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) to measure differences in

the prices that insured and uninsured individuals pay for a given drug or medical visit. Focusing

on health insurance complicates our analysis for three reasons. First, as we discuss below, health

care providers have legal and ethical duties to provide service to the uninsured; these duties do

not exist to any meaningful extent in the other insurance settings that motivate our analysis (e.g.,

auto, product warranties). Second, health care providers are much more likely to have market

power (e.g., a patented drug, or the one specialist in a geographic area) than providers of other

insurance-purchased services. Market power for providers may both blunt the negotiating power

of expert buyers and introduce price discrimination considerations that can work against the in-

sured. Third, health insurance insures against a relatively large risk (e.g., McClellan and Skinner

(2006), Finkelstein and McKnight (2008), and Finkelstein et al. (2011)), and thus demand for

health insurance is not puzzling in the way that demand for actuarially unfair product warranties

is. Our decision to focus on health insurance is driven by the facts that data is available on prices




                                                 3
actually paid by the insured and uninsured for comparable services and that we were unable to

obtain comparable data from other settings. Despite these complications, we find that purchas-

ing expertise is important in our setting. Insured consumers benefit from access to negotiated

prices that are 10% to 20% lower than those paid by uninsured consumers.

       Our analysis is cleanest for forms of care that are difficult to obtain for free and that have

limited unobserved elements of quality. We begin, therefore, by analyzing prescription drugs,

where we compare the prices that insured and uninsured consumers pay for the same packaging

of the same pharmaceutical drug in the same calendar year. By comparing identical products, we

rule out the possibility that uninsured consumers receive less expensive bundles of service than

insured consumers. In pooled regressions, we find that drug prices are approximately 10 percent

lower for those with insurance, and that the discount varies little with household income. Since

this difference excludes possible rebates from pharmaceutical companies to insurance compa-

nies, it understates the benefit of negotiated prices. Furthermore, this difference exists despite

the fact that drug companies know that insured clients will be less price sensitive, and thus

should seek to price discriminate against them. Interestingly, the insurance discount disappears

when we restrict our sample to the 7.3% of drugs that are sold through health clinics, which pro-

vide a channel for drug companies to target the most price-sensitive uninsured. The 10% aver-

age discount achieved by insurance company negotiators is arguably even more impressive in

light of the adverse effects of insurance on price sensitivity.

       Our second empirical strategy is to compare the fraction of billed charges that insured

and uninsured individuals pay for the same type of medical service. Among the 98% of indi-

viduals who make more than a token payment on their own behalf or receive a payment from a

private insurance company, we find that insured individuals pay 15.3 percentage points less of




                                                  4
their billed charges than uninsured individuals. This provides additional evidence that those buy-

ing insurance benefit from delegated purchasing. For office visits and outpatient visits, the in-

surance discount is about 20 percentage points, again excluding token payments and non-

payments. However, in our full sample of hospitalizations and emergency room visits, where

services are typically rendered before payments are collected, we find that insured individuals

pay about 30 percentage points more than uninsured individuals on average. This difference is

due entirely to the almost 20% of uninsured individuals who pay 5% or less of their billed

charges. The bargaining power uninsured households receive from perceived obligations to treat

may dominate the benefit of delegated purchasing, at least for those with low incomes.2 Interest-

ingly, we find that the delegated purchasing benefit of insurance has been rising in recent years,

with the price advantage associated with insurance coverage increasing significantly since 2006

for prescription drugs, office visits, and outpatient visits.

        The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related

literature. In Section 3, we derive the conditions under which risk-neutral individuals benefit

enough from delegated purchasing to purchase insurance that is worse-than-actuarially fair. In

Section 4, we describe the data and empirical strategy that we use to test for differences in the

prices paid for pharmaceutical drugs, and present our findings. In Section 5, we present our

complementary analysis of the prices paid for other medical services. In Section 6, we summa-

rize our findings and discuss the implications of the delegated-purchasing view of insurance for

consumer-driven health insurance and for self-insurance by employers.

2. Related Literature

        Our work contributes to a broad literature on the demand for insurance. Prior work has


2
 Our comparison excludes any payments collected from uninsured individuals by hospitals or collection
agencies after the survey, so we may be overstating the bargaining power arising from obligations to treat.


                                                    5
focused primarily on consumers’ insurance choices as a trade-off between the costs of admini-

stration, moral hazard and adverse selection and the benefits of risk reduction. Cutler and Zeck-

hauser (2000) review these issues for health insurance. In this context, risk reduction benefits—

combined with government subsidies— are sufficient for many consumers to choose to purchase

health insurance. In other contexts, such risk reduction benefits are minimal, and yet consumers

continue to purchase insurance. For example, Cabral (2011) finds that ex post adverse selection

limits the ability of dental insurance to provide much traditional insurance. The benefits from

delegated purchasing that we discuss may help to rationalize the continued demand for dental

insurance.

       Our empirical work is most closely related to studies of negotiated prices in health care.

Duggan and Scott Morton (2006) argue that Medicaid’s drug pricing rule, which is to pay the

average privately negotiated price, has the perverse effect of creating price-inelastic demand

from Medicaid enrollees. This limits the bargaining power of insurance company negotiators, as

excluding a drug from their formulary in response to high prices will not affect Medicaid de-

mand. Consistent with this argument, they find higher prices for drugs with higher Medicaid

market shares.

       Medicare Part D, a government-sponsored drug insurance program for the elderly intro-

duced in 2006, took a different approach to purchasing. Part D enrollees choose among privately

sponsored (but heavily subsidized) insurance plans, with different premia and formularies. For

many classes of drugs, the private plans have the flexibility to exclude specific drugs from their

formularies in favor of substitutes. Evidence on whether this approach led to less drug price in-

flation is mixed. Duggan and Scott Morton (2010) find lower drug price increases between 2003

and 2006 for drugs with a higher share of previously uninsured elderly users, but the same




                                                6
authors (2011) find this reversed by faster increases after 2006. Lakdawalla and Yin (2010)

show that insurers with larger Part D enrollment negotiated lower prices for prescription drugs

after the introduction of Medicare Part D, and that these lower prices spilled over to the non-

elderly with coverage from the same insurance companies.

       While we share with this work an interest in insurer-provider negotiation outcomes, our

focus is different, which drives differences in our analysis. We are interested in explaining the

popularity of different forms of (unsubsidized) insurance. The popularity of insurance is typi-

cally thought of as being driven by the tradeoff between moral hazard, adverse selection, and

administrative costs on the one hand and risk sharing benefits on the other hand. Are the benefits

of incentive-compatible expert buying important enough to be added to that equation?

       To answer this question, we need to examine the individual-level outcomes of the insured

and uninsured. Therefore, our analysis of drug prices is all within-drug. In contrast, because the

work described above is motivated by concerns about the market-level effects of government

insurance programs (which are important for fiscal and R&D incentive outcomes), Duggan and

Scott Morton’s (2010) analysis is between-drug and Lakdawalla and Yin’s (2010) analysis is be-

tween-insurance companies. It should be clear that these types of analyses are not substitutes—it

is plausible that private insurers might buy at lower prices than uninsured individuals, but that

the extension of government-subsidized but privately-administered insurance might lead to

higher prices.

       In empirical work that is also related to ours, Gruber and Rodriguez (2007) compare the

prices paid for office visits by uninsured individuals to the prices paid by insured individuals.

The key insight of their paper is that, when measuring aggregate uncompensated care, it is ap-

propriate to compare payments by uninsured individuals to payments made by (or on behalf of)




                                                7
comparable insured patients, not to the billed charges. Since their paper focuses on the distribu-

tion of the burden of providing uncompensated care across physicians, they use proprietary data

from a particular medical billing vendor that provides data on office visits to their doctor clients,

and their main analysis is at the physician level. Our interest is in the insurance choices of indi-

viduals, so we can use the nationally representative MEPS data, which contain information on

patient characteristics such as income and cover a broader range of medical services (drugs, ER

visits, hospitalizations, and outpatient procedures) but which do not identify individual physi-

cians. Whereas Gruber and Rodriguez find physicians earning slightly more from uninsured pa-

tients for the same procedures on average, we find considerable differences with patient income

and across categories of health care.

3. Modeling the Delegated Purchasing Incentive for Insurance

        We consider a simple model in which individuals are deciding whether to buy insurance

against an accident that can range in severity from 1 to N. We assume that an accident of sever-

ity i occurs with exogenous probability αi, that it necessitates service si, and that the competitive

price for this service is       . Given these values, individuals know that the expected competitive

price of recovering from an accident is:

                                                     N ⎛
                                                          α ⎞          N
                            E ⎡⎣ pC | accident ⎤⎦ = ∑ ⎜ i ⎟ pC where   ∑α        ≡ α.
                                                    i=1 ⎝ α ⎠
                                                              i              i
                                                                       i=1


To focus on the delegated purchasing incentive, we assume that individuals are risk neutral, ex

ante identical (with the exception of household income), and unable to affect the probability or

severity of the accident. These assumptions rule out welfare gains from risk sharing, as well as

any issues related to adverse selection and moral hazard. However, conditional on an accident

occurring, we assume that an individual cannot directly observe its severity. Instead, he must



                                                     8
seek the advice of an expert, who will exploit search costs and rationally charge him the ex post

monopoly price,        (see, for example, Diamond (1971)). Consequently, individuals know that

if they are in an accident, they can expect to pay:

                                E ⎡⎣ p M | accident ⎤⎦ > E ⎡⎣ pC | accident ⎤⎦ .

       Insurance contracts can eliminate this holdup problem. Because insurance companies

employ experts, they always pay the competitive price, and their expected profits are given by:

                                   ∏ = pI − α E ⎡⎣ pC | accident ⎤⎦ − c,

where pI is the insurance premium they collect from individuals, and c is the administrative cost

associated with offering insurance. Note that when profits are positive, the insurance is actuari-

ally unfair when calculated using the competitive price for each service. However, it may still be

cheaper than the expected cost of the ex post monopoly price for each service.

       A risk-neutral individual with household income y should buy insurance when:

                                            EU (insured) − EU (uninsured) > 0
                   ( y − p ) − ((1− α )( y ) + (α )( y − E ⎡⎣ p
                          I                                       M                ))
                                                                      | accident ⎤⎦ > 0
                                                    α E ⎡⎣ p M − pC | accident ⎤⎦ > ∏ +c.

The greater the difference between the ex post monopoly price and the competitive price, the

more value that is created by delegating purchasing to the insurance company.

       Because we are studying prices for medical services, we need to allow for the possibility

that uninsured individuals with lower levels of income are more likely to receive uncompensated

care. Let δ i ( y) be the probability that an uninsured individual i with income y has to pay the ex

post monopoly price, and let 1− δ i ( y) be the probability that he receives uncompensated care.

Now, a risk-neutral individual should buy insurance when:




                                                       9
     (                               )
   α E ⎡⎣δ ( y) p M − pC | accident ⎤⎦ > ∏ +c where E ⎡⎣δ ( y) p M | accident ⎤⎦ ≤ E ⎡⎣ p M | accident ⎤⎦ .

Allowing the expected ex post monopoly price to increase with household income has two impli-

cations. The first is that high-income individuals will benefit more from delegated purchasing

than low-income individuals, who are eligible to receive uncompensated care. Therefore, even

in a population of risk-neutral individuals, we expect that demand for health insurance will in-

crease with household income. The second implication is that the prices paid by uninsured indi-

viduals with low income may be downward biased estimates of the counterfactual prices that

would have been paid by uninsured individuals with high income. Our prior is that this will be a

bigger issue when expensive services are provided before payment is collected (e.g., hospitaliza-

tions and emergency department visits), than when payment is collected before services are pro-

vided (e.g., drug purchases and office visits).

         Another way to extend the model is to allow for market power among insurers and pro-

viders. This significantly complicates matters, as prices become the subject of negotiation. Pro-

vider market power can prevent insurers from obtaining the competitive price. Indeed, a pro-

vider in a monopoly position (e.g., a patented drug with no substitutes or the only medical spe-

cialist in a geographic area) could obtain the monopoly price from both the insured and unin-

sured, and it is plausible that the latter might be lower. Health care providers who offer dis-

counts based on ability to pay are of course engaging in (arguably well intentioned) price dis-

crimination. As with uncompensated care, discounts for the uninsured with low ability to pay

are not necessarily obtainable by those with high ability to pay, and thus a comparison of prices

paid by the insured and uninsured may understate the benefits of expert buying for a given client.

         Market power for insurers can offset provider market power. Because we do not know

which insurance company covers each individual, we cannot distinguish between the negotiated



                                                     10
prices paid by different insurance companies. Therefore, in the empirical work below, we are

comparing the average prices paid by uninsured and insured individuals to the average negoti-

ated prices paid by insured individuals. This difference measures the average benefit of dele-

gated purchasing in our sample.

4. Prescription Drugs

A. Data and Empirical Strategy

       To estimate the benefit due to delegated bargaining, we rely on data from the Household

Component of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). It is a large, annual survey that

asks individuals about their use of health care and then supplements their answers with detailed

data from health care providers. These data are collected by the Agency for Healthcare Research

and Quality and are intended to provide nationally representative estimates of health care expen-

ditures and insurance coverage. The survey is a rotating panel, using a sub-sample of the house-

holds who have participated in the National Health Interview Survey in the prior year; house-

holds are interviewed five times across two calendar years. Low income and minority house-

holds are over-sampled.3 Interviewers seek permission to contact medical providers in order to

obtain more detailed payment information about medical encounters. We pool data for the 2001

through 2008 survey years and, when studying drug prices, limit ourselves to observations with

completed Medical Provider Components.

       We aim to identify any differences in payments made by individuals who are uninsured,

as compared to those who are privately insured and, therefore, potentially benefiting from nego-

tiated prices. Ideally, we would compare the prices that are charged for identical products across

insured and uninsured consumers. In health care, the “product” may vary, even for patients who


3
 We present results that are unweighted. However, when we run our analysis using sampling weights,
our results that are statistically indistinguishable from the unweighted results.


                                               11
are being treated for the same illness by the same provider. Individuals who are hospitalized for

the same illness for the same length of stay, for example, may experience different procedures or

otherwise different levels of intensity of care. As a result, finding that the uninsured patient paid

less for a hospitalization may indicate that they received lower intensity of care or it could indi-

cate that they paid a lower price for the same care. In order to overcome this difficulty, we focus

the first part of our analysis on prescription drugs, which are identified in the data by NDC

codes. These eleven-digit codes uniquely identify each product, ensuring that we are comparing

purchases of the same drug, produced by the same manufacturer, at the same strength and dos-

age, and in the same form and packaging. These detailed codes ensure that we are identifying

the effect of insurance status, instead of unobserved differences in the products. And, because

drugs must be paid for before they can be used, focusing on drug prices reduces concerns that

uninsured individuals benefit from uncompensated care.

       In order to make the comparison between insured and uninsured individuals as clean as

possible, we restrict our sample in several ways. First, we exclude individuals who are publicly

insured from our sample, because public insurers often pay relatively low prices, but not through

explicit negotiation with providers. This filter excludes the vast majority of individuals aged 65

and older, as well as many of the lowest income individuals. Second, we exclude individuals

who change insurance status over the course of the calendar year. Third, we exclude any unin-

sured individuals who do not pay for their own medical care. Data on payments indicate that ap-

proximately 20% of drugs purchased by uninsured individuals were paid for by other sources,

such as the Veteran’s Administration; because those sources may also benefit from negotiated

rates, we exclude these observations from our uninsured sample. Fourth, we include only obser-

vations for which we have matched household survey and pharmacy records. This restriction




                                                 12
ensures that the payment data comes from pharmacy records, which are likely to be more precise

and accurate than individual self-reports. Finally, we include only one observation for each per-

son-prescription combination in each survey year, so that our results are not driven by a small

number of patients who purchase a relatively large number of drugs, although results are similar

if we do not impose this restriction. The resulting data set includes 80,068 purchases of 11,205

unique prescription drug products.

       We report summary statistics for our sample of drug purchases in Table 1. There are

several notable patterns. First, privately insured individuals purchase the vast majority (93.4%)

of drugs. Second, total drug payments by uninsured individuals are lower than total drug pay-

ments by insured individuals ($44.48 versus $58.26). However, this univariate comparison does

not control for differences in the sets of drugs being purchased by the two groups. In the regres-

sions below, we measure the difference in total payments for the same drug in the same calendar

year. Third, there is little evidence of uncompensated care; even among the uninsured, only

0.02% of drug purchases involve no payments. Finally, while the majority of drugs are pur-

chased from retail pharmacies, uninsured individuals are significantly more likely to purchase

drugs from clinics (17.6% versus 6.7%). This prompts us to test for differences in the relative

prices that insured and uninsured individuals pay across outlets.

       To measure the benefit of delegated purchasing for pharmaceutical drugs, we estimate the

following regression equation:

(1)           Ln(Payments)ipt = α + β Uninsured it + θ pt ⋅ Ι(Year)t ⋅ Ι(Product)t + ε ipt

where Ln(Payments)ipt is the natural log of total payments made for product p purchased by indi-

vidual i in year t. We include payments made by all sources, including the insurer and the pa-

tient. Therefore, we are not capturing simply the difference in out-of-pocket costs for the insured



                                                  13
and uninsured patients, but the difference in total payments. Our use of the natural log of pay-

ments implies that we exclude drug purchases with total payments of $0. Because we only ob-

serve total payments of $0 for 0.01% of the drug purchases in our sample, dropping them has

little impact on our findings. Uninsuredit is an indicator variable for whether individual i is unin-

sured in calendar year t; this is the independent variable of interest. The coefficient on Unin-

suredit tells us the average difference in total payments that uninsured individuals made for the

prescription drug. To guarantee that we are comparing the same product in the same year, the

regression includes a full set of product (NDC code) fixed effects interacted with a full set of

year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on NDC code.

B. Results

       Table 2 shows the results from estimating Equation (1) on our sample of drug purchases.

Each column shows the results of a different regression. The first column shows our main result:

uninsured individuals, on average, pay 9% more than insured individuals for the identical pre-

scription drug in the same year. Of course, the insured individuals have lower out-of-pocket

costs but, collectively, they are paying for the expected cost of the prescription drug, and any

other medical services they receive, through their insurance premium. This 9% difference repre-

sents the difference between the negotiated and non-negotiated price. This difference may be

understated if insurers receive rebates from pharmaceutical companies. Of course, this coeffi-

cient tells us only about the average difference. We are also interested in the distribution of dif-

ferences. Figure 1A plots the distribution of the residual from a regression of drug payments

(measured in Ln(Dollars)) on drug*year fixed effects. The figure shows that, at every part of the

distribution, uninsured patients pay more than their insured counterparts.

       The remainder of Table 2 examines heterogeneity in the difference in prices. The second




                                                 14
column looks for differential effects by the income level of the purchaser. If sellers use income

to price-discriminate among the uninsured population, then insurance could provide larger bene-

fits—from negotiated prices, at least—to higher income households. To investigate this ques-

tion, we interact our indicator for being uninsured with dummy variables for “Middle Income”

(200-300 percent of the federal poverty line) and “High Income” (greater than 300 percent of the

federal poverty line). Interestingly, we find no evidence of such price discrimination in this sec-

tion of the analysis; we cannot reject the hypothesis that uninsured individuals of all income lev-

els pay the same higher prices for prescription drugs.

       We also examine heterogeneity by the place of purchase. The second two columns pro-

vide results for prescription drugs purchased in a retail pharmacy. The estimated price differ-

ences for retail pharmacies are slightly higher than those in the overall sample, whereas the esti-

mated price differences in clinics are quite different. At clinics, the price paid by uninsured pa-

tients is statistically indistinguishable from the price paid by privately insured patients, with a

point estimate that is close to zero. These findings suggest that clinics provide discounts to unin-

sured patients that are comparable to those that they would receive if they were insured. The re-

sults for on-line and mail-order clinics are more ambiguous; while the point estimates suggest

that uninsured individuals pay higher prices, the standard errors are sufficiently large that we

cannot reject the null hypothesis that there is no price difference.

       In Table 3, motivated by the analysis of Lakdawalla and Yin (2010), we test whether the

introduction of Medicare Part D increased the delegated purchasing benefit of private insurance.

We interact the Uninsured dummy variable with a dummy variable indicating whether the drug

was purchased between 2006 and 2008. (The direct year effects are absorbed by the NDC

code*year fixed effects.) Between 2001 and 2005, we find that the uninsured pay 6.5% more




                                                 15
than the privately insured. From 2006 to 2008, we find that the uninsured pay an additional

6.4% more—remarkably similar to the 5.8% decline in prices associated with Medicare Part D

that Lakdawalla and Yin (2010) estimate for non-elderly, privately insured prescription drug

purchasers, using different data and different identification. One interpretation, since our sample

excludes individuals on public insurance programs like Medicare, is that the additional 6.4%

measures the spillover to private insurance from the increased bargaining power of insurance

companies created by Medicare Part D.4 Another, potentially complementary, interpretation is

that there was a secular increase in insurance company bargaining power over this period. In-

deed, when we estimate a more flexible specification, in which we interact our Uninsured

dummy variable with year fixed effects, we find that the benefits of delegated purchasing were

trending up before 2006. We plot the estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals in

Figure 2. In the 2001 data, the uninsured paid 2.9% more than the insured, but by 2005, the dif-

ferential had gradually risen to 9.2%. Nonetheless, there is a discrete increase in the benefits of

delegated purchasing in 2007; the estimated benefits of delegated purchasing increase to 16.7%

in that year. We further explore the possibility that insurance company bargaining power was

trending up over our sample period in Section 5.

        Taken together, our findings in this section provide strong evidence that, when we exam-

ine identical products, uninsured patients pay prices that are on the order of 10% higher. Of

course, we would like to know if these findings are unique to drugs or apply to other types of

medical care as well. Therefore, in the next section, we turn to a complementary analysis of the

prices that insured and uninsured pay for other medical services.




4
 We find quantitatively similar results when we explicitly limit the sample to individuals under the age of
65.


                                                    16
5. Prices Paid for Other Medical Services

A. Data and Empirical Strategy

       The data for this part of the analysis again come from the MEPS. For each individual

that receives medical services, we calculate the ratio of the total payments that were made to the

billed charges. We then test whether this ratio differs by insurance status by estimating the fol-

lowing equation:

(2)                        Ratioist = α + β Uninsured it + θ t ⋅ Ι(Year)t + ε ist

where Ratioist is the ratio of total payments to billed charges for individual i for service s in year

t. We exclude prescription drug spending from this measure because billed charges are not re-

ported for prescription drugs. We also exclude dental spending and charges, because dental care

is usually covered by separate insurance policies. Again, the independent variable of interest is

an indicator for whether individual i is uninsured in year t. All of the regressions include a full

set of year fixed effects. When the regression is restricted to a single type of service (e.g., office

visits), the dependent variable is calculated using only the payments and billed charges for that

type of service; individuals who do not receive the service are dropped.

       Since we are no longer able to compare the prices paid for identical products, we view

this analysis as being more suggestive, and less cleanly identified, than the analysis of prescrip-

tion drugs. In particular, in comparing ratios of payments-to-billed-charges across the insured

and uninsured, we are using billed charges as a measure of the quantity and quality of care pro-

vided. The true value of care provided for a dollar of billed charges can vary, of course, and

these differences may be correlated with insurance status. If, for example, doctors intentionally

lower the charges on the bills of uninsured patients with the knowledge that those patients would

be required to pay a higher percentage of billed charges, we would observe uninsured patients



                                                    17
paying for a larger fraction of their reported charges, when they actually paid the same fraction

of the true value of care received. On the other hand, some non-profit hospitals have faced pres-

sure to provide more uncompensated care in order to justify their tax-exempt status, which might

generate an incentive to inflate charges for patients who are not expected to pay any of their bills.

Since we cannot rule out any of this behavior, we interpret the results of this analysis more cau-

tiously.

           Our sample excludes publicly insured individuals, uninsured individuals who do not ap-

pear to pay their own bills (if any payments are made), and individuals who change insurance

status during the year. We report summary statistics for this sample in Table 4. Again, there are

several notable patterns.5 First, there are more uninsured individuals in this sample; 78% of the

patients have private health insurance, while the remaining 22% are uninsured. Second, among

the 69.7% of individuals with billed charges, the average ratio of payments to billed charges is

69.2%. This average ratio varies little with insurance status. Third, the ratio of payments to

billed charges is highest for office visits (70%) and lowest for hospitalizations (52%). About 1/3

of the payments are for hospitalizations, 1/4 for office visits, 1/4 for prescription drugs, and the

remainder for outpatient visits, emergency department visits, and other services.

           Within the full sample, 26.9% are classified as “low income” (below 200 percent of the

federal poverty line), while 39.1% are classified as “high income” (greater than 300 percent of

the federal poverty line). Since we exclude individuals who are covered by Medicaid, our full

sample excludes many of the lowest income individuals. Not surprisingly, uninsured individuals

are much more likely to be classified as low income (62.9% versus 17.7%), and much less likely

5
  The fact that the average total payment of $2,551 in our sample is lower than the per capita health care
costs reported in the National Health Expenditures data is primarily due to characteristics of the MEPS
survey. According to Selden and Sing (2008), differences between the MEPS data and National Health
Care Expenditure data are due to a variety of factors, such as the exclusion of institutionalized individuals
from the MEPS, under-reporting, and differential attrition of high-cost individuals


                                                     18
to be classified as high income (9.9% versus 46.6%). Perhaps because of these differences, the

fraction of individuals who receive medical care during the year and pay nothing for that care (or

have nothing paid on their behalf.) is 2.1% for the uninsured and 0.1% for the insured. When we

classify individuals who receive uncompensated care as those who pay 5% or less of billed

charges (2.3% of individuals fall into this category whereas 1.7% of individuals pay none of their

billed charges), the fraction increases to 18.1% for the uninsured but only to 0.6% for the in-

sured. In other words, Table 4 highlights the fact that uninsured individuals are much more

likely to receive uncompensated care.

B. Results

       The results of this analysis are shown in Table 5. Each cell reports the estimated coeffi-

cient on the Uninsured dummy variable in a different regression. The set of medical services

(and dependent variable) varies across columns. The top panel focuses on the full sample of pa-

tients. The bottom panel focuses on patients who are not receiving uncompensated care, which

we define as care that is provided in exchange for reimbursement of less than 5% of billed

charges. Within each panel, we also report the results of regressions restricted to patients from

high-, middle-, and low-income households.

       In the first column, the dependent variable is the overall ratio of all non-drug expendi-

tures to all non-drug billed charges. Within the full sample, we estimate that uninsured patients,

on average, pay 0.5 percentage points less of their billed charges. However, this pooled estimate

masks interesting heterogeneity. When we separate the full sample into high-income, middle-

income, and low-income subsamples, we find evidence of price discrimination. The fact that

low-income uninsured individuals pay, on average, 1.2 percentage points less of their billed

charges than low-income insured patients implies that providers give essentially the same dis-

count to low-income uninsured that they give to insurance companies. Higher income uninsured


                                               19
individuals, in contrast, pay 10.2 percentage points more of their billed charges than higher in-

come insured individuals, while middle income uninsured patients pays 5.4 percentage points

more.

        In the bottom panel, we find that this heterogeneity is driven, in part, by the small number

of uninsured individuals who receive medical care during the year, but pay little or none of their

medical bills (or have paid little or none of their bills at the time that MEPS data were col-

lected).6 When we also drop the 2.1% of households that pay 5% or less of their billed charges,

uninsured in the sample pay 15.3 percentage points more.7 This result is broadly consistent with

our findings in the more cleanly identified prescription drug analysis where, again, virtually

every drug purchaser paid something towards their prescription drugs and the uninsured paid, on

average, 9% more. Among high-income households, the difference grows to 19.0 percentage

points. This highlights the fact that the delegated purchasing benefits from health insurance are

stronger for higher income individuals than for lower income individuals, who are more likely to

receive uncompensated care.

        Figure 3A provides additional evidence on the distribution of the delegated purchasing

benefits of private health insurance. It suggests that about 70% of uninsured individuals pay a

larger share of their charges than insured individuals. Notably, the median uninsured individual

pays 100% of their charges, whereas the median insured individual pays (or has paid on his be-

half) only 71% of the billed charges. Therefore, even if uninsured individuals pay the same frac-


6
  In unreported regressions, we find that the fraction of billed charges increases by about 2 percentage
points when we compare medical services received at the beginning and end of the survey period, but we
find no evidence of a differential trend for the uninsured.
7
  If we use a stricter definition of “uncompensated care” and drop only the 1.7% of patients who pay none
of their billed charges, we find that the insured—if they pay anything at all—pay 12.5 percentage points
more of the billed charges than do insured patients. If we instead drop all patients who pay less than 10%
of billed charges, we find that the uninsured pay 16.9 percentage points more of their billed charged
charges than do insured patients.


                                                   20
tion of billed charges on average, they face much greater uncertainty about the size of the pay-

ment they will ultimately be required to make. Figure 3B shows the distribution of the ratio for

high-income insured and uninsured patients and, again, highlights the fact that higher income

individuals derive a particularly large price benefit from purchasing health insurance.

       The remaining columns of Table 5 examine several key components of costs: office vis-

its, outpatient visits, hospitalizations, and emergency department visits. There is substantial het-

erogeneity across types of care, with uninsured individuals typically paying a smaller fraction of

their billed charges in hospitals and emergency departments, but about 20 percentage points

more of their billed charges in office and outpatient visits. This heterogeneity may, in part, re-

flect legal differences; some states, including California and New York, have passed laws aimed

at reducing the hospital prices faced by uninsured patients. However, because our data do not

include state identifiers, we are unable to assess the relative importance of such laws.

       In Table 6, we extend the tests for changes in insurance bargaining power in the years

2006 to 2008 to the prices paid for non-drug medical services. Our prediction, given the evi-

dence of spillovers to private insurance from the introduction of Medicare Part D in Lakdawalla

and Yin (2010), is that the coefficient on the interaction between the Uninsured dummy variable

and the 2006-2008 dummy variable will be zero for these other forms of medical care. Surpris-

ingly, we find strong evidence that the relative prices paid by the insured fall for a wide range of

medical services. This is especially true when we exclude the small fraction of households that

pay less than 5% of their billed charges. In this setting, we also find (unreported) evidence that

there were pre-existing trends in the benefits of delegated purchasing. These findings suggest

that insurance company bargaining power increased during our sample period, at least in part for

reasons unrelated to the introduction of Medicare Part D. Such an increase in bargaining power




                                                 21
may reflect the recent increases in concentration in health insurance markets that were docu-

mented in Dafny, Duggan, and Ramanarayanan (2009).

6. Summary and Policy Implications

        Our paper contributes to the literature on insurance in two ways. First, we highlight the

fact that insurance provides an incentive-compatible means of engaging the services of an expert

buyer. Second, we demonstrate that the discounts obtained by insurance companies are eco-

nomically meaningful. When we study drug prices, we find an average discount of approxi-

mately 10%. When we study the prices paid for other medical services, such as doctor's office

and hospital outpatient visits, the average discount is even larger. The interesting caveat is that

the benefits of negotiated prices disappear when uninsured individuals can expect to receive un-

compensated care. However, this caveat is unique to health insurance, where perceived duties to

treat uninsured individuals create an ability to negotiate payments for expensive medical services

that have already been delivered.

        Insurers are likely better buyers of services than other expert buyers, like concierges or

securities brokers, because they face strong incentives to minimize costs.               The delegated-

purchasing view of insurance that we discuss in this paper is arguably a useful lens for viewing

recent changes and proposals in health insurance. For example, Medicare Part D prescription

drug plans are privately administered, but premia paid by participants cover only 10 percent of

costs.8 Medicare provides 80-percent reinsurance for high-cost enrollees, and up to 80-percent

risk-sharing for especially high or low plan-level costs. While this cost sharing is intended to

mute plans’ incentives to screen high-cost participants, it may have the unintended consequence


8
  For fiscal year 2010, Medicare Part D premia totaled $6.5 billion and total expenditures totaled $64 bil-
lion (2011 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Sup-
plementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds, Table V.E3). The difference was mostly covered by Federal
and State government contributions.


                                                    22
of muting their incentives to negotiate low prices.

          Incentives for negotiation are also potentially undermined by the trend towards self-

insurance by employers. The share of covered workers in self-insured plans has increased from

44% to 60% from 1999 to 2010 (Kaiser-HRET, 2011, Exhibit 10.1). Insurers typically negotiate

the same prices on behalf of both their fully and self-insured plans. When an employer shifts to

self-insurance, it weakens the incentives of the insurer to cost minimize, thus potentially creating

a negative externality for other employers.9 While insurers purchasing on behalf of self-insuring

employers may still face incentives for cost minimization from repeated interaction and reputa-

tional concerns, these are clearly weaker than the incentives created by traditional full insur-

ance.10

          Another form of self-insurance that has expanded recently is high-deductible health

plans, which have grown from 4% to 17% of enrollees from 2006 to 2011 (Kaiser-HRET, 2011,

Exhibit 8.4). In these plans, households are responsible for the first $2,000-$5,000 of expenses,

with a median deductible of about $3,500 (Kaiser-HRET, 2011, Exhibit 8.10). Had all house-

holds been enrolled in plans with a $3,500 deductable, 38% of households would have failed to

meet that deductable, and the average household would have borne 62% of expenditures (using

our weighted MEPS data, and adjusting to 2011 dollars using the CPI – Medical Care). Advo-

cates of these plans (e.g., Cogan, Hubbard, and Kessler, 2011) highlight the beneficial incentives

they create for consumers to control their own health care costs. Set against this incentive, these

plans weaken the price-negotiation incentives for insurers even more than employer self-


9
  Employer self-insurance might be both popular and inefficient, if, for example, it arose from an unravel-
ing of the insurance market, in which employers seeking full insurance were expected to be doing so in
expectation of high costs.
10
   Similarly, Mayers and Smith (1982) argue that because the purchase of retroactive liability coverage
transfers all of the liability onto the insurance company, it strengthens the insurance company’s incentive
to negotiate an efficient settlement.


                                                    23
insurance, as individuals have less ability to shift away from plans administered by insurers who

negotiate poorly. Whether the benefits of stronger incentives for consumers will offset the

weaker cost-minimizing incentives for insurers is an open question; the answer may differ for

different types of care, depending on the potential for overconsumption, postponability, and price

shopping.

       In summary, economists tend to view insurance as a tradeoff between the benefits of risk

sharing and the problems of moral hazard, adverse selection, and administrative costs. Without

diminishing the importance of any of these factors, we argue that additional insights can be

gained by recognizing that insurance is also an incentive-compatible mechanism for delegating

purchasing.




                                               24
References


America’s Health Insurance Plans, 2009, “The Value of Provider Networks and the Role of Out-
      of-Network Charges in Rising Health Care Costs: A Survey of Charges Billed by Out-of-
      Network Physicians,” downloaded from
      http://www.ahipresearch.org/ValueofProviderNetworksSurvey.html on December 8,
      2011.

Cabral, Marika, 2011, “Claim Timing and Ex Post Insurance Selection: Evidence from Dental
       ‘Insurance’,” working paper.

Cicchetti, Charles and Dubin, Jeffrey, 1994, “A Microeconometric Analysis of Risk Aversion
       and the Decision to Self-Insure,” Journal of Political Economy 102, 169-186.

Cogan, John, Glenn Hubbard, and Daniel Kessler, 2011, Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: 5 Steps to
       a Better Health Care System, Second Edition, Hoover Institution Press and AEI Press.

Cutler, David, and Richard Zeckhauser, 2000, “The anatomy of health insurance,” In: Culyer, A.
        Newhouse, J.P. (Eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol 1A. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
        pp. 563-643.

Dafny, Leemore, Mark Duggan, and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan (2009), “Paying a Premium
       on Your Premium? Consolidation in the US Health Insurance Industry,” NBER working
       paper #15434.

Diamond, Peter, 1971, “A Model of Price Adjustment,” Journal of Economic Theory 3, 156-168.

Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott Morton, 2006, “The Distortionary Effects of Government Pro-
      curement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing.” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 121, 1–30.

Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott Morton, 2010, “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceuti-
      cal Prices and Utilization.” American Economic Review 100, 590–607.

Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott Morton, 2011, “The Medium-Term Impact of Medicare Part D
      on Pharmaceutical Prices,” American Economic Review 101, 387–392.

Ellison, Glenn, and Alexander Wolitzsky, 2011, “A Search Model of Obfuscation,” MIT work-
        ing paper.

Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight, 2008. “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of
       Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Spending,” Journal of Public Economics 92,
       1644-1668.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.



                                              25
       Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group, 2011,
       “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year,” NBER work-
       ing paper #17190.

Gruber, Jonathan, and David Rodriguez, 2007, “How much uncompensated care do doctors pro-
       vide?,” Journal of Health Economics 26, 1151-1169.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Thaler, 1991, “Anomalies: The Endowment Ef-
      fect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, 193-206.

Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust, 2011, Employer Health
       Benefits Annual Survey, downloaded from http://ehbs.kff.org.

Lakdawalla, Darius, and Wesley Yin, 2009, “Insurer Bargaining and Negotiated Drug Prices in
      Medicare Part D,” NBER working paper #15330.

Lakdawalla, Darius, and Wesley Yin, 2010, “Insurers' Negotiating Leverage and the External
      Effects of Medicare Part D,” NBER working paper #16251.

Mayers, David, and Clifford Smith, 1982, “On the Corporate Demand for Insurance.” Journal of
      Business 55, 281-296.

McClellan, Mark, and Jonathan Skinner, 2006. “The Incidence of Medicare,” Journal of Public
      Economics 90, 257-276.

National Health Expenditures, 2011, “NHE Web Tables,” downloaded from
       https://www.cms.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/tables.pdf, accessed De-
       cember 6, 2011.

Rabin, Matthew and Richard Thaler, 2001, “Anomalies: Risk Aversion,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 15, 219-232.

Selden, Thomas M. and Merrile Sing, 2008, “Aligning the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey to
       Aggregate U.S. Benchmarks,” Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Working Pa-
       per No. 08006, downloaded from http://gold.ahrq.gov.

Stahl, Dale, 1989, “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search." American Eco-
        nomic Review 79, 700-712.




                                             26
                                                          Table 1
                          Summary Statistics for Sample of Prescription Drug Purchases, 2001-2008

Variable                                    Full Sample       Uninsured         Privately      Low Income        High Income
                                                                                 Insured        Purchaser         Purchaser
Total payments for drug                        $57.35           $44.48           $58.26          $53.08            $60.02
                                               (80.09)          (52.08)          (81.63)        (102.79)           (76.55)

% with no payment                               0.01               0.02           0.01             0.02              0.01

% purchased by privately insured patient        93.4                0             100              81.8              97.7

% purchased by uninsured patient                 6.6               100             0               18.2               2.3

% purchased by low income patient               20.9               57.9           18.3             100                 0

% purchased by high income patient              45.2               15.6           47.3              0                 100

% purchased at retail pharmacy                  83.5               76.2           84.0             81.5              83.0

% purchased at clinic                            7.4               17.6            6.7             10.9               6.4

% purchased on-line, mail-order or other         7.7             2.7               8.0              6.0               9.2
N                                              80,068           5,278            74,790           16,769            36,183

    Note: Sample excludes individuals in MEPS who are covered by public insurance, or who change insurance status dur-
    ing the year. We describe other filters in the text. Individuals are classified as “low income” when their income is be-
    low 200 percent of the federal poverty line in year t, and “high income” when their income is above 300 percent of the
    federal poverty line in year t. The type of pharmacy is “not ascertained” for approximately 1.5% of drug purchases.
    This explains why the % purchased through retail pharmacies, clinics, on-line, and mail-order sums to less than 100%.




                                                              27
                                                           Table 2
                                    The Effect of Insurance Status on Ln(Drug Payments)

                                                                                                             Purchased on-line or
                                        Full Sample          Purchased in a Store    Purchased in a clinic       mail-order
Coefficient on Uninsured            0.090**     0.094**      0.101**     0.112**       0.012      -0.001      0.062       0.097
                                    (0.009)     (0.012)      (0.010)     (0.014)      (0030)     (0.040)     (0.105)     (0.140)

Coefficient on Uninsured                          -0.004                  -0.013                  -0.040                   0.059
* Middle Income                                  (0.016)                 (0.019)                  (0.086)                 (0.205)

Coefficient on Uninsured                          -0.021                -0.040**                   0.064                   -0.277
* High Income                                    (0.017)                 (0.020)                  (0.106)                 (0.386)

Drug * year fixed effects             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Clusters                             11,205      11,205       9,772        9,772      2,700        2,700       2,666       2,666
N                                    80,059      80,059      66,815       66,815      5,905        5,905       6,127       6,127

Mean of Dependent Variable            3.59        3.59        3.59         3.59        3.52        3.52        3.69        3.69
Mean of Drug Payments                $57.35      $57.35      $56.31       $56.31      $55.91      $55.91      $71.51      $71.51

      Note: This table shows coefficients (and standard errors) from estimation of Equation (1). Each column shows coeffi-
      cients from a separate regression. Control variables include a full set of year * NDC code fixed effects. Regressions
      with interactions between Uninsured and income category also include controls for income category main effects.
      Standard errors are clustered on NDC code. Coefficients that are statistically significantly different from zero at the
      10-percent and 5-percent levels are denoted by * and **.




                                                                28
                                                            Table 3
                                     The Effect of Insurance Status on Ln(Drug Payments)

                                                                                                                Purchased on-line or
                                         Full Sample          Purchased in a Store     Purchased in a clinic        mail-order
Coefficient on Uninsured             0.090**     0.065**      0.101**     0.071**       0.012       0.011        0.062       0.035
                                     (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.012)      (0.030)     (0.036)      (0.105)     (0.034)

Coefficient on Uninsured                          0.064**                  0.077**                   0.003                      0.059
* Year is 2006-2008                               (0.017)                  (0.019)                  (0.087)                    (0.243)

Drug * year fixed effects              Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Clusters                              11,205      11,205        9,772       9,772       2,700        2,700       2,666         2,666
N                                     80,059      80,059       66,815      66,815       5,905        5,905       6,127         6,127

Mean of Dependent Variable             3.59        3.59         3.59        3.59         3.52        3.52         3.69          3.69
Mean of Drug Payments                 $57.35      $57.35       $56.31      $56.31       $55.91      $55.91       $71.51        $71.51

          Note: This table shows coefficients (and standard errors) from the estimation of Equation (1) with an interaction
          between the dummy variable indicating whether individual i is uninsured in calendar year t with a dummy vari-
          able indicating whether calendar year t is 2006, 2007, or 2008. The specification and sample are otherwise
          identical to those in Table 3. Control variables include a full set of year * NDC code effects. Standard errors
          are clustered on NDC code. Coefficients that are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10-percent
          and 5-percent levels are denoted by * and **.




                                                                 29
                                                          Table 4
                                  Summary Statistics for Sample of Individuals, 2001-2008

Variable                                        Full Sample        Uninsured   Privately    Low Income   High Income
                                                                                Insured      Household    Household
% with private health insurance                     79.6              0           100          52.3         94.9
% uninsured                                         20.4             100          0            47.7          5.1

% low income                                        26.9             62.9        17.7          100           0

% high income                                       39.1              9.7        46.6           0           100

Age                                                 36.0             31.3        37.2          33.3         39.4
                                                   (20.2)           (15.3)      (21.1)        (20.3)       (19.7)

% Male                                              50.1             56.6        48.4          49.1         50.6

Total annual payments                             $2,551             $211      $3,152         $1,832       $3,148
                                                  (8,122)           (1,031)    (8,993)        (7,559)      (8,889)

  Total drug payments                              $519               $71       $634           $373         $636
                                                  (1,700)            (494)     (1,872)        (1,434)      (1,948)

Total annual payments, excl. drugs and dental     $1,795             $100      $2,230         $1,345       $2,170
                                                  (7,519)            (803)     (8,364)        (7,008)      (8,237)

Total annual charges, excl. drugs and dental       $3,559            $315       $4,391        $2,877       $4,154
                                                  (16,166)          (3,314)    (17,952)      (15,524)     (17,267)

Ratio of payments to charges                       0.692             0.696      0.691         0.661         0.703



                                                              30
    Ratio of office payments to office charges       0.703           0.751           0.700           0.689            0.708

    Ratio of outpatient payments to outpatient       0.548           0.541           0.548           0.508            0.563
       charges
    Ratio of ER payments to ER charges               0.557           0.305           0.585           0.467            0.606

    Ratio of hospital payments to hospital           0.520           0.197           0.528           0.493            0.527
       charges

% with positive charges, but no payments              0.5             2.1             0.1             1.3              0.2

% with positive charges, but payments ≤ 5%            2.1             18.1            0.6             6.0              0.6

% with no charges                                     30.3            71.2            19.8            47.6            19.0

N                                                   160,715         32,850          127,865         43,294           62,826


        Note: Sample excludes individuals in MEPS who are covered by public insurance, or who change insurance status dur-
        ing the year. We describe other filters in the text. Individuals are classified as “low income” when their income is be-
        low 200 percent of the federal poverty line in year t, and “high income” when their income is above 300 percent of the
        federal poverty line in year t. In every case, when we calculate the ratio of annual payments to annual charges, we ex-
        clude drugs and dental services.




                                                              31
                                                          Table 5
                            The Effect of Insurance Status on Ratio of Amount Paid To Charges

                                   All Costs                                                              Emergency De-
Sample                           (excl. drugs)     Office Visits   Outpatient Visits   Hospitalizations   partment Visits
Full Sample                         0.005**          0.051**            -0.009            -0.330**           -0.277**
20.4% uninsured                     (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.013)             (0.018)            (0.007)
                                  N=111,951        N=104,405          N=22,238            N=8,250           N=16,645
   High Income subsample            0.102**          0.129**           0.068**            -0.329**           -0.260**
   5.1% uninsured                   (0.007)          (0.007)           (0.034)             (0.056)            (0.026)
                                   N=50,869         N=48,431          N=10,951            N=3,378            N=6,318
   Middle income subsample          0.054**          0.073**           0.057**            -0.277**           -0.190**
   16.5% uninsured                  (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.023)             (0.040)            (0.014)
                                   N=38,405         N=35,811           N=7,438            N=2,855            N=5,925
   Low income subsample            -0.012**          0.042**            -0.022            -0.340**           -0.265**
   47.8% uninsured                  (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.019)             (0.024)            (0.010)
                                   N=22,677         N=20,163           N=3,849            N=2,017            N=4,402

Excluding ratio ≤ 0.05             0.153**           0.188**           0.213**             -0.017           -0.022**
19.7% uninsured                    (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.014)            (0.030)            (0.009)
                                  N=109,588         N=102,549         N=21,814            N=8,056           N=15,561
   High Income sample              0.190**           0.208**           0.235**             -0.068             -0.043
   4.9% uninsured                  (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.037)            (0.084)            (0.032)
                                  N=50,516          N=48,080          N=10,817            N=3,346           N=6,197
   Middle income sample            0.173**           0.189**           0.254**             0.005             0.037**
   16.0% uninsured                 (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.025)            (0.057)            (0.017)
                                  N=37,764          N=35,256          N=7,293             N=2,808           N=5,651
   Low income sample               0.157**           0.199**           0.220**             -0.013             -0.006
   46.4% uninsured                 (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.021)            (0.039)            (0.012)
                                  N=21,308          N=19,213          N=3,704             N=1,902           N=3,713

Mean Ratio in Full Sample           0.692             0.704              0.548              0.520             0.557



                                                            32
Note: This table reports the coefficient (and standard error) on a dummy variable indicating whether individual i
is uninsured in year t. The dependent variable is the fraction of the billed price that is paid by individual i and,
when applicable, individual i’s insurance company. Some specifications exclude individuals for which the de-
pendent variable equals 0, or is less than or equal to 5%. Other specifications are restricted to high-income,
middle-income, or low-income individuals. All specifications include year fixed effects. Coefficients that are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 10-percent and 5-percent levels are denoted by * and **.




                                                        33
                                                             Table 6
                               The Effect of Insurance Status on Ratio of Amount Paid To Charges

                                      All Costs                                                                   Emergency De-
Sample                              (excl. drugs)      Office Visits     Outpatient Visits    Hospitalizations    partment Visits
Full Sample

    Coefficient on Uninsured          -0.009**           0.032**             -0.030**            -0.334**             -0.282**
                                       (0.003)           (0.003)              (0.015)             (0.024)              (0.009)

    Coefficient on Uninsured          0.040**            0.056**              0.073**              0.009                0.015
    * Year is 2006-2008               (0.006)            (0.006)              (0.028)             (0.038)              (0.015)

N                                     111,951            104,405              22,238               8,250               16,645

Excluding ratio ≤ 0.05

    Coefficient on Uninsured          0.111**            0.162**              0.158**            -0.231**             -0.092**
                                      (0.003)            (0.003)              (0.017)             (0.029)              (0.011)

    Coefficient on Uninsured          0.038**            0.051**              0.124**             0.108**               -0.006
    * Year is 2006-2008               (0.006)            (0.006)              (0.032)             (0.051)              (0.018)

N                                     109,993            102,705              21,898               8,147               15,784

Mean Ratio in Full Sample              0.692               0.704               0.548               0.520               0.557

         Note: This table reports coefficients (and standard errors) from the estimation of Equation (2) with an interaction be-
         tween the dummy variable indicating whether individual i is uninsured in calendar year t with a dummy variable indi-
         cating whether calendar year t is 2006, 2007, or 2008. The specification and sample are otherwise identical to those in
         Table 5. Coefficients that are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10-percent and 5-percent levels are
         denoted by * and **.



                                                                34
                                                    Figure 1A

                              !-&.%-/0,"+'"1'!%02'($34 )+.&5'
                                    /3'6+&0%$+*)'7.$.0&'
                  #!

                  $!

                  %!

                  &!
     !"##$%&'




                  '!                                                                     -./0123!
                       ('!     &'!   )'!   %'!      *'!       $'!    +'!   #'!    ,'!    4 .5./0123!
                 "&!

                 "%!

                 "$!

                 "#!
                                                 ()%*)+,#)'


                                                    Figure 1B

                             !-&.%-/0,"+'"1'!%02'($34 )+.&5'/3'
                               6+&0%$+*)'7.$.0&5'8 -29'-+*"4 )'
                ('!

                 #!

                 $!

                 %!
!"##$%&'




                 &!
                                                                                          -./0123!
                 '!
                                                                                          4 .5./0123!
                       ('!    &'!    )'!   %'!      *'!        $'!   +'!    #'!    ,'!
                "&!

                "%!

                "$!

                "#!
                                                 ()%*)+,#)'




                                                          35
                                                                         Figure 2


                                            !-?)%)+*)'-+'(%-*)&'($-='1"%'(9$%4 $*)0,*$#'
                                                          !%02&5'/3'>)$%'
                                        '6&*!
    :"); *-)+.'"+'< +-+&0%)='!04 4 3'




                                          '6&!

                                        '6(*!

                                          '6(!

                                        '6'*!

                                            '!
                                                 &''(!   &''&!   &'')!     &''%!           &''*!   &''$!   &''+!   &''#!
                                        "'6'*!
                                                                                   >)$%'




!                                                                          36!
                                           Figure 3A


               @$,"'"1'A".$#'B++0$#'($34 )+.&'."'A".$#'
                          B++0$#':9$%2)&'
        (6&!

          (!

        '6#!
@$,"'




        '6$!
                                                                                   -./0123!
        '6%!
                                                                                   4 .5./0123!
        '6&!

          '!
               ('!   &'!   )'!   %'!       *'!       $'!    +'!    #'!     ,'!
                                        ()%*)+,#)'


                                           Figure 3B


               @$,"'"1'A".$#'B++0$#'($34 )+.&'."'A".$#'
                  B++0$#':9$%2)&'C"%'8 -29D-+*"4 )'
                             6+=-E-=0$#&'
        (6&!

          (!

        '6#!
@$,"'




        '6$!
                                                                                 -./0123!
        '6%!
                                                                                 4 .5./0123!
        '6&!

          '!
               ('!   &'!   )'!   %'!      *'!       $'!    +'!    #'!    ,'!
                                       ()%*)+,#)'




                                            37
