                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CHALLENGES IN BANKING THE RURAL POOR:
                     EVIDENCE FROM KENYA'S WESTERN PROVINCE

                                          Pascaline Dupas
                                            Sarah Green
                                           Anthony Keats
                                         Jonathan Robinson

                                        Working Paper 17851
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17851


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




We thank Kathy Nolan and Kim Siegal for excellent research assistance and IPA Kenya for managing
the field work. We thank Cynthia Kinnan, William Lyakurwa, and conference participants at Strathmore
University and the 5th NBER Africa conference for helpful comments and suggestions. This study
was funded through grants from the International Growth Center, the NBER Africa project, and the
International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie). All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Pascaline Dupas, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Challenges in Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya's Western Province
Pascaline Dupas, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 17851
February 2012
JEL No. D14,G21,O16

                                               ABSTRACT

Most people in rural Africa do not have bank accounts. In this paper, we combine experimental and
survey evidence from Western Kenya to document some of the supply and demand factors behind
such low levels of financial inclusion. Our experiment had two parts. In the first part, we waived the
fixed cost of opening a basic savings account at a local bank for a random subset of individuals who
were initially unbanked. While 63% of people opened an account, only 18% actively used it. Survey
evidence suggests that the main reasons people did not begin saving in their bank accounts are that:
(1) they do not trust the bank, (2) service is unreliable, and (3) withdrawal fees are prohibitively expensive.
In the second part of the experiment, we provided information on local credit options and lowered
the eligibility requirements for an initial small loan. Within the following 6 months, only 3% of people
initiated the loan application process. Survey evidence suggests that people do not borrow because
they do not want to risk losing their collateral. These results suggest that, while simply expanding
access to banking services (for instance by lowering account opening fees) will benefit a minority,
broader success may be unobtainable unless the quality of services is simultaneously improved. There
are also challenges on the demand side, however. More work needs to be done to understand what
savings and credit products are best suited for the majority of rural households.


Pascaline Dupas                                        Anthony Keats
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Stanford University                                    University of California, Los Angeles
579 Serra Mall                                         8283 Bunche Hall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                                Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                               akeats@ucla.edu
pdupas@stanford.edu
                                                       Jonathan Robinson
Sarah Green                                            Department of Economics
Innovations for Poverty Action                         University of California, Santa Cruz
101 Whitney Ave                                        457 Engineering 2
New Haven, CT 06510                                    Santa Cruz, CA 95064
sgreen@poverty-action.org                              jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
1       Introduction
Access to basic banking services in Sub-Saharan Africa remains limited, and lags far behind even
other parts of the developing world. Chaia et al. (2009) combine a number of data sources to
estimate that only about 20% of households in Sub-Saharan Africa were banked in the early 2000s.1
While there has been some progress in recent years, Kendall et al. (2010) obtain similar results
using more recent data. While developing countries have only 28% as many bank accounts per
adult as do developed countries, the ﬁgure in Sub-Saharan Africa is far lower (only 16%). Lack
of access is particularly acute in rural areas: representative household survey data we collected
between 2009 and 2011 suggest that only between 15 and 21 percent of households are banked in
rural areas of Kenya, Malawi, and Uganda, respectively.2
    Such limited access could potentially have important repercussions on people’s lives. If lacking a
formal bank account makes it more diﬃcult for people to save, they will be unlikely to have enough
saved up to cope with unexpected emergencies such as household illness. When such shocks occur,
rather than withdraw money or take a loan from the bank, people might have to take much costlier
actions.3 Lack of banking access might also make it diﬃcult for people to save up large sums or
obtain credit for lumpy purchases such as start-up costs for a business, agricultural inputs, or even
preventative health products like anti-malarial bednets.
    Given this, expanding access to even very basic savings and credit services could have large
eﬀects. The existing evidence on this issue is somewhat mixed, however. Recent studies suggest
that expanding access to microloans alone has only modest eﬀects on most outcomes (i.e. Banerjee
et al 2010; Crépon et al 2011; Karlan and Zinman 2010). In contrast, studies of programs that
increased access to both credit and savings services have found important welfare impacts (see
Burgess and Pande, 2005 in India; and three studies in Mexico by Aportela, 1999, Bruhn and Love,
2009, and Ruiz, 2010). Expansion of saving services alone also appears to have the potential to
be beneﬁcial. In an earlier experimental study in Kenya, Dupas and Robinson (2009) provided
small-scale entrepreneurs access to accounts in a local Village Bank, and found large eﬀects on
business investment and income among a subsample of the study population (market vendors, who
are mostly female). In a similar experiment in Nepal, Prina (2011) also ﬁnds large impacts of
expanding access to savings accounts for women.
    From a policy standpoint, in addition to understanding the impact of ﬁnancial inclusion, a
critical question is how to achieve it. This is an area that has seen a lot of innovation in the
last ﬁve years. These recent innovations ultimately amount to either reducing barriers to access
to existing ﬁnancial institutions (e.g., reducing fees); or bringing banking options geographically
closer to people.4 For example, a number of countries have adopted “correspondent” or “agent”
    1
      Much of their ﬁnancial access data is from Honohan (2008).
    2
      At the country level, Chaia et al. (2009) ﬁnd a weak relationship between urbanization and ﬁnancial access.
    3
      Examples of such costly actions include taking children out of school to work on the farm (see Ferreira and
Schady 2009 for a recent review article), selling oﬀ assets such as business inventory (Dupas and Robinson 2009) or
productive animals (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1993), or engaging in income-generating activities which entail health
risk (Robinson and Yeh 2011).
    4
      Examples of the former type of innovations include the 2006 call made by the Reserve Bank of India to all


                                                        2
banking in which people can deposit into and withdraw money from their bank account using
a non-bank agent (for example, a retail store).5 A closely related option which has received a
substantial amount of recent attention is “mobile money,” in which people can transfer, deposit,
and withdraw money using their cell phone (Jack and Suri, 2009). A third approach is a “bank on
wheels” in which a vehicle visits a town at a regular interval for people to make transactions.6 A
less glamorous approach would be to simply build more ATMs or bank branches (as Equity Bank
has done in Kenya with great success – see Allen et al. 2011).
    While much attention has recently been paid to these various strategies to expand access,
comparatively little attention has been paid to the quality of ﬁnancial services in very rural areas.
If people are not banked because they do not trust banks or banking agents, because they ﬁnd
services to be unreliable, or because account maintenance or withdrawal fees are prohibitive, then
expanding such ﬂawed services is unlikely to be appealing. On the demand side, little attention
has been paid to understanding reasons other than access for why people may choose to stay out of
the formal banking system. This paper combines survey and experimental evidence from Western
Kenya to show that addressing these supply and demand factors is crucial if ﬁnancial services are
to be expanded usefully to unbanked populations.
    Our study takes place in an area spanning multiple villages surrounding three rural market
centers in Western Kenya, and in which banking options remain very limited. In this part of
Kenya, large bank branches are located only in major towns, and the villages in our study are
far enough away from a town that the cost of traveling there for banking is prohibitive. Locally,
there are only two options: a “Village Bank”, owned by share-holding villagers and aﬃliated with
a microﬁnance organization, and a partial-service branch (essentially a sales and information oﬃce
with an ATM) for a major Commercial Bank. Both banks have substantial minimum balance
requirements and withdrawal fees. The Village Bank also has an account opening fee. The Village
Bank does not pay interest on deposits; eﬀectively, neither does the Commercial Bank, at least for
the poor (interest is only paid if the account balance exceeds 20,000 Ksh, or about $210).
    To examine ﬁnancial access among this population, we conducted a census of 1,898 households
in the study area between September and December 2009. Account ownership was quite low: only
20% of households had at least one member with a bank account. Knowledge of banking options
was also limited, as only 60% of adults knew of the bank branches in the study area. Almost no
one knew the fee schedule for account opening or maintenance. The 1,565 unbanked individuals
formed the ﬁnal experimental study sample.
    To test whether opening costs (information acquisition, account opening fees, and administrative
requirements) explained the low rates of account ownership, we randomly selected 55% of the 1,565

Commercial Banks to introduce free “no-frills” accounts (Thyagarajan and Venkatesan, 2008); or the 2010 pledge by
the Bill and Melinda Gates foundation to contribute of $500 million over 5 years towards increasing access to savings
accounts in poor countries (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 2010).
    5
      See Kumar et al. (2006) for evidence on agent banking in Brazil. McKinsey and Company (2010) provide some
background on correspondent banking in several other Latin American countries.
    6
      Though such banking products exist in many countries, there are few academic studies of their impact. See
Stuart et al. (2011) for evidence from Malawi and Nguyen Tien Hung (2004) for evidence from Vietnam.


                                                         3
unbanked individuals to receive a free account at either of the two local banks. We paid the account
opening fees and provided the minimum balance, and arranged for the banks to simplify the account
opening procedure for our study participants. We did not waive withdrawal fees. The majority of
people opened accounts when oﬀered this opportunity: take-up was over 60%. But actual account
usage was much lower. Only 28% of those who opened an account (18% of those randomly selected
for a free account) made at least two deposits on their account in the 12 months after account
opening. Many did not use the account at all.
    Why didn’t the other 80% of those selected to receive a free account actively use it? To shed
light on this question, we administered qualitative surveys in which respondents could discuss their
concerns with the various savings mechanisms available to them. A signiﬁcant proportion listed risk
of embezzlement, unreliable services, and transaction fees as concerns with formal banking. Many
of these concerns are valid: the fees are indeed quite high in both the Village and Commercial
Bank, and the services in one branch of the Village Bank were relatively poor during this time
period. Furthermore, another branch of the Village Bank had a recent banking scandal in which
withdrawals were frozen for some account holders for a long period. Not surprisingly, we ﬁnd
that trust concerns are more pronounced for the village with the branch with the recent scandal,
and reliability concerns are worse for those near the branch with poor service. Interestingly, these
concerns were reinforced by exposure to the bank: those who did use their account were more
concerned with both the risk of fraud and the lack of reliability than those who did not use the
account.
    We use a similar combination of survey and experimental evidence to examine the demand for
formal loans. The banks oﬀer a variety of loans which range in interest between 1.25 and 1.5% per
month (16%-19.5% APR), well below that of many microﬁnance banks in other parts of the world,7
and well below recent estimated returns to capital, including estimates from previous work in this
part of Kenya.8 Yet, very few people take out loans. Of those in our experimental sample, only 6%
had ever applied for a formal loan at baseline. As with savings options, knowledge of loan options
appears extremely limited – very few people know what the conditions are for loans with either
bank. Further, when asked, very few people reported wanting loans for agricultural inputs such as
fertilizer, despite the high estimated returns to usage in Kenya (Suri 2011; Duﬂo et al., 2011).
    To better understand why people do not take up loans, we conducted a randomized credit
intervention with two components: (1) an information intervention in which we told people about
the requirements and procedures to apply for a loan; and (2) an intervention in which we gave
people a voucher which lowered the eligibility requirements necessary to begin taking out loans
with the Village Bank. Though the vast majority of people took the vouchers when oﬀered them,
and 40% redeemed them, only 3% of our experimental sample had even started the process of

    7
      Kneiding and Rosenberg (2008) report a worldwide average APR of 35 percent. The average in Kenya is over 50
percent per year. See Armendáriz and Morduch (2007), Morduch (1999) and Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2009) for more
background.
    8
      See, for example, de Mel et al. (2008), Fafchamps et al. (2011), McKenzie and Woodruﬀ (2008). For Western
Kenya, see Kremer et al. (2011) and Dupas and Robinson (2009).


                                                       4
applying for a loan at the time of writing (6 months after the credit information and voucher
interventions). Evidence from qualitative surveys on barriers to borrowing suggests that the fear
of losing one’s collateral if one cannot repay the loan is the primary deterrent. These results are
in line with numerous recent studies in microﬁnance which show limited demand for microcredit
at market rates (i.e. Johnston and Morduch 2008, Banerjee et al 2010, Crépon et al. 2011). They
are also roughly consistent with a recent informational experiment in Sri Lanka which found that
only 10% of entrepreneurs who were given information about credit options took out loans (de Mel,
McKenzie and Woodruﬀ, 2009).
    Overall, our data reveal a number of challenges with the current supply of ﬁnancial services.
Simply expanding those existing services is not likely to massively increase formal banking use
among the majority of the poor unless quality can be ensured, fees can be made aﬀordable, and
trust issues are addressed. Our results also suggest that marketing could be improved – a large
percentage of people lack even basic information about banking options.
    Note that while our results are based on two particular banks in one part of Kenya, and concern
“classical” banking services rather than agent- or mobile phone-based banking, the general take-
away is that service quality, fees, and trust are important and often overlooked factors. Even M-
Pesa, Safaricom’s mobile money network in Kenya and arguably the most developed mobile money
product in the world, is ultimately similar in structure to the banks we study here – people must
still make deposits and withdrawals in person, in cash, and the fees are substantial. Moreover,
M-Pesa, as it is currently constituted, cannot function well as a bank. To guarantee solvency,
Safaricom requires agents to pay in advance for any mobile money they purchase. Safaricom then
holds this money in bank accounts with several large commercial banks, and gives all interest to
charity (Jack and Suri 2011). Clearly, M-Pesa cannot lower fees unless it can invest its deposits for
proﬁt – which, in turn, will likely require some form of regulation (for instance, deposit insurance)
if people are to trust money with it.9 On top of this, banks would lobby vociferously to prevent a
new entrant into the banking sector – see Mas and Radcliﬀe (2010) for evidence on this in regards
to M-Pesa in Kenya. Given this, it seems that the most likely future for mobile banking is as a
platform through which people can transfer money into an account in a formal bank.10 Thus, the
issues we raise here remain quite pertinent to mobile banking as well.
    Our ﬁnding that a non-negligible proportion of people distrust banks generally is somewhat
surprising, since the banking sector in Kenya has been relatively stable for some time: while Kenya
has had a number of banking scandals, many of these were in the 1980s and 1990s (Central Bank
of Kenya, 2009), and many involved non-bank ﬁnancial institutions such as Savings and Credit
Cooperations (SACCOs). However, even though the number of bank scandals have been limited
in recent years, it is likely that other non-bank related ﬁnancial scandals have made people wary,
   9
      Of course, some countries may not require even banks to have deposit insurance, which will create a host of
other problems. See Demirgüç-Kunt et al. (2005) which shows that deposit insurance in Africa lags behind other
regions.
   10
      Safaricom has recently entered into a partnership with a bank to link the M-Pesa account to a formal bank
account through the M-Kesho service (Opiyo 2010). Since then, other banks are developing similar services allowing
customers to manage their accounts using MPesa.


                                                        5
especially of the Village Bank for which deposits are not insured by the central government. For
example, Kenya has had a number of very high-proﬁle pyramid schemes in which an estimated
148,000 people had invested over $90 million (Ministry of Co-operative Development and Marketing,
2009). Both Kenya and neighboring Tanzania have also had high-level scandals which ultimately
forced their respective Central Bank Governors to step down. Such scandals might quite naturally
cause general mistrust of ﬁnancial institutions. Our results indicate that, once established, such
mistrust sticks for a very long time, and limits the extent to which people seek out information
about available ﬁnancial services, even decades later. This suggests that any eﬀort to expand
ﬁnancial access, if it is to successfully achieve ﬁnancial inclusion, needs to include an important
communication component in order to bring awareness of the various options available as well as
the regulation around them (especially deposit insurance).


2     Background Information on Rural Banking
2.1     Financial Institutions in our Study Area
Our data comes from farming villages located near three market centers in Western Province,
Kenya. For conﬁdentiality purposes we call these three market centers A, B and C. Two separate
ﬁnancial institutions operate in this area, a Village Bank and a Commercial Bank.
    The Village Bank is a community-owned and operated entity that receives support from a local
microﬁnance institution (MFI). Deposits in the bank are not insured by the Central Bank (though
the bank does purchase a limited amount of private insurance), and the Village Bank is classiﬁed
as a Non-Bank Financial Institution. The Village Bank has three branches in our study area. The
main branch is located in market A and opened in 2000. There is a smaller branch in market
B which opened in 2008, and a part-time branch in market C which opened in September 2009.
Branch C only handles account opening, loan applications and deposits (withdrawals can be made
at either of the other two branches, each a bit over 11km away). The branches in markets A and B
are open Monday through Friday from 8:30 AM to 4 PM, and on Saturdays from 8 AM to 1 PM.
The branch in market C is only open Monday, Wednesday and Friday from 9 AM to 4 PM.
    The second local ﬁnancial institution, the Commercial Bank, is a small branch of a large corpo-
rate bank. The branch has an ATM through which people can make deposits and withdrawals at
any time and a small staﬀ which assists with these transactions (as well as with account opening
and loan applications) during normal business hours (Monday through Friday from 8:30 AM to
4 PM and Saturday from 8 AM to 12 PM). The main, full-service branch, where tellers process
loan applications and handle transactions, is located in a town about 30km away. Deposits in the
Commercial Bank are insured.

2.1.1    Savings Products

The Village Bank oﬀers just one type of savings account, which does not pay interest. At the time
this project started, opening an account at the Village Bank cost 300 Kenyan shillings (Ksh). All

                                                 6
accounts must also hold a 100 Ksh minimum balance making the total account opening fee 400
Ksh, or about $4.25 US at the current exchange rate. Deposits are free and there are no monthly
fees, but there is a fee to make withdrawals.11 No ATM services are available, so savings are illiquid
beyond the opening hours mentioned above.
    The basic savings account at the Commercial Bank has no account opening fee but a 200 Ksh
($2.10 US) minimum balance requirement.12 The account comes with a free ATM card. The bank
charges 30 Ksh ($0.32) for withdrawals of any size from the ATM, and 100 Ksh ($1.05 US) for
withdrawals of any size made with at an urban branch. The account pays no interest unless the
customer maintains a balance of 20,000 Ksh ($210 US) for at least a 3-month period, in which case
interest is paid.13
    A ﬁnal way that people in the study area can potentially save is through mobile money, as there
are a number of mobile money agents in the area. Mobile money is much more commonly used
for transfers than for savings, however, for several reasons. First and most obviously, people need
to have access to a cell phone (and only 47% of households in our census have a phone). Second,
it is not always possible to withdraw money immediately. On the main mobile money network
(M-Pesa), the currency of mobile money is “e-ﬂoat.” The agent holds a balance of e-ﬂoat on his
own cell phone and must decide how much cash to hold to pay out withdrawals. If the agent has
a large number of withdrawals on a given day, he may lack the liquidity to cover them all. On the
other hand, if there are many deposits, the agent may have no e-ﬂoat left to sell to allow deposits.
These sorts of problems are cited as a drawback by many respondents in our sample. In addition,
M-Pesa markets itself as a money transfer, rather than savings, product. Finally, withdrawal fees
are substantial (though this is true of both of the banks in our study as well).14

2.1.2    Credit Products

While both the Village Bank and the Commercial Bank oﬀer credit products, the terms for bor-
rowing vary quite a bit across the two institutions. The Village Bank, like many MFIs, requires
the formation of a group of at least 5 people who approve the purpose and amount of each other’s
loans, and who serve as mutual guarantors. To take out a loan, borrowers must purchase a share
(valued at 300 Ksh each, or $3.20 US) in the bank. Borrowers are then eligible to borrow up to
four times the value of shares owned. In addition, the bank requires borrowers to attend several
training sessions on loan management.
    The Village Bank oﬀers several diﬀerent types of loans, most at interest rates between 1.25
and 1.5 percent per month (16-19.5% APR). Loans are to be used for business purchases, with the
exception of a loan for emergencies which features a higher interest rate (2.25% per month).The
Commercial Bank grants microloans for existing businesses to individuals who have had an account

  11
     The withdrawal fee is 10Ksh ($0.10) to withdraw amounts under 1,000Ksh ($10.50), 20Ksh ($0.21) to withdraw
amounts between 1,000 and 4,999Ksh ($53), and 100Ksh ($1.05) for amounts of 5,000Ksh or higher.
  12
     The Commercial Bank also oﬀers a youth savings account with a smaller minimum balance requirement.
  13
     The interest rate is variable, ranging from 2-4% within the study period.
  14
     See Jack and Suri (2011) and Mbiti and Weil (2011) for more detail on these issues.


                                                      7
at the Commercial Bank or with another Commercial Bank for at least 3 months. Prospective
borrowers must also be visited by a loan oﬃcer to assess the state of the business. Loans must
be repaid within 6 months, with an interest a rate of 1.5% per month. Two guarantors and full
collateral are required for each loan15

2.2      History of Financial Scandals
One of the key results of this study is that the level of interest and trust in ﬁnancial institutions is
quite low among rural households. This ﬁnding is not particularly surprising when it applies to non-
regulated ﬁnancial institutions, such as the Village Bank that operates in our study area, or Savings
and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs), which have somewhat charged history of ﬁnancial scandals,
up to the present day. In fact, the Village Bank in our study area suﬀered a ﬁnancial scandal at its
main branch (in market A) shortly after we started working in the area. The branch manager was
ﬁred for embezzlement, resulting in a months-long liquidity crisis during which existing customers
were barred from withdrawing funds over $10.50 a day per customer. During the crisis, the satellite
branch in market C was temporarily closed. Though nobody has oﬃcially lost deposits, liquidity
remains a problem to this day.
    What is more surprising is that trust in fully regulated ﬁnancial institutions also appears rel-
atively low, despite the fact that Kenya has had relatively few scandals speciﬁc to the regulated
banking sector in recent years. Why have rural populations not embraced banks that oﬀer insured
deposits? One hypothesis is that they do not make a clear distinction between regulated and un-
regulated institutions, and their somewhat well-founded mistrust of Village Banks and SACCOs
expands to the banking sector more generally. Another hypothesis is that they remember the vari-
ous banking crises that Kenya had in previous decades, particularly from 1983 until the late 1990s.
These crises were dramatic and hugely costly. For instance, 11 banks were put under liquidation
in 1993 alone (Central Bank of Kenya, 2009). Outright fraud during crises between 1993 and 1995
was estimated to cost 3.8% of GDP (Economist Intelligence Unit, 1995), and aﬀected 30% of total
bank ﬁnancial assets (Daumont et al. 2004). While many of these crises occurred a number of
years ago, it’s likely that memory of them continues to have some eﬀect on perceptions.
    Another reason that people might be wary is that Kenya has had a number of pyramid schemes
and other scams, including a number in recent years. The problem was so severe that the Govern-
ment put together a Task Force on Pyramid Schemes in 2009. The ﬁnal report of that Task Force
reported that over 148,000 people had invested over $90 million in various pyramid schemes. The
largest of these (DECI) had over 93,000 investors alone (Ministry of Co-Operative Development and
Marketing, 2009). Other scandals have involved corruption at very high levels. In the early 1990s,
a number of government oﬃcials, including the Governor of the Central Bank, were implicated in
the notorious “Goldenberg” scandal, which led to a minimum of $600 million in fraud (Warutere
2005).

  15
   Besides these two banks, credit is available from a third institution which until recently did not take deposits.
However, that organization lends only to women with licensed businesses.


                                                         8
     Note that these issues are not speciﬁc to Kenya. A number of other African countries had major
banking scandals during the 1980s and 1990s (Caprio and Klingebiel, 1997; Brownbridge, 1998),
several of which cost over 10% of GDP (Daumont et al., 2004). Within East Africa, Uganda had a
banking crisis in which four commercial banks, holding over 12% of the nation’s deposits, collapsed
over just 13 months in 1998 and 1999 (Habyarimana, 2005; Brownbridge 2002). Tanzania had a
major banking crisis in the late 1980s in which government-owned banks (accounting for 95% of
total bank assets) became insolvent. Total estimated losses from this crisis were equivalent to about
10% of GDP (Daumont et al. 2004). Also in Tanzania, a $120 million banking scandal in 2005 led
to the ﬁring of the Governor of the Central Bank (BBC, 2008).


3        Study Sample, Design and Data
3.1      Sample
We ﬁrst conducted a census of all households living within a 4 kilometer radius of the three market
centers in our study area. The census survey collected information on demographic characteristics of
the household, sources of income, as well as access to ﬁnancial services, knowledge and perceptions
of available ﬁnancial services, and saving practices more generally.
     A total of 1,898 households were surveyed during the census exercise. Table 1 presents some
summary statistics on those households. Panel A presents demographic information. The average
household had just below 6 members. Only a few households (11%) did not have a female head
living in the homestead, but around 31% of households did not have a male head living in the
homestead.16 Polygamy is still somewhat prevalent – 8% of households are polygamous. The
average household in the study area owned just under two acres of land, and had just above 4,000
Ksh ($42) in animal assets. Almost half (47%) of households owned a cell phone.
     Panel B of Table 1 presents statistics on access to banking services. Only 20% of households had
a member with a bank account, despite the fact that the average distance to the closest deposit-
taking ﬁnancial institution is only 1.6 kilometers, suggesting that physical access is unlikely to be
the barrier.
     Table 2 presents statistics at the individual level, separately for women (Panel A) and men
(Panel B). Average educational attainment is relatively low, with just about 6 years of education
for women and 8 years for men. Sixty-ﬁve percent of women and 90% of men were literate. Almost
three-quarters of women reported farming as their primary activity, while only a little over a third
of men did. Own enterprise was the primary occupation of 19% of women and 36% of men. The
remainder worked in physical day labor (mostly associated with agriculture), worked for a wage,
or had no job. Table 2 also includes individual-level statistics on access to banking. While 21% of
men had a bank account, only 10% of women did.
     To construct a sample, the primary eligibility criterion was that nobody in the household had a

    16
    This is the result of two main factors: (1) it is much less common for a widow to remarry than it is for a widower;
and (2) some men leave their family behind to work in urban areas.


                                                          9
bank account. However, we also decided to exclude all polygamous households and all households
with no female head. The rationale for doing this is that those two categories of households are
likely very diﬀerent from others, yet they are too few of them to do subgroup analysis. In the
case of polygamous households, another reason is that measuring expenditures and savings in such
households is diﬃcult and time-intensive.
    Given this eligibility criteria, 989 of the 1,898 households in the census were selected to partici-
pate in the randomized experiment, comprising 1,565 individuals. As is to be expected, households
in the experimental sample are poorer, less educated, and more likely to be farmers than other
households (see Column 2 in Tables 1 and 2).

3.2     Experimental Design
3.2.1    Savings Experiment

After constructing the sample, we randomly selected individuals for the savings intervention. Ran-
domization was done at the individual (rather than household) level, stratiﬁed by household com-
position (single female-headed or dual-headed), primary occupation, and market center.
    The savings intervention was rolled out between May and June 2010. Those individuals who
were selected for this intervention received a nominal, non-transferable voucher for a free savings
account. For those living within 4 kilometers of Market A (where the Commercial Bank has an
ATM), the voucher was redeemable at either the Village Bank or the Commercial Bank. For
everybody else, the voucher was for the Village Bank only. The experiment made it ﬁnancially
costless to open an account: the vouchers covered all account-opening fees (where applicable),
including the minimum balance requirement.
    The vouchers were delivered to people in their homes. During that visit, individuals received
information on how the bank and the account work, and when and how to redeem the voucher.17
    Among households with no male head, 50% were randomly selected to receive an account
voucher, which was given to the female head. Among households with both a female and a male
head, 20% received no voucher, 30% received two vouchers (one for each head), and 50% received
one voucher (in 25% of households, the male received the voucher; in the other 25%, only the female
received the voucher). In total, 55% of the sample was selected to receive vouchers.

3.2.2    Credit Experiment

In February 2011, a second randomization was conducted to lower informational and ﬁnancial
barriers to credit. The intervention diﬀered slightly according to whether individuals had received
the savings intervention 9 months earlier.
    Among those who had not received the savings intervention, half were randomly selected to
receive information about local credit opportunities. Trained staﬀ visited those individuals at their
  17
     The vouchers expired after 2 weeks. In practice, most of those who redeemed did so immediately. Commercial
Bank customers had to visit the branch twice, once to redeem the voucher and again two weeks later in order to pick
up their ATM cards and receive training in their use.


                                                        10
home and delivered a detailed script explaining the rules and procedures for obtaining a loan from
either of the two local institutions. No ﬁnancial assistance was given, however.
    Among those who had received the savings intervention, half were selected to receive the same
ﬁnancial information script as above. However, they were also given a voucher redeemable for one
free share at the Village Bank (valued at 300 Ksh, or $3.20). As discussed in Section 2.1.2, one
of the requirements for getting a loan from the Village Bank is that an individual must purchase
a share (in addition to having a bank account). In particular, the maximum amount that anyone
can borrow is four times the amount of share capital they own. While the share is not the only
requirement to get a loan (in particular, people must form a group with four other bank clients who
approve their loan and act as guarantors), getting a free share does lower the barrier to getting a
loan.

3.3     Data
We use three main sources of data in this project. First, we have background information (described
above) from the census. Second, we have administrative data on deposits, withdrawals and loan
applications from the bank. All study participants that opened an account agreed to sign a waiver
allowing their bank to release their bank statements to the research team. We use these bank
statements to monitor the saving activity as well as the credit history of our restricted experimental
sample. Third, a semi-structured survey was administered to a randomly selected half of the
restricted experimental sample after 9 months. The survey asked respondents open-ended questions
about their current savings practices, perceived barriers to saving, and perceptions of the various
saving mechanisms available to them. For those who had received an account voucher but had not
redeemed it, the survey also asked why they had not opened an account. The survey also included
a number of questions about familiarity with and interest in local credit options.


4       Rural Households and their Money: A Snapshot
In Tables 3 and 4 we present information from the census to show how rural households in the study
area save. Table 3 presents means at the household level, separately by household type. Table 4
present means at the individual level, separately by gender.
    The ﬁrst striking observation in Table 3 is the fact that access to formal saving services is very
limited. Among the 20% of households which have at least one family member with a savings
account, only about 12% have accounts in a commercial bank (this includes all commercial banks
in Kenya, not just the bank which participated in the experiment), 8% in the Village Bank that
participated in the experiment, and 3% in the post oﬃce savings bank. Nobody saves in a micro-
ﬁnance institution. Note that some households have multiple accounts, so these categories are not
exclusive.
    Interestingly, 25% of households have a mobile money account. However, most Kenyan house-
holds do not currently save in such accounts and instead use them only for transfers (Mbiti and


                                                 11
Weil, 2011).18 Nevertheless, the relatively high penetration of such accounts in even very rural
areas is potentially very promising.
    In contrast to the low rates of participation in formal savings, savings through informal mech-
anisms is quite important– 56% of households have at least one member who participates in a
ROSCA.19 A ROSCA (Rotating Savings and Credit Association) is a savings group (composed of
10 to 20 members, typically) that meets on a regular basis; at each meeting, group members make a
ﬁxed, mandatory contribution which goes into a “pot” that is then assigned to one of the members.
Each member gets the pot in turn. A ROSCA cycle thus requires as many meetings as there are
members. Once a cycle is complete, a new cycle can start. Though the structure of ROSCAs varies
from place to place, most ROSCAs in this part of Kenya use a predetermined order to allocate the
savings pot. Many households (52% of the population) also save in animals, which can be used
both as a form of savings and as productive assets.
    The amounts saved in ROSCAs and animals are not trivial– the average household reports
saving over 7,200 Ksh in ROSCAs ($76 US) over the past year and owning about 4,300 Ksh ($45
US) worth of animals. These two forms of informal savings are relatively illiquid, however. Selling
animals quickly in response to negative income shocks is not easy, especially if the shock is an
aggregate shock at the community level (since the market may be ﬂooded with people selling
animals at that time). In the case of ROSCAs, since they typically have a predetermined order,
it is impossible to access the money immediately if an emergency comes up. Thus, a more liquid
savings option (such as a bank account) could still be useful to people.
    The breakdown by household type in Panels B and C of Table 3 shows that female-headed
households are much less likely to be banked than dual-headed households (9% vs. 25%). They are
also less likely to use informal saving mechanisms, suggesting that their overall saving rate is lower.
The individual-level means presented in Table 4 suggest that this gap between household types is
essentially driven by a gender divide: only 10% of women have banking accounts, compared to 21%
of men. Similarly, only 12% of women have mobile money accounts, compared to 28% of men.
    There are also major diﬀerences between those who are primarily farmers and those who are
not. We present the statistics disaggregated by gender and farming status in Appendix Table A1.
Only 8% of farmers have savings accounts, compared to 23% of non-farmers. Most striking is that
only 6% of female farmers have accounts. Farmers are also much less likely to participate in a
ROSCA or have a mobile money account.
    Given the low rate of banking, and the fact that the most common informal saving alternatives
are relatively illiquid, a key question is how people deal with emergencies that require immediate
liquidity. To shed some light on this issue, our census survey asked people “If you absolutely needed
1,000 Ksh ($10.5 US) right now, where would you get the money?” We allowed people to list as

   18
      As discussed in the introduction, formal banks in Kenya have lobbied against the entry of M-Pesa. In part to
avoid this controversy, M-Pesa markets itself as a service for transferring money and not for saving. This (along with
the withdrawal fees) is likely a big reason that people do not much use M-Pesa as a savings vehicle.
   19
      Besley, Coate and Loury (1993), Anderson and Baland (2002) and Gugerty (2007) discuss various reasons why
so many people in developing countries participate in ROSCAs.


                                                         12
many sources as they wanted (so that the categories are not exclusive). The results are presented
in Table 5. We ﬁnd that only 13% of people would be able to get even part of the money from
savings. Most people would ask others for help, while others would have to sell a household asset
or work more. Although it’s conceivable that people could fully make up for a 1,000 Ksh shortfall
by relying on others, nearly every study of inter-household risk coping suggests that this is unlikely.
Thus, it seems likely that increasing savings would better allow people to cope with shocks.


5     Understanding Low Levels of Formal Banking
This section discusses factors which partially explain the low observed rate of formal banking. We
start by describing our baseline survey evidence. We ﬁnd that at the time our study began people
knew very little about local ﬁnancial institutions, suggesting that earlier marketing activities by
these ﬁnancial institutions, if any, had been mostly unsuccessful. We then present evidence from
the randomized savings experiment. Overall, while we ﬁnd that reducing the account opening
fees and minimizing the hassle of opening an account did induce a minority to start saving in the
bank, we ﬁnd that most people did not use their accounts. Survey evidence suggests that the
major reasons people did not use the bank is that they were concerned about high withdrawal fees
and poor service, and that they did not trust their money with the bank. Note that given our
experimental design, it is not surprising that distance to a local banking option does not appear as
a major factor, as the sample was drawn from villages within walking distance of the bank.

5.1   Survey Evidence: Baseline Interviews
Table 6 presents data from the census on knowledge of and trust in the Village Bank, separately
by branch. At the time of the census, the Village Bank had been established in market center A
for nearly 10 years, in market center B for about 18 months, and in market center C for 10 months.
Despite this, only 64% of household heads in markets A and B, and 51% in market C, had ever
heard of the Village Bank. Even those who had heard of the bank did not know enough about it to
have an opinion about it. Thus, when those who had at least heard of the Village Bank were asked
if they would trust the bank with their money, 43% said they didn’t know enough about the bank
to know. Around 49% said they would trust the bank, while the remaining 8% said they would
not. The main reasons for not trusting the bank were lack of familiarity and being worried about
embezzlement of funds.
    Table 7 addresses those in the experimental sample, who were all unbanked at the time of the
census, and to whom a slightly more detailed survey was administered. In this sample, we asked
about knowledge of both the Village Bank and the Commercial Bank. Unsurprisingly, familiarity
with local ﬁnancial institutions is lower among these unbanked individuals than in the full census
sample. Only about half of household heads had heard of the Village Bank across the three market
centers, though awareness was slightly higher in Market A (where the Village Bank had been
established for longer), and lower in Market C (where the Village Bank had only recently started


                                                  13
a deposit-only branch). Very few individuals knew the details of the services oﬀered by the Village
Bank, however – only 8% of those who had heard of the bank knew the cost of opening an account.
   Despite the fact that the Commercial Bank, located in market A, had only opened in late 2008
(8 years after the Village Bank), by 2009 it had the same level of name recognition as the Village
Bank. Just as with the Village Bank, however, people knew very little about the products oﬀered at
the Commercial Bank: none of the respondents knew that accounts were free (with only a minimum
balance requirement).
   Though people do not know much about either bank, most people tend to prefer the Commercial
Bank (likely because it is a large, well-established bank with a national presence). When asked
which institution they would prefer to have an account in, close to two-thirds of respondents said
they would choose the Commercial Bank over the Village Bank.

5.2   Experimental Evidence
The randomized savings experiment allows us to test the extent to which eliminating opening
fees, facilitating account opening, and providing information can increase access to formal banking.
Table 8 presents ﬁgures on take-up of the experimental oﬀer of a free bank account. A relatively
large fraction of individuals elected to open an account: overall take-up was 62%. In market A,
where both banks are available, the Commercial Bank was the favorite choice: 43% of people
opened an account at the Commercial Bank, compared to only 17% at the Village Bank. Across
the branches, take-up was lowest in market C, where the Village Bank only oﬀers partial service.
   However, many of those who opened accounts did not actively use them. In Table 8, we deﬁne
an account as “active” if the respondent made at least two deposits in the year following the account
opening date. We ﬁnd that only 28% of opened accounts were active. Since only 62% of people
even opened accounts, this means that the overall usage rate was only 0.28 x 0.62 = 18%. In Table
9, we show the results separately for men and women (pooling all the market centers together).
While women were slightly less likely to open accounts than men, they were 10 percentage points
more likely to actively use the account if they opened one. Overall, the active take-up rate was
thus higher among women than men (19.7% versus 14.0%), but still relatively modest among both
groups. Overall, these results suggest that entry costs – be it the cost of acquiring information, the
opening fees (including minimum balance requirement) or the administrative hassle of opening an
account – explain only about 1/5th of the low banking rates observed in our study area.

5.3   More Survey Evidence: Debrieﬁng Interviews
To understand what other supply factors explain the relatively low demand for formal banking
we observe once the entry costs were experimentally removed, we asked respondents, in an open-
ended way, what their concerns were with the various saving mechanisms available to them. We
asked these questions to a random subset of our restricted experimental sample. The results are
presented in Table 10. We present the results separately for those in the control group (who did not
receive information and assistance with account opening), those in the treatment group who did not

                                                 14
actively use the account (whom we call non-compliers), and those in the treatment group who did
use the accounts (whom we call compliers). We present results for the three formal and quasi-formal
banking options available: the Commercial Bank, the Village Bank, and Mobile Money.
   The main concerns raised with formal banks are transaction fees, unreliability, and risk of
embezzlement. The relative importance of these concerns varies substantially between the two
ﬁnancial institutions in our study area. Transaction fees are the primary concern with the Com-
mercial Bank, which charges a ﬂat ﬁxed fee of 30 Ksh per withdrawal at the ATM, making it very
costly to make small withdrawals. While these withdrawal fees could act as a commitment device
to not withdraw money until a relatively large lump sum has been saved, they can also deter people
from saving in the account if they anticipate needing small sums to deal with emergencies as they
arise. This is in line with a related study we conducted in this part of Kenya, in which we ﬁnd that
the cost of limiting liquidity exceeds its beneﬁt for many people (Dupas and Robinson, 2011).
   For the Village Bank, while fees remain a major concern, substantial fractions of people also
report unreliability and risk of embezzlement as problems. Among the non-compliers, 37% cite
unreliability and 24% cite risk of embezzlement, suggesting that many of those who did not actively
take-up Village Banking thought service quality was poor or lacked trust in the institution.
   In regards to mobile banking, the most common concerns are that it requires owning a cell
phone and that there are network or liquidity issues (i.e. the agent runs out of “e-ﬂoat”, to pay
out withdrawals). Fees are less of a concern for mobile money banking than for formal banks,
even though in practice the fees associated with mobile money fall somewhere in between the fees
charged at the Village Bank and those charged at the Commercial Bank. Notably, trust in mobile
banking is extremely high (another promising sign if mobile money is eventually to be mobilized
for savings as well as transfers).
   Table 11 provides further qualitative evidence on these issues by disaggregating results by
market center. Recall that there was a withdrawal freeze in the wake of an embezzlement scandal
in Market A and that the service in Market C is spotty, so we might expect people to trust the
Village Bank least in Market A and ﬁnd it most unreliable in Market C. Interestingly, Table 11
shows that this is true only of people who actively used the accounts. Though the sample of people
who use their account is obviously selected, one interpretation of these ﬁndings is that people’s
experience with the Village Bank reinforced the mistrust in the institution.
   Table 11 also reports responses to a question in which we asked people for their preferred
savings options. All in all, when asked what their preferred savings mechanism would be if they
could choose, over 40% of respondents answered “a commercial bank.” A sizeable fraction also
reported the Village Bank. As expected, this share is higher in the control and compliers groups
than in the non-compliers group. Somewhat surprisingly, mobile money banking was the least
favorite mechanism, behind grain storage and ROSCA participation. In fact, almost 40% of the
control group reported informal options (animals, ROSCAs, or saving in grain) as their preferred
saving tool. Given the risks associated with these informal saving mechanisms, the fact that they
remain preferred is suggestive that the formal products being oﬀered are insuﬃcient for many


                                                15
people. This is consistent with the ﬁnding that close to a quarter of respondents said they had
been discouraged to open a bank account by a friend.

5.4   Open questions
The evidence presented thus far has focused on supply issues. These issues only partially explain
the low formal savings rates we observe in our experiment, however. Many of those in the treatment
group who do not list trust, fees, or reliability as concerns still do not use the accounts. When asked
directly what keeps them from saving, many of them say that their expenses are too high or that
their income is simply too low for them to save at all. However, it is hard to know how to interpret
these responses. Existing evidence strongly suggests that even extremely poor people can save. For
instance, research in the Gambia (Shipton, 1990) and Bangladesh, India, and South Africa (Collins
et al., 2009) demonstrates that poor households do ﬁnd ways to save, albeit often through informal
mechanisms. Moreover, Banerjee and Duﬂo (2007) ﬁnd that even among the poorest households
– those living at or under $1 per person per day – the majority don’t exhaust all their income on
basic necessities.
   Ultimately, the low take-up rate in this study begs the question: is a savings account in a
bank relatively far from home well-tailored for people who can only save in very small increments?
Providing a more convenient place to save, or stronger incentives to make deposits, may be more
eﬀective. For example, in previous work, we ﬁnd that people save quite readily if provided with a
lock box and key which they can keep at home (Dupas and Robinson, 2011). Furthermore, providing
people with a credit incentive to make deposits, and social pressure to continue making them, was
extremely eﬀective in mobilizing savings. Similarly, Duﬂo et al. (2011) ﬁnd that providing people
with small incentives to set aside money for fertilizer when people have money (after harvest)
increases fertilizer investment. Other recent papers have shown how prompting people to save
(Atkinson et al., 2010) or providing people with reminders to save can also be quite eﬀective (Kast
et al 2010; Karlan et al. 2011).
   Indeed, in countries like the US, where many transactions are conducted electronically, it is has
been well documented that savings can be most eﬀectively mobilized when they are “unseen,” for
example when wage increases are automatically put into a savings account (Thaler and Benartzi,
2004) or when people are automatically opt in to a certain 401(k) savings level (Carroll et al.,
2009). Designing such products in a much more cash-based economy may be diﬃcult, but is worth
exploring. In fact, the value of mobile money (such as M-Pesa in Kenya) may be largely in making
savings more electronic; it might be less costly, both in terms of transportation and time, to transfer
an electronic balance to a linked savings account than to physically take cash to the bank during
operating hours. It may also be less painful psychologically to devote electronic money to savings
rather than to physically put cash into a savings account.




                                                  16
6         Understanding Low Borrowing Rates
While much of our focus has been on savings, the ﬂipside of savings is credit. Returns to capital
have been estimated to be quite high in the study area (as discussed in footnote 12), higher than
the APR on loans oﬀered by the two ﬁnancial institutions (which vary from 16-19.5 percent APR).
What keeps people from taking out such loans and reaping high returns?
     We examine this issue in Tables 12-14. To start, Table 12 describes familiarity with local credit
options among our restricted experimental sample of unbanked households. As with savings, people
have very limited information about credit options. Only 64% think there is a local credit option
and only 38% (41%) correctly identiﬁed the Village Bank (Commercial Bank), respectively, as a
credit option. Only 15% said that they knew the procedure to get a loan; interestingly, only 7%
could correctly describe the procedure when asked.20
     To gauge potential interest in loans, we asked people if they were interested in a loan at 1.5%
monthly interest, with or without collateral requirements. While 74% said that they were interested
if no collateral was required, this dropped to only 32% with collateral. We also asked people if they
thought that they could qualify for a loan, and 37% said yes. Yet only 6% had ever applied for
loan.
     Given this low level of information, we implemented an intervention to improve information
and access to credit (the details are presented in Section 3.2.2). We present two sets of results
of this intervention. First, in Table 13, we report the answers to questions we asked participants
immediately after they received detailed information about local credit opportunities. While a
majority of people were interested in a loan at the Village Bank, far fewer were interested at the
Commercial Bank. This is likely primarily due to the fact that the Commercial Bank only lends to
people with an existing business, and as shown in Table 2, only 15% of women and 36% of men in
our restricted experimental sample had a business at baseline (farming is not considered a business
by the bank). What’s more, most of those have a very small market vending business with very low
levels of working capital, and they would most likely not quality for a loan from the Commercial
Bank in any case. It is also likely that people perceive it as more diﬃcult to qualify for a loan from
the Commercial Bank even aside from the business requirement.
     Among those interested in borrowing, we asked what they would want to borrow for. Few people
were interested in loans for small investments like agricultural inputs. People were much more likely
to report wanting to start a business or adding to business inventory with a loan. Whether these
types of goals are feasible for such borrowers is an open question.
     The second set of results from the experimental credit intervention is presented in Table 14,
and concerns the take-up of the “share capital” voucher we gave to a random subset of those who
had already been oﬀered an account voucher. By redeeming this voucher, people would be credited
with one Village Bank share (valued at 300 Ksh) and thus be eligible to borrow up to four times the
value of the share (1,200 Ksh). Note, however, that this is much smaller than the median desired

    20
         As shown in Appendix Table A2, these levels are even lower among farmers.


                                                          17
loan size listed in Table 13, which was 10,000 Ksh. Table 14 shows that, while 87% accepted the
voucher when it was given to them, only 40% redeemed it, and as of the time of writing (6 months
after vouchers had been distributed), only 3% of individuals had started the process of applying for
a loan by making an inquiry, and only 1 person (out of 358) had applied and been granted a loan.
    While we have not yet followed up with these individuals directly to ask why they did not end
up applying for a loan, we did ask people about concerns about taking out loans at the time the
vouchers (and information) were given out. These results are reported in Table 15. Overwhelmingly,
people report that they are afraid of losing collateral or that taking out a loan is risky. Thus, even
at relatively low interest rates, the fear of losing assets overwhelmed loan demand in our study
area. Clearly, this creates a serious problem in generating a market for credit, since the interest
rate would have to be much higher if loans were not collateralized.


7    Conclusion
Without a safe place to save up money, it may be very diﬃcult for people to take advantage of high-
return investments of many types. Likewise, without a safe place to keep an emergency cash buﬀer,
vulnerability to shocks might be very high. Recognizing this, policymakers and international aid
organizations have begun to devote attention to expanding access to ﬁnancial services in developing
countries, especially in rural areas where access continues to be extremely limited. This paper
shows that unless serious attention is paid to the reliability and quality of ﬁnancial services oﬀered,
simply expanding access by reducing monetary or time costs will fail to eﬀectively achieve ﬁnancial
inclusion.
    Our analysis generates several important prescriptions for eﬀectively expanding ﬁnancial services
to the poor. First, trust is an important reason that people do not use current banking services.
Providing stronger consumer protection through tighter regulation and deposit insurance could be
very important. Second, many people are uninformed about banking options (in part because they
have little or no experience with them). Better marketing from the banks themselves might be
warranted. Finally, more attention should be paid to the types of products that banks provide.
While basic savings accounts do appear to be useful to a minority, more sophisticated products
might be necessary for others (just as they are for many people in developed countries). For
example, many people in Kenya save to deal with health emergencies, which are very common. For
them, putting money into a bank that does not oﬀer withdrawal services at night or on weekends
and that has big withdrawal fees might not be very attractive. Similarly, people whose income is
seasonal (such as farmers, who make up the great majority of the rural poor in Sub-Saharan Africa)
might beneﬁt from products that provide stronger incentives to save as soon as they have money.
    In this sense, it is good news that as many as 18% of people in our poor, rural sample took
up and actively used basic savings accounts when they could access them for free. However, the
evidence we presented suggests that this is a lower bound on potential demand for formal saving
products. Serious attention should be paid to improving the delivery of ﬁnancial services – doing


                                                  18
so could improve the lives of millions of people.




                                                    19
References
      [1] Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Robert Cull, Jun “QJ” Qian, Lemma Senbet, and
             Patricio Valenzuela (2011). “Improving Access to Banking: Evidence from Kenya.”
             Working paper.
      [2] Anagol, Santosh and Christopher Udry (2006): “The Return to Capital in Ghana.”
             American Economic Review 96(2), 388-393.
      [3] Anderson, Siwan and Jean-Marie Baland (2002). “The Economics of Roscas and Intra-
             household Resource Allocation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 963-995.
      [4] Aportela, Fernando (1999): “Eﬀects of Financial Access on Savings by Low-Income
             People. Mimeo, Banco de México.
      [5] Armendáriz, Beatriz and Jonathan Morduch (2007).The Economics of Microﬁnance
             (2nd Edition). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      [6] Ashraf, Nava (2009). “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An
             Experimental Study in the Philippines.” American Economic Review 99, no. 4
             (September 2009): 1245-1277.
      [7] Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. (2006). “Tying Odysseus to the Mast:
             Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Jour-
             nal of Economics 121, 673-697.
      [8] Atkinson, Jesse, Alain de Janvry, Craig McIntosh and Elisabeth Sadoulet (2010).
             “Creating Incentives To Save Among Microﬁnance Borrowers: A Behavioral Ex-
             periment From Guatemala”. Working Paper.
      [9] Baland, Jean-Marie, Catherine Guirkinger, and Charlotte Mali (2007). “Pretending to
             be poor: borrowing to escape forced solidarity in credit cooperatives in Cameroon,”
             forthcoming, Economic Development and Cultural Change.
     [10] Banerjee, Abhijit, Duﬂo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan (2010).
             “The Miracle of Microﬁnance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” mimeo,
             MIT.
     [11] Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duﬂo (2007). “The Economic Lives of the Poor”. Journal
             of Economic Perspectives 21, 141-167.
     [12] BBC (2008) “Tanzania in bank scandal sacking”BBC News,                  January 10.
             http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7181065.stm
     [13] Besley, Timothy, Stephen Coate, and Glenn Loury (1993). “The Economics of Rotating
             Savings and Credit Associations,” American Economic Review, 83(4): 792–810.
     [14] Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (2010). “Melinda Gates Challenges Global Lead-
             ers:   Create Savings Accounts and Bring Financial Security to the World’s


                                              20
       Poorest.” Press Release (November 16). http://www.gatesfoundation.org/press-
       releases/Pages/melinda-gates-at-global-savings-forum-101116.aspx.
[15] Brownbridge, Martin (1998) “The Causes of Financial Distress in Local Banks in
       Africa and Implications for Prudential Policy.” UNCTAD Discussion Paper Series,
       No. 132.
[16] Brownbridge, Martin (2002). “Resolving Bank Failures in Uganda: Policy Lessons
       from Recent Bank Failures.” Development Policy Review 20 (3): 279-29.
[17] Bruhn, Miriam, and Inessa Love (2009). “The economic impact of banking the un-
       banked: evidence from Mexico”. World Bank Policy Research working paper no.
       4981.
[18] Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande (2005). “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from
       the Indian Social Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 780-
       795.
[19] Caprio, Gerard, Jr. and Daniela Klingebiel (1997). “Bank Insolvency: Bad Luck, Bad
       Policy, or Bad Banking?” in M. Bruno and B. Pleskovic, eds., Annual World Bank
       Conference on Development Economics. Washington, DC: World Bank, pp. 79-104.
[20] Carroll, Gabriel , James J. Choi, David Laibson, BrigittMadrian and Andrew Metrick
       (2009). “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions: Theory and Evidence from 401(k)
       Saving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1639-74.
[21] Central Bank of Kenya (2009) “About DPF [Deposit Production Fund].” Accessed on
       August 30, 2011 at: http://www.centralbank.go.ke/dpfb/Default.aspx.
[22] Chaia, Alberto, Aparna Dalal, Tony Goland, Maria Jose Gonzalez, Jonathan Morduch,
       and Robert Schiﬀ (2009). “Half the World is Unbanked.” Financial Access Initiative
       Framing Note.
[23] Collins, Daryl, Morduch, Jonathan, Rutherford, Stuart, Ruthven, Orlanda (2009).
       Portfolios of the Poor: How the World’s Poor Live on $2 a Day. Princeton Uni-
       versity Press, Princeton.
[24] Crepon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duﬂo and William Pariente (2011). “Impact
       of Microcredit in Rural Areas of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized Evalua-
       tion”. Mimeo, MIT.
[25] Daumont, Roland, Françoise Le Gall, and François Leroux (2004). "Banking in Sub-
       Saharan Africa: What Went Wrong?" IMF Working Paper.
[26] de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2008). “Returns to Cap-
       ital in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 123 (4): 1329-1372.



                                       21
[27] de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2009). “Getting Credit
        to High Return Microentrepreneurs: The Results of an Information Intervention.”
        Forthcoming, World Bank Economic Review.
[28] Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Baybars Karacaovali, and Luc Laeven (2005). “Deposit Insur-
        ance around the World: A Comprehensive Database.” World Bank Working Paper
        Series #3628.
[29] Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Robert Cull, and Jonathan Morduch (2009). “Microﬁnance
        Meets the Market.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1): 167-192.
[30] Duﬂo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson (2011). “Nudging Farmers
        to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” Forthcoming,
        American Economic Review.
[31] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2009). “Savings Constraints and Microen-
        terprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.”NBER Work-
        ing Paper #14693.
[32] Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson (2011). “Why Don’t the Poor Save More?
        Evidence from Health Savings Experiments.” NBER Working Paper #17255.
[33] Economist Intelligence Unit (1995). Country Report - Kenya, fourth quarter (Nairobi).
[34] Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher Woodruﬀ.
        (2011). “When is capital enough to get female microenterprises growing? Evidence
        from a randomized experiment in Ghana.” Mimeo, University of Oxford.
[35] Ferreira, Francisco and Norbert Schady (2009). “Aggregate Economic Shocks, Child
        Schooling, and Child Health.” World Bank Research Observer 24 (2): 147-181.
[36] Gugerty, Mary Kay (2007). “You can’t save alone: commitment in rotating savings
        and credit associations in Kenya.”Economic Development and Cultural Change 55:
        251-282.
[37] Habyarimana, James (2005). “The Beneﬁts of Banking Relationships: Evidence from
        Uganda’s Banking Crisis.” Working paper, Georgetown.
[38] Honohan, Patrick (2008). “Cross-Country Variation in Household Access to Financial
        Services.” Journal of Banking and Finance 32 (11): 2493-2500.
[39] Jack, William and Tavneet Suri (2011). “Mobile Money: The Economics of M-PESA.”
        Working paper, Georgetown and MIT.
[40] Johnston, Don Jr. and Jonathan Morduch (2008). “The Unbanked: Evidence from
        Indonesia.” World Bank Economic Review 22 (3): 517-537.
[41] Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2010). “Expanding Microenterprise Credit Ac-
        cess: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts in Manila.”
        mimeo, Dartmouth and Yale.

                                       22
[42] Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman
       (2011). “Getting to the Top of the Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving.” Work-
       ing paper.
[43] Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz (2010). “Under-savers anonymous:
       Evidence on self-help groups and peer pressure as a savings commitment device.”
       Working paper.
[44] Kendall, Jake, Nataliya Mylenko and Alejandro Ponce (2010).“Measuring Financial
       Access around the World”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5253.
[45] Kneiding, Christoph and Richard Rosenberg (2008). “Variations in Microcredit Inter-
       est Rates.” CGAP Brief (July).
[46] Kremer, Michael, Jean Lee, Jonathan Robinson and Olga Rostapshova (2011). “The
       Return to Capital for Small Retailers in Kenya: Evidence from Inventories.” Work-
       ing paper.
[47] Kumar, Anjali, Ajai Nair, Adam Parsons, and Eduardo Urdapilleta (2006).“Expanding
       Bank Outreach through Retail Partnerships: Correspondent Banking in Brazil.”
       World Bank Working Paper No. 85.
[48] Mas, Ignatio and Dan Radcliﬀe (2010). “Mobile Payments go Viral: M-PESA in
       Kenya.” Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
[49] Mbiti, Isaac and David Weil (2011). “Mobile Banking: The Impact of M-Pesa in
       Kenya.” NBER Working Paper No. 17129.
[50] McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2008). “Experimental Evidence on Re-
       turns to Capital and Access to Finance in Mexico,” World Bank Economic Review
       22 (3): 457-482.
[51] McKinsey and Company (2010). Global Financial Inclusion. Accessed on August 29,
       2011 at:     http://www.mckinsey.com/clientservice/Social_Sector/our_practices/
       Economic_Development/Knowledge_Highlights/~/media/Reports/SSO/GFI_v13_complete.ashx
[52] Ministry of Co-Operative Development and Marketing [Kenya] (2009). Report of the
       Taskforce on Pyramid Schemes. Government of Kenya: Nairobi.
[53] Morduch, Jonathan (1999). “The Microﬁnance Promise.” Journal of Economic Liter-
       ature 37 (4): 159-1614.
[54] Nguyen Tien Hung, G. (2004). “Bank on Wheels.” Finance & Development (June).
[55] Opiyo, Dave (2010). “Banking via phone made possible.” Daily Nation (May 18).
[56] Prina, Sylvia (2011). “Do Simple Savings Accounts Help the Poor to Save? Evidence
       from a Field Experiment in Nepal”. Mimeo, Case Western Reserve University.
[57] Robinson, Jonathan and Ethan Yeh (2011). “Transactional Sex as a Response to Risk
       in Western Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1): 35-64.

                                        23
[58] Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin (1993), “Credit Market Constraints, Con-
       sumption Smoothing, and the Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-
       Income Countries: Investments in Bullocks in India,” Journal of Political Economy
       101 (2): 223-244.
[59] Ruiz, Claudia (2010). “From Pawn Shops to Banks: The Impact of Formal Credit on
       Informal Households.” Mimeo, UCLA.
[60] Rutherford, Stuart (2000). The Poor and Their Money. Oxford University Press, New
       Delhi.
[61] Shipton, Parker (1990), “How Gambians Save -and What Their Strategies Imply for
       International Aid.” Agriculture and Rural Development Department, The World
       Bank, WPS 395
[62] Stuart, Guy, Michael Ferguson and Monique Cohen (2011). “Cash In, Cash Out: Fi-
       nancial Transactions and Access to Finance in Malawi.” Financial Services Assess-
       ment Report. Accessed on August 29, 2011 at http://www.fsassessment.umd.edu.
[63] Thaler, R., Benartzi, S. (2004). “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics
       to Increase Employee Saving”. Journal of Political Economy 112, S164-S187.
[64] Thyagarajan, S. and Jayaram Venkatesan (2008). “Cost-Beneﬁt and Usage Behaviour
       Analysis of No Frills Accounts: A Study Report on Cuddalore District.” Working
       paper, Centre for Micro Finance.
[65] Warutere, P (2005). “The Goldenberg conspiracy: The game of paper gold, money
       and power.” Mars Group Kenya Occasional Paper 117.




                                      24
Table 1. Baseline household characteristics
                                                                           (1)                               (2)
                                                                                                  Restricted Experimental
                                                                      Full Sample
                                                                                                           Sample
Panel A. Demographic Information
Total Household size                                                      5.83                             5.67
                                                                         (3.05)                            (2.95)
No Male Head                                                              0.31                             0.38

No Female Head                                                            0.11                              0.03

Polygamous household                                                      0.08                              0.00

Number of children                                                        3.38                              3.34
                                                                         (2.34)                            (2.28)
Household health expenditures last month (in Ksh)                         683                               508
                                                                         (3058)                            (1502)
Household treats drinking water with chlorine                             0.43                              0.39

Iron roof at home                                                         0.48                              0.45

Cement floor at home                                                      0.17                              0.13

HH has cell phone                                                         0.47                              0.40

Value of physical assets (in Ksh)                                        10482                              9073
                                                                         (9852)                            (8448)
Value of animals (in Ksh)                                                4142                               4277
                                                                         (9278)                            (9424)
Land holdings (acres)                                                     1.90                              1.74
                                                                         (2.86)                            (1.90)
Panel B. Access to Banking
At least one member of household has a bank account                       0.20                              0.00

Distance to closest deposit-taking branch (in km)                         1.60                             1.60
                                                                         (0.74)                            (0.71)
Distance to closest branch offering withdrawals (in km)                   2.78                             3.01
                                                                         (2.32)                            (2.45)
Panel C. Eligibility for Experimental Treatments
Eligible for randomized saving and credit experiments                     0.52                              1.00


Number of Households                                                        1898                             989
Standard deviations in parentheses. The exchange rate at the time of the study was around 80Ksh to US$1 on average.




                                                             25
Table 2. Baseline Individual characteristics
                                                            (1)                              (2)
                                                                                  Restricted Experimental
                                                        Full Sample
                                                                                           Sample
Panel A. Women
Age                                                        39.27                            40.39
                                                          (15.98)                          (17.02)
Years of education                                          6.09                             5.34
                                                           (3.88)                           (3.65)
Can write in Swahili1                                       0.65                             0.58

Primary Occupation:
    Farming                                                0.72                             0.78
    Own enterprise                                         0.19                             0.15
    Physical labor                                         0.02                             0.02
    Employee                                               0.03                             0.00
    None                                                   0.05                             0.05

Has bank account                                           0.10                             0.00

Included in Experimental Sample                            0.56                             1.00

Number of Women                                            1686                             949

Panel B. Men
Age                                                        41.73                            40.02
                                                          (15.28)                          (15.33)
Years of education                                          8.10                             7.35
                                                           (3.58)                           (3.25)
Can write in Swahili                                        0.90                             0.90

Primary Occupation:
    Farming                                                0.38                             0.43
    Own enterprise                                         0.36                             0.36
    Physical labor                                         0.10                             0.11
    Employee                                               0.10                             0.05
    None                                                   0.06                             0.04

Has bank account                                           0.21                             0.02

Included in Experimental Sample                            0.47                             1.00

Number of Men                                                 1299                           606
Standard deviations in parentheses.
1
  We use writing in Swahili as a proxy for literacy because we have fewer observations with data on being
able to read in Swahili. Results look very similar with alternate definitions, however.




                                                     26
Table 3. How do Households Save?
                                                                      All              # obs
Panel A. All Households
Informal Savings
Owns Animals                                                          0.50             1806
Value of Animals (for those who own)                                  4358             1751
                                                                     (9469)
Someone in Household Participates in ROSCA                            0.53             2984
ROSCA contributions in past year (if any)                             7231             924
                                                                    (13121)
Formal Savings
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                     0.20              1752
   Has Account in Commercial Bank                                    0.12              1752
   Has Account in Post Bank                                          0.03              1752
   Has Account in Village Bank                                       0.08              1752
   Has Account with MFI                                              0.00              1752
   Has Account Elsewhere                                             0.03              1752
Has Mobile Money Account                                             0.25              1752

Panel B. Married Households
Informal Savings
Owns Animals                                                          0.52             1195
Value of Animals (for those who own)                                  4762             1153
                                                                     (9944)
Someone in Household Participates in ROSCA                            0.56             2388
ROSCA contributions in past year (if any)                             8361             675
                                                                    (14812)
Formal Savings
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                     0.25              1169
   Has Account in Commercial Bank                                    0.16              1169
   Has Account in Post Bank                                          0.03              1169
   Has Account in Village Bank                                       0.09              1169
   Has Account with MFI                                              0.00              1169
   Has Account Elsewhere                                             0.04              1169
Has Mobile Money Account                                             0.32              1169

Panel C. Single Headed Female Households
Informal Savings
Owns Animals                                                         0.47              501
Value of Animals (for those who own)                                 3637              489
                                                                    (8286)
Someone in Household Participates in ROSCA                           0.40              492
ROSCA contributions in past year (if any)                            4118              208
                                                                    (5471)
Formal Savings
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                     0.09             478
   Has Account in Commercial Bank                                    0.04             478
   Has Account in Post Bank                                          0.01             478
   Has Account in Village Bank                                       0.05             478
   Has Account with MFI                                              0.00             478
   Has Account Elsewhere                                             0.01             478
Has Mobile Money Account                                             0.09             478
Data: Full census sample. Standard deviations in parentheses. Monetary values in Kenyan shillings
(Ksh). Exchange rate was roughly 80 Ksh to $1 US during the sample period.
                                                27
Table 4. How do Individuals Save?
                                                                        All             # obs
Panel A. All
Participates in ROSCA                                                   0.41            2605
    If yes: Number of ROSCAs                                            1.50            1079
                                                                       (0.80)
   If yes: ROSCA contributions in past year (in Ksh)                    6130            1090
                                                                      (10443)
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                       0.15             2869
  Has Account in Commercial Bank                                       0.08             2869
  Has Account in Post Bank                                             0.02             2869
  Has Account in Village Bank                                          0.05             2869
  Has Account with MFI                                                 0.00             2869
  Has Account Elsewhere                                                0.02             2869

Has Mobile Money Account                                               0.19             2869

Panel B. Women
Participates in ROSCA                                                  0.45             1608
    If yes: Number of ROSCAs                                           1.54              725
                                                                      (0.82)
   If yes: ROSCA contributions in past year (in Ksh)                   5316              723
                                                                      (8272)
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                       0.10             1640
  Has Account in Commercial Bank                                       0.04             1640
  Has Account in Post Bank                                             0.01             1640
  Has Account in Village Bank                                          0.05             1640
  Has Account with MFI                                                 0.00             1640
  Has Account Elsewhere                                                0.01             1640
Has Mobile Money Account                                               0.12             1640

Panel C. Men
Participates in ROSCA                                                   0.36             997
    If yes: Number of ROSCAs                                            1.42             354
                                                                       (0.74)
   If yes: ROSCA contributions in past year (in Ksh)                    7733             367
                                                                      (13625)
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                       0.21             1229
  Has Account in Commercial Bank                                       0.14             1229
  Has Account in Post Bank                                             0.02             1229
  Has Account in Village Bank                                          0.06             1229
  Has Account with MFI                                                 0.00             1229
  Has Account Elsewhere                                                0.03             1229
Has Mobile Money Account                                                0.28             1229
Data: Full census sample. Standard deviations in parentheses. Exchange rate was roughly 80 Ksh to
$1 US during the sample period.


                                                   28
Table 5. If you absolutely needed 1,000 Ksh, where would you get the money?
                                                                        All             # obs
Panel A. All
 Would use savings                                                     0.13             1984
 Would work more                                                       0.14             1984
 Spouse would work more                                                0.07             1984
 Would borrow from friend/relative/neighbor                            0.43             1984
 Would get donations from friend/relative/neighbor                     0.13             1984
 Would get a loan from ROSCA                                           0.06             1984
 Would sell household asset / animal / land                            0.13             1984
 Would sell business asset                                             0.01             1984
 Would sell agricultural product                                       0.14             1984
 Other                                                                 0.08             1984

Panel B. Women
If you absolutely needed 1,000 Ksh, where would you get the money?
   Would use savings                                                   0.08             1221
   Would work more                                                     0.12             1221
   Spouse would work more                                              0.09             1221
   Would borrow from friend/relative/neighbor                          0.45             1221
   Would get donations from friend/relative/neighbor                   0.16             1221
   Would get a loan from ROSCA                                         0.06             1221
   Would sell household asset / animal / land                          0.12             1221
   Would sell business asset                                           0.01             1221
   Would sell agricultural product                                     0.15             1221
   Other                                                               0.08             1221

Panel C. Men
If you absolutely needed 1,000 Ksh, where would you get the money?
   Would use savings                                                  0.20                763
   Would work more                                                    0.16                763
   Spouse would work more                                             0.04                763
   Would borrow from friend/relative/neighbor                         0.38                763
   Would get donations from friend/relative/neighbor                  0.08                763
   Would get a loan from ROSCA                                        0.05                763
   Would sell household asset / animal / land                         0.14                763
   Would sell business asset                                          0.01                763
   Would sell agricultural product                                    0.13                763
   Other                                                              0.09                763
Data: Full census sample. Respondents could give more than one answer to the question (i.e.
categories are not mutually exclusive).




                                                29
Table 6. Perception of Village Bank
                                                                     All     Market A Market B Market C          # obs
Panel A. All
Have you heard of the Village Bank?                                 0.60        0.64       0.64        0.51      2018
Do you trust the Village Bank?
 Don't know                                                         0.43       0.41        0.44       0.46       1191
 Yes                                                                0.49       0.52        0.48       0.46       1191
 No                                                                 0.08       0.08        0.08       0.09       1191

Of those who don't trust the Village Bank, why?
 Worried that the Village Bank will take my money                   0.23        0.10       0.49        0.17       111
 Don't know the Village Bank / unfamiliar with banking              0.43        0.64       0.23        0.29       111
 Fees are high                                                      0.10        0.08       0.11        0.13       111
 No interest                                                        0.04        0.02       0.06        0.04       111
 Bank is unreliable                                                 0.08        0.04       0.03        0.25       111
 Other                                                              0.12        0.14       0.09        0.13       111


Panel B. Women
Have you heard of the Village Bank?                                 0.55        0.61       0.57        0.43      1492
Do you trust the Village Bank?
 Don't know                                                         0.44       0.41        0.46       0.49        803
 Yes                                                                0.49       0.53        0.46       0.44        803
 No                                                                 0.07       0.07        0.08       0.07        803

Of those who don't trust the Village Bank, why?
 Worried that the Village Bank will take my money                   0.25        0.11       0.56        0.25       67

 Don't know the Village Bank / unfamiliar with banking              0.46        0.57       0.28        0.42       67
 Fees are high                                                      0.09        0.08       0.11        0.08       67
 No interest                                                        0.02        0.03       0.00        0.00       67
 Bank is unreliable                                                 0.05        0.03       0.00        0.17       67
 Other                                                              0.13        0.19       0.06        0.08       67

Panel C. Men
Have you heard of the Village Bank?                                 0.75        0.78       0.81        0.68       526
Do you trust the Village Bank?
 Don't know                                                         0.41       0.40        0.41       0.41        388
 Yes                                                                0.49       0.50        0.50       0.48        388
 No                                                                 0.10       0.10        0.09       0.11        388

Of those who don't trust the Village Bank, why?
  Worried that the Village Bank will take my money                    0.21        0.07       0.41       0.08      44
  Don't know the Village Bank / unfamiliar with banking               0.39        0.80       0.18       0.17      44
  Fees are high                                                       0.11        0.07       0.12       0.17      44
  No interest                                                         0.07        0.00       0.12       0.08      44
  Bank is unreliable                                                  0.14        0.07       0.06       0.33      44
  Other                                                               0.09        0.00       0.12       0.17      44
Notes: Data is from the full census sample. The Village Bank in Market A had a freeze on withdrawals a few months prior
to the survey. The bank in Market C does not allow withdrawals and is often closed during business hours.
                                                            30
Table 7. Familiarity with Local Financial Institutions among the Unbanked
                                                                       All     Market A Market B Market C       # obs
Panel A. All
Distance to closest deposit-taking branch (in km)                     1.63       1.87          1.40     1.49    1260
                                                                     (0.71)     (0.69)        (0.77)   (0.52)
Distance to closest branch offering withdrawals (in km)               3.04       1.87          1.40     7.00    1260
                                                                     (2.44)     (0.69)        (0.77)   (0.73)
Has heard of the local Village Bank                                   0.52       0.54          0.57     0.45    1122
 If yes: Knows account opening fee at local Village Bank              0.08       0.11          0.07     0.00     389
Has heard of local Commercial Bank1                                              0.59                           125
 If yes: Knows Comm. Bank accounts are free to open                              0.00                            71
Would use bank account if had one                                     0.85       0.85          0.87     0.83    1468
Would choose Village Bank over Commercial bank if had choice          0.38       0.31          0.47     0.41    1320

Panel B. Women
Distance to closest deposit-taking branch (in km)                     1.60       1.85          1.37     1.46    828
                                                                     (0.71)     (0.69)        (0.77)   (0.53)
Distance to closest branch offering withdrawals (in km)               3.01       1.85          1.37     7.01    828
                                                                     (2.45)     (0.69)        (0.77)   (0.73)
Has heard of the local Village Bank                                   0.47       0.52          0.49     0.37    914
 If yes: Knows account opening fee at local Village Bank              0.05       0.09          0.03     0.00    247
Has heard of local Commercial Bank                                               0.54                            71
 If yes: Knows Comm. Bank accounts are free to open                              0.00                            37
Would use bank account if had one                                     0.81       0.82          0.82     0.79    958
Would choose Village Bank over Commercial bank if had choice          0.39       0.31          0.48     0.45    858

Panel C. Men
Distance to closest deposit-taking branch (in km)                     1.67        1.92         1.45     1.54    432
                                                                     (0.72)      (0.70)       (0.79)   (0.50)
Distance to closest branch offering withdrawals (in km)               3.08        1.92         1.45     6.99    432
                                                                     (2.44)      (0.70)       (0.79)   (0.73)
Has heard of the local Village Bank                                   0.73        0.71         0.80     0.67    208
   If yes: Knows account opening fee at local Village Bank            0.14        0.14         0.15     0.00    142
Has heard of local Commercial Bank                                                0.67                           54
   If yes: Knows Comm. Bank accounts are free to open                             0.00                           34
Would use bank account if had one                                     0.92        0.91         0.98     0.91    510
Would choose Village Bank over Commercial Bank if had choice          0.36        0.31         0.45     0.34    462
Notes: Data consists of restricted experimental sample. Standard deviations in parentheses.
1
  This question only asked in Market A (where the Commercial Bank has a branch).




                                                           31
Table 8. Experimental Results: Take-up and Usage of Free Accounts among those Initially Unbanked
                                                                All          Market A        Market B         Market C     # obs
Opened an account                                              0.625          0.613           0.753            0.530        840
Opened account at Village Bank                                 0.427          0.175           0.744            0.526        840
Opened account at Commercial Bank                              0.198          0.438           0.009            0.004        840
If opened an account:
    "Active" ( = at least 2 deposits)                          0.28             0.36           0.27             0.17        525
    If Village Bank account: "Active"                          0.23             0.22           0.28             0.17        359
    If Commercial Bank account: "Active"1                                       0.39                                        166
    If "Active": Average number of deposits                     4.58            4.57            4.71            4.36        147
                                                               (3.48)          (3.46)          (3.44)          (3.79)
                  Total deposited on account (Ksh)             4,314           6,477           2,221            730         147
                                                             (10,231)        (13,174)         (3,836)         (1,818)
                  Average deposit size (Ksh)                    862            1,288            460             132         147
                                                              (2,223)         (2,901)          (713)           (228)
                  Average number of withdrawals                 1.68            2.27            1.42              0         148
                                                               (3.71)          (4.49)          (2.67)
                  Average withdrawal size (Ksh)                1,455           1,760            845              0          66
                                                              (1990)          (2269)          (1063)
      Account joint with spouse (if married)                   0.058           0.060           0.039           0.078        397

Overall: Active Take-Up of Free Account                        0.176           0.218           0.206           0.089
Data: Subset of individuals sampled for free account (among restricted experimental sample). Accounts were opened in May-July 2010
and follow-up data is from May 2011 (approximately 10-12 months after account opening). Standard deviations in parentheses.
Monetary values in Kenyan shillings (Ksh). Exchange rate was roughly 80 Ksh to $1 US during sample period.
1
    Accounts at the Commercial Bank were only offered in Market A (where the Commercial Bank has a branch).




                                                                   32
Table 9. Experimental Results: Take-up and Usage of Free Accounts among those Initially Unbanked (By
Gender)
                                                                    Women                             Men

Opened an account                                                       0.611                        0.649
Opened account at Village Bank                                          0.415                        0.448
Opened account at Commercial Bank                                       0.195                        0.201
If opened an account:
    "Active" ( = at least 2 deposits)                                  0.32                            0.22
    If Village Bank account: "Active"                                  0.27                            0.16
    If Commercial Bank account: "Active"1                              0.41                            0.34
    If "Active": Average number of deposits                            4.29                            5.27
                                                                     (3.26)                          (3.91)
                  Total deposited on account (Ksh)                    1,966                           9,637
                                                                     (3955)                         (16421)
                  Average deposit size (Ksh)                           480                            1,727
                                                                     (1144)                          (3506)
                  Average number of withdrawals                        0.96                            3.31
                                                                     (1.56)                          (6.03)
                  Average withdrawal size (Ksh)                       1,059                           2,148
                                                                     (1658)                          (2345)
   Account joint with spouse (if married)                             0.071                           0.045
Overall: Active Take-Up of Free Account                               0.197                           0.140
Observations                                                            532                           308
Data: Subset of individuals sampled for free account (among restricted experimental sample). Accounts were opened in
May-July 2010 and follow-up data is from May 2011 (approximately 10-12 months after account opening). Standard
deviations in parentheses. Monetary values in Kenyan shillings (Ksh). Exchange rate was roughly 80 Ksh to $1 US during
sample period.
1
    Accounts at the Commercial Bank were only offered in Market A (where the Commercial Bank has a branch).




                                                                   33
Table 10. Concerns with Local Financial Institutions among those initially unbanked
                                                            Commercial Bank                Village Bank               Mobile Money
Panel A. Control Group (No Account Voucher)
Concerns with Savings Option:
 Fees                                                              0.34                        0.15                         0.11
 Unreliable                                                        0.16                        0.32                         0.01
 Distance                                                          0.11                        0.02                         0.02
 Risk of embezzlement                                              0.06                        0.17                         0.00
 Agent can't always handle transactions1                             -                           -                          0.29
 Requires phone                                                      -                           -                          0.36
Observations                                                       283                         294                          292

Panel B. Non-Compliers (Offered Account Voucher but did not open account or is not actively using account)
Concerns with Savings Option:
 Fees                                                     0.39                      0.21                                    0.05
 Unreliable                                               0.15                      0.37                                    0.02
 Distance                                                 0.19                      0.03                                    0.02
 Risk of embezzlement                                     0.07                      0.24                                    0.00
 Agent can't always handle transactions                     -                         -                                     0.33
 Requires phone                                             -                         -                                     0.38
Observations                                              285                       284                                     284

Panel C. Compliers (Offered Account Voucher, opened account and actively using account)
Concerns with Savings Option:
 Fees                                                    0.46                      0.16                                     0.09
 Unreliable                                              0.17                      0.43                                     0.01
 Distance                                                0.11                      0.02                                     0.01
 Risk of embezzlement                                    0.06                      0.21                                     0.00
 Agent can't always handle transactions                    -                         -                                      0.22
 Requires phone                                            -                         -                                      0.35
Observations                                              79                        82                                       82
Data: Restricted experimental sample.
1
 If customers make a large number of withdrawals on a given day, the agent may run out of liquidity. If customers make a large number of
deposits, he may run out of e-float. See text for more details.




                                                                   34
Table 11. Concerns with Village Bank by Market Center
                                                                      All           Market A          Market B         Market C
Panel A. Control Group (No Account Voucher)
Concerns with Village Bank
 Fees                                                                0.15              0.19             0.07              0.17
 Unreliable                                                          0.32              0.33             0.21              0.40
 Distance                                                            0.02              0.01             0.03              0.01
 Risk of Embezzlement                                                0.17              0.19             0.14              0.16

Preferred Banking Option
 Commercial Bank                                                     0.43              0.40             0.40              0.49
 Village Bank                                                        0.07              0.05             0.10              0.08
 Mpesa                                                               0.06              0.08             0.07              0.02
 Animals                                                             0.21              0.22             0.25              0.15
 ROSCA                                                               0.11              0.11             0.06              0.15
 Grain                                                               0.07              0.07             0.10              0.05
Have you ever been discouraged                                       0.17              0.19             0.16              0.14
 to open an account by a friend or relative?

Observations                                                          294              138               73                83

Panel B. Non-Compliers (Offered Account Voucher but did not open account or is not actively using account)
Concerns with Village Bank
 Fees                                                       0.21           0.23             0.27                          0.12
 Unreliable                                                 0.37           0.34             0.36                          0.40
 Distance                                                   0.03           0.02             0.03                          0.05
 Risk of Embezzlement                                       0.24           0.26             0.21                          0.23

Preferred Banking Option
 Commercial Bank                                                     0.36              0.39             0.30              0.35
 Village Bank                                                        0.17              0.06             0.30              0.23
 Mpesa                                                               0.04              0.05             0.04              0.02
 Animals                                                             0.22              0.22             0.19              0.25
 ROSCA                                                               0.07              0.10             0.03              0.07
 Grain                                                               0.08              0.09             0.08              0.07
Have you ever been discouraged                                       0.24              0.24             0.27              0.21
 to open an account by a friend or relative?
Observations                                                          284              125               70                89

Panel C. Compliers (Offered Account Voucher, opened account and actively using account)
Concerns with Village Bank
 Fees                                                      0.16             0.11                        0.32              0.12
 Unreliable                                                0.43             0.41                        0.26              0.65
 Distance                                                  0.02             0.00                        0.11              0.00
 Risk of Embezzlement                                      0.21             0.28                        0.11              0.12

Preferred Banking Option
 Commercial Bank                                                     0.49              0.67             0.20              0.35
 Village Bank                                                        0.29              0.13             0.55              0.41
 Mpesa                                                               0.02              0.02             0.05              0.00
 Animals                                                             0.12              0.09             0.10              0.24
 ROSCA                                                               0.04              0.02             0.10              0.00
 Grain                                                               0.04              0.07             0.00              0.00
Have you ever been discouraged                                       0.31              0.26             0.40              0.31
 to open an account by a friend or relative?
Observations                                                          82                46               19                17
Data: Restricted experimental sample. The Village Bank in Market A had a recent freeze on withdrawals. The bank in Market C does not
allow withdrawals and was often closed during business hours.


                                                                35
Table 12. Baseline Knowledge of Local Credit Opportunities and Interest in Loans among
those Initially Unbanked

                                                                         All          # obs

Is there a local institution in which you can get loans?
  Yes                                                                   0.64          665
  No                                                                    0.11          665
  Don't know                                                            0.26          665

Correctly identified Village Bank as local credit option                0.38          667
Correctly identified Commercial Bank as local credit option1            0.41          311
Says knows procedure for loan                                           0.15          660
Really knows procedure for loan                                         0.07          658

Interested in loan at 1.5% monthly interest without collateral          0.74          645
Interested in loan at 1.5% monthly interest with full collateral        0.32          643

Do you think you could qualify for a loan?
 Yes                                                                    0.37          664
 No                                                                     0.22          664
 Don't know                                                             0.41          664

Has ever applied for loan                                               0.06          537
Has ever gotten loan                                                    0.05          536
Data: Random subset of restricted experimental sample.
1
  This question was only asked in Market A, where the Commercial Bank has a branch.




                                                    36
Table 13. Interest in Loans among those initially Unbanked, Immediately After Receiving
Information on Local Credit Opportunities

                                                                            All             # obs
Interested in loan at Village Bank                                         0.60              645
Interested in loan at Commercial Bank                                      0.35              644

If interested in a loan : Purpose of Loan1
      Farm inputs                                                          0.11               98
      Farm equipment                                                       0.02               98
      Start business                                                       0.77               98
      Business inventory                                                   0.19               98
      Business equipment                                                   0.09               98
      Home construction                                                    0.04               98
      Home repair                                                          0.00               98
      Furniture                                                            0.01               98
      School fees                                                          0.08               98
      Health care                                                          0.00               98
      Wedding                                                              0.00               98
      Land                                                                 0.01               98
      Debts                                                                0.00               98
      Other                                                                0.11               98
If interested in a loan: Desired Loan Amount (in Ksh)
  Mean                                                                     18878               95
  Median                                                                   10000               95
  Standard Deviation                                                       31813
Months needed before can make first repayment                               2.15               95
% say would be able to make first payment within 1 month                    0.41               95
% say would be able to make first payment within 2 months                   0.70               95
Data: Results restricted to those who received the credit intervention.
1
  Due to problem in the skip code on a version of the survey, this question was only asked for a subset
of people who were interested in a loan.




                                                  37
Table 14. Experimental Results: Impacts of Credit Intervention
                                                                  All                 # obs
Panel A. Share Voucher + Information Intervention
All
Accepted Voucher                                                 0.87                  358
Redeemed Voucher                                                 0.40                  358
Inquired about loan at Village Bank                             0.028                  358
Completed loan training at Village Bank                         0.011                  358
Formed group at Village Bank                                    0.014                  358
Got loan at Village Bank1                                       0.003                  358

Women
Accepted Voucher                                                 0.85                  233
Redeemed Voucher                                                 0.37                  233
Inquired about loan at Village Bank                             0.043                  233
Completed loan training at Village Bank                         0.017                  233
Formed group at Village Bank                                    0.021                  233
Got loan at Village Bank                                        0.004                  233

Men
Accepted Voucher                                                 0.91                  125
Redeemed Voucher                                                 0.46                  125
Inquired about loan at Village Bank                              0.00                  125
Completed loan training at Village Bank                         0.000                  125
Formed group at Village Bank                                    0.000                  125
Got loan at Village Bank                                        0.000                  125

Panel B. Information Only Intervention
All
Inquired about loan at Village Bank                              0.00                  296
Completed loan training at Village Bank                          0.00                  296
Formed group at Village Bank                                     0.00                  296
Got loan at Village Bank                                         0.00                  296

Women
Inquired about loan at Village Bank                              0.00                  196
Completed loan training at Village Bank                          0.00                  196
Formed group at Village Bank                                     0.00                  196
Got loan at Village Bank                                         0.00                  196

Men
Inquired about loan at Village Bank                                0.00                 100
Completed loan training at Village Bank                            0.00                 100
Formed group at Village Bank                                       0.00                 100
Got loan at Village Bank                                           0.00                 100
Data: See text for detailed description of interventions. Loan take-up is updated through 31 August
2011. Respondents in Panel A received both a voucher for 1 share at the bank and information on
how to apply for a loan. Respondents in Panel B received information only. Information on loan
take-up is from the Village Bank only. As of August 31, 2011, no respondents had applied for a loan
at the Commercial Bank.
1
  Exactly one person had qualified for a loan by August 31, 2011.




                                                38
Table 15. What factors might prevent you from getting a loan?

                                                                           All   # obs
 Don't need the money                                                     0.14    179
 Afraid bank will seize collateral                                        0.51    179
 Too risky                                                                0.45    179
 Don't trust the bank                                                     0.09    179
 Don't like the idea of being in debt                                     0.08    179
 Have too much other debt                                                 0.01    179
 Too much hassle                                                          0.12    179
 I don’t have a business which is required for loan                       0.27    179
 I can't pay immediately                                                  0.18    179
 Other                                                                    0.38    179
Data: Results restricted to those who received the credit intervention.




                                                      39
Appendix Table A1. Savings for Farmers and Non-Farmers
                                                                 All     Female     Male     # obs
Panel A. Farmers
Informal Savings
Participates in ROSCA                                           0.39      0.42       0.32    1576
Number of ROSCAs (for those who participate)                    1.43      1.46       1.35     620
                                                               (0.74)    (0.77)     (0.60)
ROSCA contributions in past year (for those who participate)    4362      4205       4881    643
                                                               (7245)    (6147)    (10051)
Formal Savings
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                0.08      0.06      0.15     1657
   Has Account in Commercial Bank                               0.04      0.02      0.09     1657
   Has Account in Post Bank                                     0.01      0.01      0.02     1657
   Has Account in Village Bank                                  0.04      0.03      0.05     1657
   Has Account with MFI                                         0.00      0.00      0.00     1657
   Has Account Elsewhere                                        0.01      0.01      0.01     1657
Has Mobile Money Account                                        0.13      0.09      0.24     1657

Panel B. Non-Farmers
Informal Savings
Participates in ROSCA                                            0.45      0.53      0.39    1014
Number of ROSCAs (for those who participate)                     1.60      1.72      1.46     455
                                                                (0.87)    (0.89)    (0.82)
ROSCA contributions in past year (for those who participate)     8731      7797      9704    443
                                                               (13451)   (11302)   (15340)
Formal Savings
Has Account in Formal Deposit-Taking Institution                0.23      0.19      0.25     1197
   Has Account in Commercial Bank                               0.15      0.09      0.18     1197
   Has Account in Post Bank                                     0.02      0.02      0.02     1197
   Has Account in Village Bank                                  0.07      0.10      0.06     1197
   Has Account with MFI                                         0.00      0.00      0.00     1197
   Has Account Elsewhere                                        0.03      0.02      0.04     1197
Has Mobile Money Account                                        0.26      0.19      0.31     1197
Data: Full census sample.




                                                      40
Appendix Table A2. Baseline Knowledge of Local Credit Opportunities and Interest in Loans among those Initially
Unbanked (Farmers vs. Non Farmers)
                                                                        All           Female   Male         # obs
Panel A. Farmers
Is there a local institution in which you can get loans?
  Yes                                                                   0.59           0.55    0.73         451
  No                                                                    0.12           0.13    0.08         451
  Don't know                                                            0.29           0.33    0.19         451

Correctly identified Village Bank as local credit option                0.34           0.30    0.47         452
Correctly identified Commercial Bank as local credit option             0.37           0.31    0.55         212
Says knows procedure for loan                                           0.12           0.11    0.17         446
Really knows procedure for loan                                         0.05           0.04    0.09         444

Has ever applied for loan                                               0.05           0.04    0.08         360
Has ever gotten loan                                                    0.04           0.03    0.04         359
Do you think you could qualify for a loan?
 Yes                                                                    0.34           0.30    0.46         449
 No                                                                     0.21           0.24    0.14         449
 Don't know                                                             0.45           0.46    0.40         449

Interested in loan at 1.5% monthly interest without collateral          0.74           0.71    0.85         424
Interested in loan at 1.5% monthly interest with full collateral        0.27           0.22    0.47         423

Panel B. Non-Farmers
Is there a local institution in which you can get loans?
  Yes                                                                   0.74           0.62    0.84         196
  No                                                                    0.09           0.11    0.07         196
  Don't know                                                            0.17           0.28    0.09         196

Correctly identified Village Bank as local credit option                0.47           0.34    0.58         197
Correctly identified Commercial Bank as local credit option             0.47           0.38    0.56          95
Says knows procedure for loan                                           0.19           0.12    0.24         196
Really knows procedure for loan                                         0.09           0.06    0.11         196

Has ever applied for loan                                               0.09           0.06    0.11         160
Has ever gotten loan                                                    0.06           0.03    0.08         160
Do you think you could qualify for a loan?
 Yes                                                                    0.43           0.30    0.52         197
 No                                                                     0.24           0.30    0.19         197
 Don't know                                                             0.34           0.40    0.29         197

Interested in loan at 1.5% monthly interest without collateral        0.73             0.67    0.77         204
Interested in loan at 1.5% monthly interest with full collateral      0.41             0.29    0.50         203
Data: Random subset of restricted experimental sample.
1
  This question was only asked in Market A, where the Commercial Bank has a branch.




                                                                   41
