NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUITY-HOLDING INSTITUTIONAL LENDERS:
DO THEY RECEIVE BETTER TERMS?
Jongha Lim
Bernadette A. Minton
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 17856
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17856
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

We would like to thank Zhenyi Huang and Jongsik Park for excellent research assistance, and participants
in a seminar at Ohio State University, as well as Zahi Ben-David, Isil Erel, John Howe, Robert Prilmeier,
Shastri Sandy, Berk Sensoy, René Stulz, and Jun Yang for helpful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jongha Lim, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Equity-Holding Institutional Lenders: Do they Receive Better Terms?
Jongha Lim, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 17856
February 2012
JEL No. G21,G3,G32
ABSTRACT
The past decade has seen significant changes in the structure of the corporate lending market, with
non-commercial bank institutional investors playing larger roles than they historically have played.
In addition, non-commercial bank institutional lenders are often equity holders in their borrowing
firms. In our sample of 11,137 tranches of institutional “leveraged” loans, 2,008 (18%) have a non-commercial
bank institution that also owns at least 0.1% of the firm’s equity. Such “dual holder” loan tranches
have higher spreads than otherwise similar loan tranches without equity holder participation. The dual
holder premium is present for both revolver and term loans, and exists within all non-investment grade
credit rating classes. Contrary to risk-based explanations of this finding, dual holder tranches are priced
with premiums relative to other tranches of the same loan package. Dual holding premiums are higher
when the equity-holder’s stake is larger, when the dual-holder’s share in the loan is larger, and when
the equity holder is a hedge fund or a private equity fund. These premiums likely represent additional
compensation to dual holders for providing capital to firms when the firms are having difficulty raising
capital otherwise.
Jongha Lim
Department of Finance
Trulaske College of Business School
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
limjong@missouri.edu
Bernadette A. Minton
Finance Department
Fisher College of Business
700 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
minton_15@fisher.osu.edu

Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
The past decade has seen significant changes in the structure of the corporate lending market,
with non-traditional lenders such as non-commercial bank institutional investors playing larger roles than
they historically have played. 1 Because institutional investors often have greater flexibility than
commercial banks in the type of assets they can hold, profitable opportunities arise from investing in
multiple securities issued by the same firm. For example, Ivashina and Sun (2011b) document that when
institutional investors lend to firms and trade in those firms’ equities, such trading tends to have
abnormally good performance. Another way in which an institutional investor can take advantage of
multiple investments in a firm’s securities is by lending to firms in which it is already an equity holder. In
this paper, we document the extent to which non-commercial bank institutional equity holders have
become increasingly important lenders to their firms, as well the way in which they are able to obtain
more superior terms than outside investors when they lend to their firms.
To evaluate the way in which institutional equity holders are involved in the lending process, we
consider a sample of 11,137 tranches of institutional “leveraged” loans from the DealScan database,
originated between 1997 and 2007.2 We focus on the leveraged loan segment of the market because
institutional investors’ participation in the corporate lending market has been concentrated in this lower
quality, non-investment grade segment of the market.3 Of the 11,137 institutional leveraged loan tranches,
2,008 had the participation of an institutional lender that also held at least 0.1% of the firm’s equity
during the one-year period prior to the current loan origination. These “dual holders” can have meaningful

1

We use the term “institutional” investor to refer to non-commercial banking institutions.
The technical definition of leveraged loans varies by organization. For example, DealScan defines as leveraged
any loan with a credit rating of BB+ or lower and any unrated loan. Bloomberg defines leveraged loans as those
with spreads over LIBOR of 250 basis points (bp) or more. Standard & Poor’s deems loans with spreads over
LIBOR of 125 bp or more as leveraged loans. Thompson Financial denotes as leveraged loans, all those with an
initial spread of 150 bp or more before June 30, 2002, or 175 bp or more after July 2, 2002. We follow DealScan’s
classification of leveraged loans in this paper. By “institutional” loan facilities we mean loan facilities in which at
least one institutional investor is involved.
3
The proportion of leveraged loans among loans classified as institutional loans by DealScan is about 90% during
the sample period. Similarly, Nandy and Shao (2010) find that 86.1% of institutional loans are leveraged loans with
the proportion increasing over the years during the period from 1995 to 2006. In our sample, the proportion of
leveraged loan facilities with institutional participation almost doubled during our sample period, from 38% in 1997
to 74% in 2007.
2

1

equity positions; of the 2,008 dual holder loan tranches in our sample, 493 had the participation of
institutional investor(s) with equity holdings of at least 3%, and 279 had the participation of institutional
investor(s) holding at least 5%. In addition, 106 loan tranches had the participation of equity-holding
hedge funds or private equity funds which held on average 4.3% of the borrowing firm’s equity.
Theoretically, lending to a firm in which an investor already has an equity position is sub-optimal
from a diversification perspective. Therefore, to induce such an investor to lend to the firm, he must earn
more than the rate on comparable loans, or receive some other benefits to offset the loss of diversification.
Jiang, Li and Shao (2010) argue that one such benefit could arise if lending leads to common ownership
of equity and debt that could reduce future investment distortions arising from conflicts between
claimholders. A second possible benefit, arising from information asymmetries among potential lenders,
is that an equity holder’s lending to the firm could certify the firm’s quality and facilitate participation of
other institutions in the loan. Finally, firms or lead arrangers sometimes approach firm insiders, such as
institutional equity, investors to participate in loan facilities that are particularly important to the firm or
for which demand is relatively weak.4 In this case, by participating in the loan syndicate, the equity holder
would provide value by alleviating a financial constraint, and receive a premium return that represents his
compensation for providing capital when it is most valuable.
To evaluate these explanations for institutional investors’ dual holdings of equity and debt, we
estimate the difference in all-in-drawn spreads between loan tranches in which dual holders invest, and
otherwise similar loan tranches. We first estimate the incremental effect of a tranche’s being held by an
institutional dual holder on the spread of that tranche. In doing so, we control for other factors that affect
the loan tranche’s spread, such as the firm’s risk measured by either firm-level accounting variables, or
the rating of the issuer, as well as the loan’s type (Term Loan A, Term Loan B, or Revolver) and other
tranche-specific characteristics.
Our results indicate that loan facilities in which at least one institutional equity holder participates
have, on average, 13 basis-point higher spreads than otherwise identical loan facilities which is
4

Throughout the paper, we use the terms “facilities’ and “tranches” interchangeably.

2

approximately 5% of the average total spread of 258 basis points. This premium exists for different types
of loan tranches: There is a 12 basis-point premium when dual holders invest in revolvers and a 16 basispoint premium for term loans, both of which are economically significant and statistically significantly
different from zero. In addition, there are premiums associated with dual holders for loan tranches made
to issuers of each non-investment grade rating class, and the premiums are generally larger for lowerrated issuers. For example, for loan tranches to issuers rated below CCC, the dual holder premium is
about 21 basis points compared to a 12 basis-point premium for BB-rated issuers.
In computing these estimates of the dual holder premiums, we control for publicly observable
variables that could affect spreads. However, it is possible that dual holder premiums could reflect
unobservable heterogeneity across firms that is correlated with both the likelihood of a dual holder and
the all-in-drawn spreads on the loan tranches in which they invest. For example, suppose that an equityholder helps to arrange or to certify a loan at a time when the firm is having financial problems that
prevent it from receiving a loan from other lenders. In this case, it is likely that the borrowers’ true risk
would not be reflected in observable variables, so that the positive estimated premiums could reflect
compensation for risk that is unobservable to an outsider.
To evaluate the possibility that the premiums to dual holders could reflect incremental risk
differences between dual holder loans tranches and other loan tranches, we estimate the effect of the dual
holder on the pricing of different tranches within the same loan. Different tranches of the same loan
package share the same underlying firm fundamentals and typically have the same seniority and hence
have the same default risk. Yet, they have different maturities, sizes and members of syndicate, so we
control econometrically for those differences in tranche-specific attributes when estimating our equations.
If the existence of a dual holder affects the relative spreads on different tranches of the same loan, it
cannot reflect a correlation between dual holders’ existence and a factor related to firm-level risk.
The within-loan estimates indicate that when a dual holder participates in a Term Loan B tranche,
the tranche trades at a positive premium relative to Term Loan A tranches or revolvers of the same loan.
This positive premium is higher than that for non-dual holder Term Loan B tranches relative to other

3

tranches in their loans. In addition, when a dual holder purchases part of the revolver, the spread gap
between the Term Loan B tranche and revolver decreases, suggesting that ceteris paribus, dual holders
are able to invest in revolvers with higher spreads. Finally, we consider the cases in which a dual holder
invests in a Term Loan B facility and there is also another institutional Term Loan facility in the same
loan. In these cases as well, the one with the dual holder trades at a higher spread. These findings confirm
that particular tranches for which equity holders invest have higher spreads than otherwise similar
tranches, even holding borrower characteristics constant.
The fact that the dual holder premium appears to be a function of the particular tranche in which
the equity holder participates suggests that the explanation for the premium is tranche-specific rather than
firm-specific. This finding is not consistent with arguments that dual holding reduces conflicts that
potentially increase the value of future investments, or that the dual holder’s presence signals something
about the firm’s quality. Rather, the tranche-specific nature of the dual holder premium favors the
argument that an equity holder participates in a particular loan tranche that is relatively difficult to obtain,
or for which the capital raised from the loan tranche is particularly important. This logic suggests that
equity holders are opportunistic lenders who provide capital to firms when it is most needed and receive
higher spreads in return for doing so.
The idea that dual holder premiums can be explained by opportunistic lending implies that the
premiums should be larger when equity holders are most flexible in the type of investments they can
make, and when they have larger incentives to maximize the returns of their investments. Consequently,
we consider the way pricing of loan facilities varies with lender characteristics. First, we consider whether
the type of institutional investor affects the loan tranche pricing. In particular, private equity and hedge
funds tend to have substantial direct and indirect incentives to increase the returns of their investments, as
well as the freedom to make different kinds of investments relatively quickly without being subject to
restrictions faced by other institutional investors. Consequently, we expect private equity and hedge funds

4

to be the most likely investors to lend at relatively higher spreads.5 The empirical results are consistent
with this hypothesis; our estimates indicate that hedge funds and private equity funds loan facilities have
spreads that are 54 basis points higher than otherwise similar facilities that do not have a dual holding
institution. Facilities held by other funds who are equity holders have 28 basis point higher spreads, and
loans from other institutional equity holders have 6 basis-point spreads than comparable loans without
dual holding institutions. These findings suggest that the institutions managed by individuals with the
strongest incentives and most information about their firms receive the highest spreads when they lend to
firms.
Second, we estimate whether the size of the dual holder’s equity position affects the loan
pricing. The results suggest that institutions with larger equity stakes receive higher interest rates when
they lend to their own companies. In particular, holding other things constant, institutions with higher
than average (2.6%) equity holdings receive a 20 basis-point premium over comparable non-dual holder
loan facilities, while institutions with less than average equity holdings receive a 11 basis-point premium.
When we consider both the type of the institution and size of the institution’s equity position together,
both characteristics affect the dual holding premium, although hedge funds and private equity funds’
loans tend to have particularly high spreads regardless of their equity ownership.
Third, we estimate whether the size of the dual holder’s share of the loan affects the loan’s
pricing. Controlling for the size of the dual holder’s equity position, as well as firm and tranche
characteristics, our estimates indicate that the dual holder’s loan share is positively and statistically
significantly related to the loan tranche’s spread. They imply that a one-standard deviation increase
(12.5%) in dual loan share is associated with an 18 basis-point increase in the loan spreads.
Finally, we consider the idea that if equity-holding lenders are paid premiums to invest in the
particular tranches in which dual holders participate, then these tranches should be for loans in which
5

Hedge funds and private equity funds started to actively participate in corporate lending market starting in the mid1990s. According to HedgeFund.Net, there were more than 100 funds specializing in lending as of 2007. Large
funds are accelerating this trend by raising giant funds dedicated to loan investing; for example, the private equity
firm Blackstone Group started a $3 billion fund to invest in leveraged loans in 2011.

5

capital is particularly important for the borrowing firms. Therefore, we expect that these firms should
spend the capital they raise more quickly than when a dual holder does not participate. To evaluate this
hypothesis, we estimate equations similar to those in Kim and Weisbach (2008) that predict the fraction
of an incremental dollar raised that goes to alternative uses. Our estimates indicate that virtually none of
the capital raised from dual holder lenders is saved as cash, while between 19 and 28 cents from every
dollar raised by non-dual holder lenders is saved as cash. This difference is consistent with the notion that
dual holders receive a premium as compensation for participating in situation when raising capital quickly
is particularly important to the firm.
Our findings are parallel those of Brophy, Ouimet, and Sialm (2009), who find that hedge funds’
equity investments are typically to firms that otherwise would have trouble raising capital. When making
equity investments, hedge funds typically negotiate discounts relative to the public stock price paid by
other investors, and earn abnormal returns because their purchases are at a discount. Thus, hedge funds
abnormal returns on private placements of equity can be thought of as the return to providing liquidity.
Our findings can be viewed similarly; we find that equity holders contribute to loan tranches in firms with
spreads that are relatively high. Since spreads are determined through an auction process, high spreads
that cannot be explained by risk and other firm and loan attributes mean that the tranche would have
relatively few investors or would have difficulties in fully subscribing absent the equity holder. Therefore,
we view dual holders’ incremental return as compensation that they receive in exchange for providing
liquidity to their firms in the tranche that is in less demand from other investors.
Our paper is related to Jiang, Li, and Shao (2010), who also analyze the pricing of loans held by
equity-holding institutional investors. In contrast to our findings, these authors find that loans from
institutional equity holders have lower spreads than otherwise similar loans. The likely source of the
difference in findings between the two papers is the sample. In contrast to our sample that is made up
entirely of relatively risky leveraged loans, 51% of Jiang, Li and Shao’s sample are investment grade. If
we re-estimate the equations in our paper using only the institutional leveraged loan tranches in the Jiang,
Li and Shao sample and our definition of non-commercial institutional dual holders, we find a positive

6

spread premium similar to what we report in our paper.6 Consistent with this argument, we do not find the
dual holder premium for the subsample of issuers that have investment grade ratings (BBB or above). In
addition, Jiang, Li and Shao’s sample is somewhat earlier than ours in calendar time, and therefore likely
has fewer hedge fund and private equity funds as dual holders. Given that our findings suggest that these
institutions receive by far the highest spreads on their loan tranches, a sample like Jiang, Li and Shao’s
that does not contain as many hedge funds and private equity funds is likely to have smaller dual holder
spread premium than ours.
The paper is also related to the literature on potential conflicts of interest that arise when
institutional investors engage in syndicated lending. Ivashina and Sun (2011b) and Massoud, Nandy,
Saunders, and Song (2011) focus on the trading of institutions that participate in syndicated lending, and
the associated potential conflicts of interest. Both papers find evidence that institutional investors in the
syndicated loan market exploit their access to private information when trading and earn abnormal returns
when they trade in the firm’s equities.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the data sources and sample. Section 3
discusses hypotheses about why equity holders might lend to their firms. Section 4 estimates the
differences in spreads between dual-holder loan tranches and comparable non dual-holder loan tranches.
Section 5 examines the impact of dual holder characteristics of the dual-holders on premiums. Section 6
considers the way in which the uses of funds differs between dual holder and non-dual holder borrowers,
and Section 7 concludes.

6

We are extremely grateful to Wei Jiang, Kai Li and Peng Shao for sharing their sample and allowing us to
understand the differences in the results between the two papers. The estimated equations using the Jiang, Li and
Shao sample are available from the authors by request. The definition of dual investor used in our paper is somewhat
different from the one used in Jiang et al. (2010) in terms of both timing and size of equity holdings. To define a
dual holder, Jiang et al. (2010) measures the lender’s equity holding at the end of the quarter in which the loan is
originated, whereas we start from the list of shareholders during one year prior to the loan origination and then
examine whether any of these shareholders participated in the loan syndicate. Moreover, they consider only equity
holdings above 1.0% as dual holding, whereas we consider all holdings above 0.1%.

7

2. Data and Sample
2.1. Sample of Institutional Leveraged Loans
We obtain a sample of leveraged loans with institutional participation from the Reuters Loan
Pricing Corporation’s (LPC) DealScan database for the 1997-2007 period. Leveraged loans are loans with
credit ratings of BB+ or lower or any unrated loan (see footnote 2). In a leveraged loan, term loans
tranches are often packaged together with revolver facilities. A term loan tranche is a loan tranche for a
specified amount, fixed repayment schedule and maturity, and usually fully funded at origination. In
contrast, revolvers typically have shorter maturities than term loan tranches and are not fully funded at the
origination of the loan syndicate. The Term Loan A tranche is a term loan that is usually amortizing, and
is typically held by the lead arranger. Institutional term loan tranches (Term Loan B, C, D, E, …) also can
amortize like Term Loan A tranches but are more often “bullet”, meaning that they have one payoff at
maturity.7
We focus on leveraged loans because participation of institutional investors in this segment of
the loan market has been particularly pronounced, with institutions making up more than 70% of the
capital funding of these loans. Additionally, the overwhelming majority of institutional loans are
leveraged loans with the proportion increasing over time. We begin our sample in 1997 because major
developments in the market that fueled institutional involvement in the corporate loan market occurred in
1995 and 1996.8
To construct the sample, we begin with all leveraged loans listed in DealScan made to nonfinancial U.S. public firms and completed between 1997 and 2007, a total of 37,552 loan facilities. We
require that the data on deal value and dates not be missing. We additionally restrict the sample to the
7

Appendix B contains statistics on the payoff structure of each type of tranche.
The Loan Syndications and Trading Association (LSTA) was founded in 1995 and S&P first started rating bank
loans in 1995. In 1996, LSTA first started providing mark-to-market pricing (for dealers only). In addition, the
secondary market for syndicated loans became well established by mid-1990s: by the early 1990s specialized loan
trading desks were operating in a number of institutions led by Bankers Trust, Alex Brown, Bear Stearns, Citibank,
Continental Bank and Goldman Sachs. By 1997, about 25 institutions had active trading desks and there were two
inter-dealer brokers. These innovations spurred the fast growth of the syndicated loan market, which in turn fueled
institutional participation in the primary lending market. Moreover, there are very few leveraged loans before 1997,
as is documented in Figure 1.
8

8

most common type of tranches, where the type of instrument is either a line of credit (Revolver/Line, 364Day Facility, Demand Loan, Limited Line) or a term loan (Term Loan, Delay Draw Term Loan, Term
Loan A, B, …, H).9 We further restrict the sample to the borrowing companies for which we could match
to the Compustat database.10 Finally we exclude loans whose primary purpose is LBO financing, because
our goal is to study the way equity holders influence the lending environment in the corporate
environment. The above screening process results in a sample of 20,031 facilities associated with 13,122
loans made to 5,627 borrowing firms.
We consider a loan facility to have institutional participation if at least one non-commercial
bank institutional investor is involved in the lending syndicate. Non-commercial bank institutions include
hedge funds, private equity funds, mutual funds, pension funds and endowments, insurance companies,
financing companies, and investment banks. A narrower definition of institutional participation is if at
least one institutional investor plays a major role in the lending syndicate.11 We consider a lender to be a
commercial bank if it and/or its ultimate parent have major commercial banking operations. To
distinguish the identity of a lender between commercial banks and non-commercial bank institutional
investors, we rely primarily on DealScan’s information on lender type. We confirm this identification by
the lender’s primary SIC code and Investor Type code in Thompson Reuters Institutional Holding
Database.12 We also take into consideration the changes in the institutional type. So for example, JP
Morgan is classified as institutional lender before its merger with the Chase Manhattan Corp in 2000, and
JP Morgan Chase is coded as a commercial bank afterward. According to this classification, 1,137 of the

9

This restriction excludes bankers’ acceptance, leases, standby letters of credit, step payment leases, guidance lines,
traded letters of credit, multi-option facilities, and undisclosed loans.
10
We are grateful to Michael Roberts for providing the Dealscan-Compustat link file. In addition to using this link
file, we also manually confirmed the matching between DealScan and Compustat.
11
The lenders with the following roles are considered as the major participants: admin agent, agent , arranger, book
runner, co-agent, co-arranger, co-lead manager, co-manager, co-syndications agent, co-underwriter, collateral agent,
coordinating arranger, documentation agent, facility agent, issuing agent, joint arranger, L/C issuer, lead arranger,
lead manager, lead participant, manager, managing agent, mandated arranger, PRC agent, packager, paying agent,
reference agent, senior co-arranger, senior lead manager, senior manager, senior managing agent, sole lender,
syndication agent. We have estimated the equations reported in the paper using this narrower definition of
participation and get similar results to those reported below.
12
A lender is classified as a commercial bank if its primary SIC code falls in 6011-6082 or 6712, or its Thompson
Financial institution type code equals one.

9

20,031 leveraged loan facilities in our sample had institutional participation, and 8,408 had major
participation by institutional lenders.
Information about other loan- or facility-specific variables is also taken from DealScan.
Because loan tranches are almost always floating-rate, we use the all-in-drawn spread as a measure of
loan pricing. The all-in-drawn spread is the sum of the spread of the facility over LIBOR and any annual
fees paid to the lender group. DealScan also provides data on the facility’s size and maturity, the number
of investors participating in the lending syndicate, as well as information on whether the facility is senior,
secured, second-lien, syndicated, and the type of facility (revolver or term loan). We also consider the
firm’s lending relationship with the dual holding lenders and other lenders, by examining whether the
firm borrowed from the same lender previously.
To identify whether the lender held equity stake in the borrower prior to the loan origination,
we create the list of shareholders of the borrowing company from Thompson Reuters Institutional
Holding Database (13F) for the one-year period leading up to the current loan, as well as the list of
lenders who are participating in the current loan. For example, for a loan originated in April 2000, we
create a list of equity holders using four 13F filings: filings for the quarters that end in June 1999,
September 1999, December 1999, and March 2000, respectively. An institutional investor’s equity stake
is measured as the average of the holdings that appear in these four filings. We focus on the equity stake
held by lenders prior to loan origination because we wish to evaluate the effect of holding an equity
position on the loan decision. We then match lender information from DealScan to the institutional
investors in the 13F by the lender’s name, and the lender’s ultimate parent’s name. We consider a loan
facility to be a dual-holder facility if at least one non-commercial bank institutional investor or its
ultimate parent participating in the loan syndicate also held an equity stake larger than 0.1% on average in
the same borrower during the one-year period prior to loan origination.
We match the borrower’s and/or borrower’s parent name to the Compustat firm by a
combination of algorithmic matching and manual checking following Chava and Roberts (2008). Using
this matching procedure, we are able to obtain other firm-level variables from Compustat, CRSP, I/B/E/S,

10

13F, and SDC Platinum. The total number of loan facilities with institutional participation that have a full
set of data for the most recent prior fiscal year-end is 6,350.
2.2. Overview of Sample
Table 1 provides statistics on the annual distribution of institutional loan facilities. This table
emphasizes increasing trend of institutional participation in the leveraged loan market. As Table 1 and
Figure 2 document, the portion of leveraged loans having institutional participation grew from 38% of
loan facilities in 1997 to 74% in 2007.
The emergence of institutional investors in the leverage loan market has been accompanied by an
increase in institutional equity holders’ participation in loans. In our sample of leverage loan facilities,
2,008 loan facilities (18%) had institutional investors who were also equity holders of the firms. As the
last column of Table 1 and Figure 3 show, this phenomenon of dual holding also has increased over the
sample period from about 16% of the sample in 1997 to almost 24% of the sample in 2007.
Table 2 presents summary statistics for both loan facilities and borrowing firms. The dual holders
have substantial equity stakes in the firms to which they lend, averaging 2.6% of the firm’s equity. The
sample average facility amount is $250 million, the average number of investors involved in a lending
syndicate is about nine, and the average maturity is about 52 months. Approximately 74% of facilities are
secured, 2% are second-lien, and roughly half are revolvers. Almost all loan facilities are senior debt
distributed in loan syndication.
Not surprisingly, because the sample consists of leveraged loans, borrowers tend to be risky.
The average leverage, measured by book value of total debt to total assets ratio, of our sample firms is
67.1% and the median is 63.3%. In addition, the sample firms also exhibit relatively low Z-scores and
credit ratings (BB-rated on average). 13,14 Finally, these firms underperformed relative to their industry, as
indicated by a negative industry-adjusted ROA prior to the loan origination.

13

“Z-score” is intended to be a negative function of bankruptcy probabilities. It is taken form Altman (1968) and
defined by: Z = 1.2 Working Capital / Total Assets + 1.4 Retained Earnings / Total Assets + 3.3 EBIT / Total Assets
+ 0.6 Market Value of Equity / Book Value of Total Liabilities T4 + 0.999 Sales/ Total Assets.
11

3. Why Would Equity Holders Lend to their Firms?
All else equal, investors prefer to concentrate their lending in firms other than the ones for which
they have a substantial equity stake. Lending to a firm for which an investor has a substantial equity stake
increases the investor’s exposure to firm-specific shocks, which could be mitigated to some extent if the
investor were to lend to a comparable firm for which it does not have an equity stake. Therefore, to
induce an investor to lend to a firm for which it is an equity holder, its lending must lead to an additional
source of gains that offsets her loss of diversification.
One potential source of such gains to a dual holder comes from aligning the interests of equity
holders and debt holders. Classic papers by Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Myers (1977) point out how
differences the incentives of equity holders and debt holders can lead to both underinvestment of valueincreasing projects and overinvestment of value-decreasing ones. Common ownership of debt and equity
potentially decreases conflicts of interest, improving the quality of the firm’s investments. Thus, the dual
holding of equity and debt by an institutional investor provides a channel which could lead to efficiency
gains. 15 If the improvement in investment efficiency arising from dual holding is larger than the
associated costs from sub-optimal diversification to the investor, as Jiang, Li and Shao (2010) argue, the
required return from dual holder loans is likely to be lower than that for similar non-dual holder loans.
Empirically, if dual holding occurs to increase investment efficiency, the incremental effect of dual
holding on spreads should be negative.
Another way in which equity holders can create value by lending is if imperfections in capital
markets lead firms to face financial “constraints”, meaning that firms cannot borrow at the interest rate
reflecting the firms’ fundamental risks. When firms are constrained at a time when access to capital is
particularly important, equity holders, who internalize some of the value created by the positive NPV
14

We use issuer ratings, not ratings for individual loans, because information on ratings for individual loans is often
missing. Therefore the sample includes 796 loans made to investment grade borrowers, despite the fact that all of
our loan facilities are classified as “leveraged”.
15
However, Parrino and Weisbach (1999)’s simulations suggest that the magnitude of this effect is trivial unless the
firm is substantially more levered than the average public U.S. firm.

12

project, are potential sources of capital. If the equity holders receive a return commensurate to the firm’s
risk minus the fraction of the value created through the project belonging to the equity holders, then the
loans could be priced at a discount relative to comparable ones. However, if the equity holder receives
compensation for providing capital through lending when others are unwilling to, or is able to negotiate
rents because of their influence inside the firms, then it is possible that the loan tranches could be priced
at a premium. Since firms will only be willing to pay a premium to avoid financial constraints at times
when raising capital is particularly important, a prediction of this argument is that firms will spend the
capital from these loan tranches more quickly than the capital raised from other ones.16
Finally, asymmetric information among potential lenders could potentially lead equity holders to
lend to the firm. By participating in the loan tranches themselves, insiders “certify” the quality of the firm,
and signal to other investors that the firm’s prospects are relatively good. We expect that the certification
argument leads to dual holdings at relatively risky-looking firms, and that the loan tranches should trade
at a premium to otherwise comparable loan tranches, since they were the ones that required certification
in the first place. In addition, to induce the equity holder to certify the quality of a loan that is undesirable
from a diversification perspective, the loan tranche is likely to require a premium over comparable loan
tranches that are more desirable to the equity holder.
Overall, there are several reasons why equity holders would choose to lend to their firms despite
the diversification costs they face from doing so. Equity holders receive a portion of value created
through better real investments, which could potentially be improved by reducing conflicts between
equity and debt holders, and also by providing capital to firms when they face financial constraints.
Theoretically, such capital could be priced at either a discount or a premium: A discount would occur if
equity holders internalize some of the value created and a premium if the equity holder receives

16

An interesting issue is why an equity holder would lend through a syndicated loan rather than through a private
placement. In practice, equity holders, especially hedge funds and private equity funds, do lend to firms in which
they hold equity positions, sometimes through affiliated mezzanine funds. These loans are generally at relatively
high interest rates and contain substantial control rights; however the positions are private so it is impossible to
quantify their magnitude. Involving an equity holder in a syndicated loan can be thought of as an intermediate way
of involving the equity holder without paying the larger premium associated with a private placement of debt.

13

compensation and/or rents from providing capital when it is most needed. In addition, if equity holder
participation is necessary to certify the quality of a deal, the equity holder should receive some sort of
compensation for being under-diversified, so in this case, we expect the loans to trade at a premium.

4. Differences between Dual Holder Loans and Non-Dual Holder Loans
4.1. Differences in Characteristics
Table 3 summarizes the univariate differences between the 2,008 dual holder and 9,129 non-dual
holder loan tranches in our sample. Dual holder tranches are somewhat less likely to be revolvers than
non-dual holder loans, but revolvers still make up more than half the dual holder sample (52.3%). The
other loan tranches in both samples are term loans. Both samples have roughly the same proportion of
Term Loan A facilities (between 6 and 7 percent), while dual holder facilities are more likely to have a
larger fraction (41.3%) of Term Loan B facilities than non-dual holder facilities (37.4%).17
Within a sample of institutional leveraged loan facilities, the dual holder facilities tend to be less
risky than non-dual holder facilities. A much higher proportion of borrowers of dual holder loan facilities
have ratings than borrowers of non-dual holder loan facilities (82.5% vs. 51.6%). Of the borrowers that do
have ratings, dual holder borrowers’ ratings tend to be higher. For example, of the dual-holder loan
facilities with issuer ratings, 34% have a B rating or lower, compared to 48% of the non-dual holder loan
facilities. Also indicative of dual holder facilities having lower risk is the fact that dual holder facilities
are substantially larger than non-dual holder loans ($461 million versus $212 million). Finally, dual
holder loan facilities tend to have more participating lenders (14 versus 8), to have somewhat longer
maturity, and are less likely to be secured or second-lien than non-dual holder loans.
17

We treat tranches with B or higher designations (e.g. C, D, etc.) as Term Loan B since all of them are marketed to
institutional investors. Moreover, about one-third of the term loans in our sample has no letter designation but is just
called ‘Term Loan’. In all reported tables, we treat these undesignated term loans as Term Loan B. We do so
because the facility attributes, such as the spread and payment schedule, of the unlabeled Term Loans in our sample
appear to be more like the Term Loan B’s than the Term Loan A’s. Detailed comparisons of attributes across
different tranche types are provided in Appendix B. In addition, when a tranche is first launched and appears in the
‘Calendar’, which is the weekly record of outstanding loans published by Reuters Loan Pricing Corporation (LPC),
often its type is originally described as “Term Loan”, but ultimately is classified in DealScan “Term Loan B”, or
vice versa. We have re-estimated all equations reported in the paper treating unclassified term loans separately and
all results are similar to those reported below.

14

Table 4 reports selected statistics on the types of institutional investors who are dual holders.
Column (1) reports the number of loan facilities with each type of institutional dual holder.18 Over 60% of
the dual holder loan facility sample has an investment banker as a dual holder, while only 5.3% of the
sample has as a hedge fund or private equity fund as a dual holder. As Column (4) shows, most of the
participation by hedge funds or private equity funds (over 75%) is in Term B Loan tranches. Loan
participating mutual funds also participate more often in Term B loan tranches, while other institutional
dual holders such as investment bank and finance company participate more frequently in revolvers
(about 60%). The equity stakes by institutional dual holder also varies by institutional type; Column (7)
reports the average equity stake by type and shows that hedge funds and private equity funds tend to have
the largest holdings, with an average of 4.3%.
4.2. Differences in Spreads
The goal of this paper is to understand the motives underlying equity holders’ investments in loan
tranches to the companies in which they have equity investments. One possibility is that they are able to
earn additional compensation by lending to these firms because of an information advantage, enabling
them to lend in situations where spreads are higher than usual. Alternatively, as suggested by Jiang, Li
and Shao (2010), having an equity position creates an extra motive for equity holders to lend, since doing
so potentially reduces conflicts of interest, and also could increase the value of their equity stake by
facilitating valuable investments. This argument implies that lending to a firm could be sufficiently
desirable to an equity holder that we could observe them lending at lower rates than other investors.
To evaluate these alternative hypotheses, we estimate equations predicting the interest rate on a
particular loan facility. Because the loans in our sample are floating rate with LIBOR as their index, we
estimate equations predicting the “All-in-Drawn Spread”, which is the spread of the loan facility over
LIBOR plus any annual fees that the borrower must pay the lenders. Our goal is to estimate the

18

The column sums to 2,399, not 2,008, because a loan can have more than one type of institutional investor as a
dual holder.

15

incremental effect of a dual holder on the spread, holding other factors that could affect the spread
constant. Therefore we estimate the following equation:

All - in - drawn      Dual Holder Indicator    X  

(1)

where X is a vector of covariates that include facility- and firm-specific control variables. The control
include the facility amount, the number of participating lenders and the lenders’ past relationships with
the firm, the maturity of the facility, whether the facility is secured or second-lien, whether the loan has
covenants, as well as the borrowing firm’s size and its ratio of fixed to total assets. Definitions of all
variables are provided in the Appendix A.
The loan facilities are generally either revolvers or term loans. The term loans are of two types,
Term Loan A facilities, which are usually syndicated to banks, or Term Loan B facilities (sometimes
labeled just “Term Loan”), which are typically structured for institutional investors. Since each type of
tranche usually has a different spread, it is important to control for differences in type of tranche when
estimating these types of equations.
A key factor in determining the spread on a loan facility is its default risk. The majority (82.5%)
of the firms in our sample have issuer credit ratings at the end of fiscal year prior to the loan origination.
The credit ratings presumably reflect the risk of the issuer as assessed by professionals around the time
the loan is issued. However, relying solely on credit ratings to measure risk necessitates dropping loans to
firms that do not have ratings. Therefore, we present specifications using issuer credit ratings as a
measure of risk for the loan facilities for which credit ratings are available, as well as equations using the
Z-Score and leverage to control for default risk for the larger sample that includes loan facilities without
credit ratings.
We present the OLS coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and the corresponding p-values on the
full sample in Table 5, and on the sub-sample with credit ratings in Table 6. Each equation includes
tranche-type fixed effects, tranche-purpose fixed effects, and year fixed effects, and reported standard
errors are clustered by borrower.

16

Column (1) of Table 5 presents estimates of Equation (1) using all observations for which all
required data are not missing (6,350 loan facilities). In this column, the coefficient on the institutional
dual holder indicator variable is 13.4, and is statistically significantly different from zero. This coefficient
indicates that holding other things constant, loan facilities with institutional dual holder participation have
spreads that are 13.4 basis points higher than other loan facilities. This spread difference is relatively large,
given the average spread of 257.5 basis points, so the estimated dual holder premium equals 5.2% of the
total spread.
The coefficients on the remaining variables, which control for other factors that potentially affect
spreads, are consistent with the notion that spreads are a function of borrower and loan risk. Larger loan
facilities with more participants, especially when the participants have past relationships with the
borrowers, tend to be less risky and have lower spreads. Secured and second-lien facilities tend to be
more risky, and hence have positive coefficients. 19 Z-Score has a negative coefficient and leverage a
positive one, suggesting that riskier firms have higher spreads, and profitability in the form of industryadjusted ROA, not surprisingly, lowers spreads. We also control for market-wide risk premia by including
the high-yield credit spread, measured as the gap between the spread on AAA loan index and the spread
on BB loan index in the month of loan origination. Not surprisingly, since our sample is relatively riskly
leveraged loans, the high yield spread is positively related to the all-in-drawn spread.
In Column (2) of Table 5, we present estimates of Equation (1) for the subsample of revolvers, in
Column (3) for all term loans, and in Column (4) for only the Term Loan B facilities. In each column, the
coefficient on the institutional dual holder indicator variable is positive and statistically significantly
different from zero. For revolvers, the coefficient on the dual holder indicator variable implies that loans
from dual holders have 12.0 basis point higher spreads than other loans. For all term loans pooled
(Column (3)), the premium is 16.5 basis points, and for just Term Loan B facilities, it is 17.7 basis points.
These results imply that there is a positive premium for different types of loan facilities.
19

Security by itself lowers the risk of a loan. However, secured loans tend to be issued by younger, riskier firms
with lower cash flows, so the positive relation with spreads likely reflects this additional risk. See Berger and Udell
(1990) and Erel, Julio, Kim, and Weisbach (2012).

17

In these equations, we control for default risk based on accounting measures such as leverage and
the firm’s Z-Score. An alternative way of controlling for risk is to use the issuer’s credit rating. Since
credit ratings are constructed to measure firms’ comprehensive default risk, it is likely a preferable
approach. However, credit ratings are not available for all firms, so the use of credit ratings is limited to
those firms that have them.
Table 6 presents coefficient estimates of Equation (1) for different credit ratings (Columns (1)
through (5)) and for issuers of no credit ratings (Column (6)). Column (1) contains estimates for all
facilities from issuers with credit ratings, including indicator variables for different rating categories.
Columns (2), (3), (4), and (5) present estimates for BBB and above rated firms, BB-rated firms, B-rated
firms, and CCC and below rated firms, respectively. As in Table 5, we include control variables for
tranche and firm characteristics, tranche-type, tranche-purpose and year fixed effects. The reported
standard error estimates are clustered by borrower.
In each column in Table 6, except Column (2), the coefficient on the dual holder indicator
variable is positive and statistically significantly different from zero. For all firms with ratings (Column
(1)), the estimates indicate that there is about an 11.0 basis point premium for dual holder facilities. This
premium rises with the risk of the firms: It is an insignificant 5.8 basis points for firms rated BBB and
higher, 12.0 basis points for BB-rated firms, 17.4 basis points for B-rated firms and 21.0 basis points for
firms with ratings lower than CCC. In addition, for firms without ratings, there is a positive but not
significant premium of 9.1 basis points to dual holders. These estimates suggest that this positive
premium to equity holders who lend to their firms increases with the firm’s default risk.
4.3. Do the Dual Holder Spread Premiums Reflect Unobservable Heterogeneity?
One possible interpretation of the results in Tables 5 and 6 is that there is some sort of
heterogeneity that is unobservable to an outsider, but affects both the likelihood that an equity holder
lends to the firm and also the spreads on the loans in which the dual holder participates. A potential
source of such heterogeneity is the unobservable risk of the firms. If dual holders are more likely to lend
in situations in which ratings understate true risks, then the premiums would reflect risk rather than

18

liquidity provision. A second potential source would be if dual holders are less likely to have covenants or
other restrictions in their loan facilities, and the spread premium represents compensation to the lenders
for having fewer rights than other lenders.20 If equity holdings strengthen the relationship between lender
and borrower, they could act in a similar manner to lending relationships and affect the optimal number of
covenants to use in a loan.21
A method of measuring dual holder premiums that is unlikely to be affected by such unobserved
firm heterogeneity comes from the relative pricing of different tranches within the same loan.22 Since
each tranche of a multiple tranche loan has the same seniority and covenants, the default risk of tranches
and the creditor rights attached to the tranches in the same loan is essentially the same. Different tranches
in the same loan will generally have different maturities and implicit options from one another that will
affect their pricing. However, once these other differences are controlled for econometrically, the
incremental effect of a dual holder on the relative pricing of tranches within a given loan should reflect
the dual holder’s impact. This approach will not be affected by unobservable firm-level heterogeneity
causing a spurious relation between the dual holder’s existence and the firm’s risk.
Within-loan estimates can also help to distinguish between alternative explanations for the dualholder premiums. Factors that affect firm-level value such as a change in ownership that is likely to
reduce future conflicts between equity and debt holders, and/or a signal to the market that the quality of
the firms’ assets is high, should affect the spreads on all tranches of the loan similarly. In contrast, a
systematic difference in the relative spread between different tranches that is a function of whether an
equity holder participates in that tranche has to be a function of tranche-level rather than firm-level factors.
One such possibility would be if different types of tranches have different liquidity and demand. For

20

Bradley and Roberts (2004) and Reisel (2010) estimate that, holding other factors constant, additional covenants
lower the equilibrium interest rate paid by borrowers.
21
The relation between lending relationships or equity holdings and covenant use is not clear theoretically. In
principle, they could lower the marginal cost of monitoring and lead to more covenants, or increase the ability of
lenders to extract rents through covenants, leading to fewer covenants. Prilmeier (2011) develops these hypotheses
in the context of lending relationships and finds empirical support suggesting both effects are important.
22
This approach was developed by Ivashina and Sun (2011a) and was recently adopted by Nadauld and Weisbach
(2011).

19

example, commercial banks, typically the lead arrangers, hold the Term Loan A portion of the loan and
sell the Term Loan B portion to non-commercial bank institutional investors. If the lead arranger is
worried about being able to sell a particular Term Loan B tranche it can increase the spread, probably
above the reservation price of equity holders, leading an institutional equity-holder to purchase part of
that tranche. In this case, the dual holders are likely to receive an unusually high spread, measured relative
to the Term Loan A tranche of the same loan.
To estimate the incremental effect of a dual holder on the differences in spreads between tranches
of a given loan, we estimate the following equation:

Spread Gap     Dummy indicatingwhich tranche the dual holder bought  γ  X  

(2)

where X includes differences in tranche-specific characteristics such as facility size, the number of
participating lenders, maturity, and whether the tranche is secured by collateral, as well as firm-level
characteristics and market-wide high-yield spread. The dependent variable in this equation is the
difference between the spreads of different tranches within the same loan. The indicator variable denoting
which tranche the dual holder bought measures the incremental effect on the spread gap of the dual
holder’s existence, and the control variables are intended to capture other differences between the
tranches. We estimate these equations on the sample of loans that have multiple tranches of the type
considered in that specification.23
Column (1) of Panel A of Table 7 presents estimates of Equation (2) for the subsample of 227
loans that have both Term Loan A and Term Loan B tranches. In this subsample, it was more common for
the dual holder to participate in the Term Loan B portion of the loan than the Term Loan A portion: Of
the 227 loans, there were 37 in which the dual holder participated in the Term Loan B tranche and only
one in which he participated in the Term Loan A tranche. For this reason, we estimate the incremental
effect of an equity holder participating in the Term Loan B portion of the loan.

23

We exclude cases in which dual holders exist in both types of tranches.

20

Term Loan B tranches tend to have a longer effective maturity than Term Loan A tranches
because the majority of Term Loan B tranches are bullet while the majority of Term Loan A tranches are
amortizing (see Appendix B). With a longer duration, Term Loan B tranches will have higher spreads
regardless of whether there is a dual holder participating in the tranche. The hypothesis that dual holders
are able to invest in the most attractive tranche implies that there should be an additional premium over
the corresponding Term Loan A tranche for the Term Loan B tranches in which they invest. The
coefficient estimates indicate the presence of a dual holder in the Term Loan B portion increases the
difference in spreads between Term Loan B and Term Loan A tranches by 11.9 basis points. However,
because of the relatively small number of cases with both tranche types present, the difference is not
statistically significant at conventional levels.
There are 1,055 loans in our sample that have both a Term Loan B tranche and a revolver. Of
these 1,055 cases, equity holding institutions participated in 71 of the Term Loan B tranches and five of
the revolvers. We estimate Equation (2) on this subsample of loans, considering the effect of the dual
holder purchasing the Term Loan B tranche in Column (2) and the effect of the dual holder purchasing the
revolver in Column (3). The dependent variable in these equations is the difference in spreads between
the Term Loan B tranche and the revolver. Therefore, the coefficient estimate of 28.3 on the dual holder
variable in Column (2) implies that the spread between Term Loan B tranches and revolvers is by 28.3
basis points higher when a dual holder is present in Term Loan B. Similarly the coefficient estimate of 26.2 in on the dual holder variable in Column (3) implies that the spread difference is 26.2 basis points
lower in the small number of cases in which the dual holder participates in the revolver. These estimates
suggest that dual holders are more likely to participate in whichever tranche has the highest spread
holding other factors constant.
A potentially cleaner test of the hypothesis that dual holders are able to invest in the most
attractive tranches comes from cases in which the dual holder invests in one of multiple tranches of the
same type in a particular deal. Our sample contains 100 such tranches, coming from 50 loans. In Panel B
of Table 7 we estimate equations similar to Equation (1) on this subsample of loans. In Column (1) we

21

present estimates of Equation (1) without controlling for firm-level characteristics, since each pair of
loans share the same firm-level fundamentals. In Column (2), we report estimates when controlling for
firm-level characteristics to further deal with the possibilities that cross-sectional variation in firm
characteristics across different pairs matters. Again, the coefficient estimate on the dual holder indicator
variable is positive and statistically significantly different from zero, implying between a 30.7 and a 36.1
basis point premium to dual holders.
Finally, there are 322 cases in which a borrower issues two of the same tranche type in the same
year, but not necessarily in the same deal. We re-estimate the equation for this subsample in Column (3)
and (4) of Panel B of Table 7. For this subsample, the coefficient estimate is statistically significant and
implies a positive dual holder premium of between 13.7 and 14.9 basis points.
Overall the results from Table 7, in which we compare tranches within a given loan, or across
similar tranches from the same borrower within a short period of time, are consistent with the results in
Table 6 that are based on comparisons across different loans. When an equity holding institution lends to
the firm, it receives a premium on the particular tranche in which it chooses to participate. These
premiums do not appear to be a result of unobserved heterogeneity across tranches in terms of their risk,
or in terms of the rights of lenders through protective covenants.

5. Dual Holder Characteristics and Spreads
The within-loan results suggest that the dual holder premiums occur because of tranche-specific
and not firm-specific factors. The most plausible explanation is that tranches in which equity holders
participate appear to be relatively more difficult to market than the ones in which they do not participate.
When institutional equity holders are relatively flexible in making their investment decisions, they can
lend to a firm fairly quickly and are able to earn compensation for providing capital in these
circumstances. This explanation implies that the types of institutions that are most flexible and can lend to
a firm under these circumstances are most likely to earn premiums. In addition, when an institutional
investor’s personal incentives are strongest, he is most likely to seek out investment opportunities with

22

relatively high returns. Finally, when an investor owns a larger share of the firm’s equity ownership, he is
likely to be more influential or have more information inside the firm, and thus more able to earn
premium by lending to it. We evaluate these predictions empirically in this section.
5.1. The Type of Institutional Dual Holder.
As documented in Table 4, there are a number of different types of institutional investors that
invest in loan tranches. If institutional investors’ incentives and their flexibility to make different kinds of
investments relatively quickly are factors that lead to larger dual holder premiums, then we would expect
hedge funds and private equity funds to be associated with relatively high premiums. Hedge funds and
private funds provide very large direct and indirect incentives to their managers and are relatively
unrestricted in the types of investments they can make.24 Other asset managing funds also have strong
pecuniary incentives, albeit not as strong as hedge fund and private equity fund managers. However, their
investments are more often subject to various kinds of restrictions (e.g. diversification requirement).
Finally, other institutions such as financing companies, investment banks and insurance companies tend
to have lower monetary incentives than the other groups that are directly related to loan pricing. For
example, insurance companies tend to focus on ensuring that their loan portfolio has the right term
structure and risk profile, rather than seeking out unusual opportunities to achieve abnormal returns.
Investment banks in our sample are often take the role of security broker whose major sources of profit
consist of not only loan spreads, but also fees they receive in exchange for providing services to the
borrower and other members of syndication.25
In Column (1) of Table 8, we re-estimate Equation (1) with the dual holders broken down by the
type of institution. To do so, we include separate indicator variables for hedge funds and private equity
24

General partners of private equity and hedge funds receive direct incentives through carried interest that usually
equals 20% of profits. In addition, they receive indirect incentives because their performance affects their future
incomes. These indirect incentives are likely to be of similar magnitude as the direct incentives. [See Chung,
Sensoy, Stern and Weisbach (2012) for estimates for private equity funds and Lim, Sensoy and Weisbach (2012) for
estimates for hedge funds.]
25
One concern about the dual holding investment banks is that it is possible that the equity and debt positions are
controlled by different parts of the bank, and consequently have virtually nothing to do with one another. It is
impossible to tell from our data exactly which part of the bank is controlling each investment. This issue is another
reason why we estimate the premiums separately by type of dual holder in this section.

23

funds, other funds, and other institutional investors. The coefficient estimates indicate that the premium is
substantially larger for hedge and private funds than for other types of funds. The coefficient on the
indicator variable for hedge and private equity funds is 53.7, indicating that when these funds lend to their
firms, they receive a 53.7 basis point premium over other non-dual holder facilities. The regression
coefficients also indicate that other fund dual holders have a 27.7 basis point premium over other
investors, while other institutional dual holders have just a 6.4 basis point premium. This pattern indicates
that the type of institution clearly matters in the premium the dual holders receive when they lend. Hedge
and private equity fund managers have substantially larger pecuniary incentives than other investors; they
also receive better interest rates when they lend to their firms.
Column (2) of Table 8 includes indicator variables for each un-grouped type of institutional dual
holder. Again, similar to the results in Columns (1), the coefficient estimates indicate that the type of
institutional investors matters. The coefficient estimate on the hedge fund and private equity fund
indicator variable is 36.9, while the coefficient estimates on the mutual funds and finance company dual
holder indicator variables are 22.5 and 12.1, respectively. The coefficient estimates on other types of dual
holders are not statistically significant or large in magnitude.
Columns (3) and (4) of Table 8 re-estimate this equation using just the loan facilities in which the
dual holders have participated, omitting the “Other institutional dual holder” variable from the equation in
Column (3), and the “Pension fund/CDO dual holder” variable in Column (4). Again, the hedge funds and
private equity funds have a largest premium relative to other institutional dual holders (33.5 to 44.8 basis
points). The other funds also do have a premium relative to the other institutions (16.4 basis points);
however, it is substantially smaller than the premium for hedge and private equity funds. These results are
consistent with hedge fund and private equity funds receiving the largest premiums relative to other loan
participants when they lend to firms in which they hold equity positions.
5.2. The Size of Dual Holder Equity Ownership.
The extent to which institutional equity holders invest in loan facilities that have relatively high
spreads also depends on the extent to which their equity position affords them informational or strategic

24

advantage inside the borrowing firm. Larger equity ownership implies that the investor will share a larger
fraction of the gains created through a value-increasing loan, but also potentially increases the
institution’s ability to facilitate participation in the most attractive tranches. To evaluate the extent to
which equity ownership influences their lending to their firms, we estimate the effect of the size of the
equity ownership on the dual holder premium.
To do so, we re-estimate Equation (1) using two dual holder indicator variables, one of which
measures that there is a dual holder with less than average (2.6%) equity holdings and the other which
indicates that there is a dual holder with above average holdings. Columns (1) - (4) of Table 9 contain
coefficient estimates for different types of tranches. The coefficients on these indicator variables represent
the premiums for dual holders with small and large stakes for all tranche types, revolvers, all term loans,
and only Term B facilities, respectively.
The premiums for large shareholdings range from 20.4 to 21.9 basis points, and the premiums for
small shareholdings range from 8.5 to 15.8 basis points. For each type of tranche, the premium is higher
for above average shareholdings than for below average shareholdings. This pattern indicates that dual
holding premiums, in addition to being affected by the type of institution, are increasing in the equity
ownership of the institution.
It is possible that these size effects are related to the type of institutional investor, since private
equity funds and hedge funds have the largest premiums and also tend to have the largest holdings (4.3%
compared to 2.5% for other dual holders). Therefore, we re-estimate this equation using separate controls
for whether the dual holder is a hedge fund or private equity fund, and how this is affected by the fund’s
equity ownership. The results, presented in Column (5) of Table 9, indicate that the largest effect is the
type of the fund, rather than the ownership of the fund. Hedge and private equity funds with small equity
ownership stakes have a 38.2 basis point premium and those with large ownership stakes have a 46.0
basis point premium. These premiums are substantially larger than the 8.6 basis point and 17.1 basis point
premiums for small and large shareholdings of non-hedge or private equity fund institutions.

25

5.3. The Proportion of the Loan Held by Dual Holders
If the dual-holder premiums represent compensation to equity holders for lending to the
borrowing firms, then, within the sample of dual holder loans, this compensation should be higher when
the firm would have had difficulties funding this particular facility absent the presence of dual holders.
An additional prediction of this argument is that the spread should be higher when the dual holder
provides a larger portion of the loan tranche. To evaluate this hypothesis, we estimate equations
predicting the spread on a particular loan tranche as a function of the dual holder’s loan share, as well as
the control variables we have used throughout the paper. Data on the share of the loan contributed by each
lender is available for only 301 dual holder loan tranches.26 We present estimates of the way the spread is
affected by the dual holder’s contribution on this sample in Table 10.
The estimates indicate that larger positions in the loan are associated with larger spreads. The
coefficient on the dual holder’s share in the base-case specification (Column (1)) is 147.5, which is
statistically significantly different from zero. This coefficient implies that for each additional percentage
point of dual holder loan ownership, the spread increases by 1.47 basis points, or that for one standard
deviation increase in loan share (12.5%, see Table 2), the spread increases by 18.4 basis points. Since it is
possible that loan share is correlated with a lender’s equity ownership, we include a variable indicating
whether the equity ownership is above the mean ownership of 2.6% in Column (2) of Table 10. The
results indicate that consistent with the results reported in Table 9, having above average equity
ownership leads to a 17.7 basis-point increase in spreads; however the coefficient on the dual holder’s
loan share is essentially unchanged. Finally, in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 10, we replace the dual
holder’s loan share with a variable indicating whether the dual holder is the largest lender. The results
reported in these columns indicate that a dual holder being the largest lender increases the spread by about
20 basis points. Overall, it appears that the size of the lender’s share has a statistically significant and
economically important effect on the tranche’s spread.

26

Our test here is restricted on a sample of dual holder loans, since non-dual holder loans, by definition, do not have
any dual holder loan share.

26

6. The Uses of Funds
The analysis so far suggests that the dual-holding premiums are most consistent with a story in
which equity holders provide capital for tranches that are particularly hard to fund, and receive
compensation for doing so in the form of a higher spread. Such premium will be even higher, if this hardto-fund facility is also particularly important to the firm. The idea is that, if it is difficult to raise a specific
tranche, firms will pay additional compensation for an equity holder to participate, provided that the
capital has a valuable use that cannot be delayed to a point in time in the future when capital markets are
potentially more liquid and it is unnecessary to pay an additional premium to acquire capital. This
argument predicts that firms borrowing from dual holders will spend a higher proportion of the raised
cash relatively quickly, rather than saving it as additional cash.
We test this prediction by estimating models similar to those in Kim and Weisbach (2008) that
predict the uses of the funds raised in a particular time period following the capital raising. In particular,
we estimate the following equation:

 loan proceed  
 loan proceed  
  1   2 ln 
  1  Dual Holding Indicator
Y   0   1 ln 
 total assets 0  
 total assets0  
  3 Dual Holding Indicator   4 lntotal assets0  

20074 Q

 Year - Qtr   ,

(3)

i
i 19971Q

where Y = ln[(Vt – V0)/total assets0]+1] for V = cash holdings and total assets, and Y = ln[(



t

V )/total

i 1 i

assets0]+1] for V = capital expenditure, acquisition, R&D, and long-term debt reduction, and t=1, 2, 3, 4
quarters subsequent to the loan issuance quarter.
We present estimates of Equation (3) in Table 11. We present the coefficient estimates for β1 and
β2 for the sake of brevity. Each row of this table represents a regression predicting a different possible use
of the capital that is raised in a specified time period. For example, the top row predicts the change in cash

27

during the first quarter following the capital raising, the second, the change in cash during the four
quarters following the capital raise, and the third row the change in cash during the eight quarters
following the capital raising. In the first row, the positive coefficient on β1 means that a portion of capital
raised is used to increase cash holdings in the first quarter following a loan. However, the negative
coefficient on β2 implies that the fraction of loan used to increase cash holdings is smaller for firms that
raised capital through at least one dual holder tranches. The final two columns transform the coefficients
into the predicted quantity of cash saved from an additional dollar raised by a median-sized firm.27 These
estimates suggest that, depending on the window used to measure the change in cash holdings, cash
increases at non-dual holder firms by between 20 and 29 cents for every dollar raised, while at dual holder
firms, the increase is only between 1 and 3 cents for every dollar raised.
The implication of these results is that firms with dual holder lenders appear to spend virtually all
of the capital they raise, while firms with non-dual holder lenders save between 20 and 29 cents of each
dollar raised as cash. The remaining rows of Table 11 attempt to gauge the types of use for which dual
holder firms tend to use the cash. These estimates are somewhat inconclusive, with total assets increasing
and long-term debt is reducing at all sample firms, with a somewhat larger effect for firms using dual
holder lenders. Nonetheless, these results suggest that firms with dual holder lenders spend the capital
they raise more quickly than non-dual holder firms, consistent with the view that capital raising was
particularly important at the firms that had equity-holder participation in their loans.

27

The calculations are based on a median-sized firm in the sample using Year and Quarter fixed effects for 3Q2003.
For example, the dollar changes in cash for t=1 is calculated as follows: Median loan proceeds are 150 and median
total assets prior to the loan issuance are 790. The estimates for β2 and β3 are 0.063 and 0.001, respectively, and the
constant term reflecting 3Q2003 is 0.007. Using these numbers together with coefficients from Table 11 yields a
predicted change of 40.37 in cash for non-dual holder lenders and a predicted change of 62.54 in cash for dual
holder lenders. Then we add one to median loan proceed and repeat the above procedure, which results in a
predicted change of 40.57 for non-dual holder lenders and 62.55 for dual holder lenders. The difference in the two
predicted changes represents the dollar change in cash for one unit increase in loan proceed, which equals 0.20 for
non-dual holder lenders and 0.01 for dual holder lenders.

28

7. Conclusion
Participation by equity-holding institutions has become a major part of the syndicated loan
market. In our sample of 11,137 institutional “leveraged” loan tranches between 1997 and 2007 from the
DealScan database, 2,008 (18%) have participation by a “dual holder” institution that owns at least 0.1%
of the borrowing firm’s equity. Lending to firms in which one has an equity position goes against the
principle of diversification, since it exposes the investor to firm-specific shocks through both its equity
and debt ownership. To justify dual holding, the investor must receive compensation of some sort, either
through the improvements in the value of its equity holdings, or by above market rates of return on the
loan.
We estimate the abnormal return a dual holder receives by comparing spreads on dual holder
tranches to those on observationally equivalent tranches that do not have a dual holder. Our estimates
indicate, holding all else equal, that loan tranches with dual holder participation receive a 13 basis-point
higher spread than otherwise similar tranches without an equity holder’s participation in the lending
syndicate. The positive spread is statistically and economically significant for revolvers as well as term
loans, and for loans to borrowers of different ratings and to unrated borrowers as well.
It is possible that the equity holding by an institutional investor is correlated with other,
potentially unobservable factors related to the loan tranche spread, which could drive the spread
premiums. For example, suppose that the risk of the particular tranches for which equity holders tend to
invest tends to be higher than is reflected in their ratings. We address the possibility that these spread
differences in spreads could reflect unobservable sources of risk by considering differences in spreads
across tranches of the same loan. Since different tranches of the same loan share the same underlying risk
and have the same seniority, unobservable differences in risk cannot explain differences in spreads of
tranches of the same loan. Because factors such as maturity and implicit options affect the spreads of
different types of tranches, we test whether the existence of a dual holder affects the relative difference in
spreads, holding other factors constant. Our results suggest that in a loan with both a Term Loan B and a
revolver, if a dual holder invests in a Term Loan B tranche, the spread between the two is higher than

29

would be expected absent dual holder participation, while if the dual holder invests in the revolver, the
spread is lower than expected. In the subsample of dual holder loans that have multiple tranches of the
same type, the tranches with dual holder participation have higher spreads than the tranches without dual
holder participation.
These results are not consistent with the view that dual holder premiums reflect unobservable risk.
Instead, they suggest that equity holders receive additional compensation in terms of additional returns
when they lend to firms for which they hold equity positions. There are several channels that would lead
to these additional returns. It is possible that common ownership of equity and debt could reduce conflicts
of interest between claimholders, leading to improved firm-level investment, or that participation by an
equity holder could certify a firm’s quality to outside investors. However, these arguments predict that
returns to all tranches of a loan will be higher, and do not explain differences in returns between tranches
of the same loan. The within-loan results are better explained by a story in which equity holders receive
compensation for participating in tranches that are relatively difficult to fill at times when it particularly
important for the firm.
An implication of this argument is that the equity holders with the largest monetary incentives
and the flexibility to make loans quickly will receive higher premium. Our results suggest that there are
large differences in premiums going to different types of dual holders. When private equity and hedge
funds are dual holders, they have a 54 basis-point premium over other loans when other kinds of money
managing funds are dual holders, the premium is 28 basis-points, and when all other types of institutional
investors are dual holders, the premium is only 6 basis points. Since incentives to maximize returns from
holding multiple securities of the same firm are substantially higher in private equity and hedge funds
than in other institutions, these large differences reinforce our interpretation of the premium as reflecting
equity holding institutions utilize their position inside the borrowing firms when they lend to their firms.
In addition, spreads are higher when the investor has a larger equity position in the firm, and when it
purchases a larger portion of the loan.

30

Institutional investors, especially private equity and hedge funds, have become substantial equity
holders in corporations. In addition, they are important lenders to corporations through their role in the
syndicated loan market. In principle, institutions could use one type of investment to improve returns in
their other investments. The evidence in this paper suggests that their substantial equity stakes can lead
these investors to obtain higher interest rates than other investors when they lend to the companies in
which they hold equity. By comparing spreads across loan tranches of the same loan, we can rule out
explanations for this finding coming from unobserved heterogeneity coming from risk or other loan
features being associated with dual holders.
The basic point, however, is that there can be interactions among different investments by one
financial institution in a particular firm. These interactions can potentially create efficiencies and rents
that can be captured by one party or other. Understanding the way in which institutional investors utilize
different types of investments to benefit their overall returns would be an excellent topic for future
research.

31

References

Altman, E. I. (1968) Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis, and the Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy.
Journal of Finance 23, 589–609.
Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, (1990) Collateral, loan quality, and bank risk, Journal of
Monetary Economics 25, 21-42.
Bradley, Michael, and Michael R. Roberts (2004). “The Structure and Pricing of Corporate Debt
Covenants,” Working Paper, Duke University.
Brophy, David J., Paige P. Ouimet, and Clemens Sialm (2009) “Hedge Funds as Investors of Last Resort?”
Review of Financial Studies, 22, 541-574.
Chava, S., and M. R. Roberts. (2008) How does financing impact investment? The role of debt covenants.
The Journal of Finance 63 (5): 2085-121.
Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Léa H. Stern, and Michael S. Weisbach (2012), “Pay for
Performance from Future Fund Flows: The Case of Private Equity,” Review of Financial Studies,
forthcoming.
Erel, Isil, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach (2012) “Macroeconomic Conditions and
Capital Raising,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 341-376.
Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun. (2011a) “Institutional Demand Pressure and the Cost of Corporate
Loans,” Journal of Financial Economics 99, 500-522.
Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun (2011b) “Institutional Stock Trading on Loan Market Information,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 100, 284-303.
Jensen, Michael C. and William Meckling (1976) “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure” Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Peng Shao. 2010. When shareholders are creditors: Effects of the simultaneous
holding of equity and debt by non-commercial banking institutions. Review of Financial Studies 23,
3595-3637.
Kim, Woojin and Michael S. Weisbach (2008) “Motivations for Public Equity Offers: An International
Perspective,” Journal of Financial Economics, 87, 281-307.
Lim, Jongha, Berk A. Sensoy, and Michael S. Weisbach (2012) “Total Incentives of Hedge Fund
Managers,” Research in Progress, Ohio State University.
Massoud, N., D. Nandy, A. Saunders, and K. Song (2010) “Do hedge funds trade on private information?
Evidence from syndicated lending and short selling.” Journal of Financial Economics.
Myers, Stewart (1977), “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing”, Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 145175.

32

Nadauld, Taylor D. and Michael S. Weisbach (2011) “Did Securitization Affect the Cost of Corporate
Debt?” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Nandy, D., and P. Shao (2010) “Institutional investment in syndicated loans.” Working Paper.
Parrino, Robert, and Michael S. Weisbach (1999), “Measuring Investment Distortions Arising from
Stockholdler-Bondholder Conflicts”, Journal of Financial Economics 53, 3-42.
Prilmeier, Robert (2011) “Why do Loans Contain Covenants? Evidence from Lending Relationships,”
Working Paper, Ohio State University.
Reisel, Natalia (2010). “On the Value of Restrictive Covenants: Empirical Investigation of Public Bond
Issues.” Working Paper, Southern Methodist University.

33

Figure 1. Par Amount of Outstanding US Leveraged Loans
This figure presents the overall size of the U.S. leveraged loan market over the period 1996 to September of 2010.
Par amount of outstanding U.S. leveraged loans in billion dollars is plotted. Numbers are from S&P / LCD.
($Bill)
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

34

Figure 2. Institutional Participation in Leveraged Loan Facilities
This figure presents the proportion of leveraged loan facilities with institutional participation over the period 1997 to
2007. The solid line and the dotted line represent the proportion of loan facilities that have non-commercial bank
participation and non-commercial bank major participation, respectively, among 20,031 leveraged loan facilities in
our sample. The dashed line represents the proportion of loan facilities that involve only commercial banks.
90
80
70

(%)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
97

98

99

00
01
02
03
04
05
Bank‐only: % of Facility
Inst. Participation:% of Facility
Inst. Major Participation: % of Facility

35

06

07

Figure 3. Dual Holdings by Institutional Investors
This figure presents proportion of dual holder loan facilities over the period 1997 to 2007. The solid line and the
dotted line represent the proportion of dual holder loan facilities among all leveraged loan facilities (20,031 loan
facilities) and among institutional leveraged loan facilities (11,137 loan facilities) in our sample, respectively.

25

20

(%)

15

10

5

0
97

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Inst. Dualholding: % of all Leveraged Loan Facilities.
Inst. Dualholding: % of Leveraged Loan Facilities with Institutional Participation

36

Table 1. Trends in Institutional Participation in Leveraged Loans and Dual Holdings
Panel A and Panel B present the distribution of loan origination during 1997-2007 by number and dollar value,
respectively. Column (1) reports the total number (value) of all leveraged loan facilities from DealScan database.
Column (2) reports the total number (value) of loan facilities in which only commercial banks participated. Columns
(3) and (4) report the total number (value) of loan facilities in which at least one institutional investor is a participant
and a major participant of a loan syndicate, respectively. Column (5) reports the total number (value) of loan
facilities in which an institution is involved as a dual holder.
Panel A: Number of Loan Facilities
Year of
Number of All Number of Bank-only
Origination
Leveraged Loan
Facilities
Facilities
(% of all facilities)
(1)

(2)

Number of InstitutionNumber of Facilities
participated Facilities with Major Participation
(% of all facilities)
by Institutions
(% of all facilities)
(3)
(4)

Number of Facilities
with at least one
Insitutional Dual Holder
(% of institutional loans)
(5)

1997

2,706

1,674 (61.9)

1,032 (38.1)

765 (28.3)

163 (6.0)

(15.8)

1998

2,264

1,352 (59.7)

912 (40.3)

689 (30.4)

148 (6.5)

(16.2)

1999

1,915

996 (52.0)

919 (48.0)

678 (35.4)

180 (9.4)

(19.6)

2000

1,780

966 (54.3)

814 (45.7)

610 (34.3)

138 (7.8)

(17.0)

2001

1,777

887 (49.9)

890 (50.1)

655 (36.9)

153 (8.6)

(17.2)

2002

1,800

795 (44.2)

1,005 (55.8)

685 (38.1)

166 (9.2)

(16.5)

2003

1,778

632 (35.5)

1,146 (64.5)

844 (47.5)

198 (11.1)

(17.3)

2004

1,818

532 (29.3)

1,286 (70.7)

954 (52.5)

209 (11.5)

(16.3)

2005

1,626

443 (27.2)

1,183 (72.8)

950 (58.4)

241 (14.8)

(20.4)

2006

1,365

304 (22.3)

1,061 (77.7)

860 (63.0)

203 (14.9)

(19.1)

2007

1,202

313 (26.0)

889 (74.0)

718 (59.7)

209 (17.4)

(23.5)

Total

20,031

8,894 (44.4)

11,137 (55.6)

8,408 (42.0)

2,008 (10.0)

(18.0)

Value of Institutionparticipated Facilities
(% of all facilities)

Value of Facilities with
Major Participation
by Institutions
(% of all facilities)

Panel B: Value of Loan Facilities (in $ billions)
Year of
Value of All
Value of Bank-only
Origination
Leveraged Loan
Facilities
Facilities
(% of all facilities)

Value of Facilities with at least one
Insitutional Dual Holder
(% of institutional loans)

1997

322

80.3 (24.9)

242 (75.2)

192 (59.6)

79.2 (24.6)

(32.7)

1998

269

69.5 (25.8)

200 (74.3)

166 (61.7)

58.1 (21.6)

(29.1)

1999

268

57.2 (21.3)

211 (78.7)

170 (63.4)

82.1 (30.6)

(38.9)

2000

241

70.4 (29.2)

171 (71.0)

129 (53.5)

45.4 (18.8)

(26.5)

2001

271

52.7 (19.4)

218 (80.4)

174 (64.2)

73.2 (27.0)

(33.6)

2002

243

37.9 (15.6)

205 (84.4)

156 (64.2)

60.9 (25.1)

(29.7)

2003

268

35.7 (13.3)

233 (86.9)

185 (69.0)

83 (31.0)

(35.6)

2004

341

35.5 (10.4)

305 (89.4)

246 (72.1)

82.4 (24.2)

(27.0)

2005

368

44.4 (12.1)

324 (88.0)

275 (74.7)

96.3 (26.2)

(29.7)

2006

380

39.8 (10.5)

340 (89.5)

300 (78.9)

103 (27.1)

(30.3)

2007

393

39.8 (10.1)

354 (90.1)

315 (80.2)

121 (30.8)

(34.2)

Total

3,370

563.0 (16.7)

2,800 (83.1)

2,310 (68.5)

885 (26.3)

(31.6)

37

Table 2. Summary Statistics
This table presents sample summary statistics for leveraged loan facilities with institutional participation from the
DealScan database, occurring between 1997 and 2007. The total number of such loan facilities with a full set of
matched information from various data sources is 6,350. Definitions of the variables are provided in the Appendix A.
All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% level.
N

Mean

25th Pct.

Median

75th Pct.

Std. Dev.

Dual Holdings
Dual holdings indicator

6,350

0.240

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.427

Dual holder's equity holding (conditonal on dual holding)

1,523

0.026

0.003

0.012

0.029

0.041

Dual holder's loan share (conditonal on dual holding)

301

0.129

0.057

0.096

0.150

0.125

Dual holder is the largest lender (conditonal on dual holding)

301

0.326

0.000

0.000

1.000

0.469

Loan Characteristics
Facility amount ($MM)

6,350

250.0

50.0

150.0

300.0

309.0

Number of participating lenders

6,350

9.453

3.000

7.000

13.000

8.611

% of participating lender with past relationship

6,350

0.340

0.000

0.250

0.600

0.344

Maturity (months)

6,350

52.32

36.00

60.00

66.00

22.61

Secured indicator

6,350

0.736

0.000

1.000

1.000

0.441

Secondlien indicator

6,350

0.017

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.129

Number of finanacial covenants

6,350

2.125

0.000

2.000

3.000

1.585

Number of non-financial covenants

6,350

2.839

1.000

4.000

5.000

2.115

Revolver indicator

6,350

0.585

0.000

1.000

1.000

0.493

Allindrawn

6,350

257.5

162.5

225.0

325.0

138.5

Total Assets ($MM)

6,350

2,649

301

790

2,129

5,067

Fixed assets/total assets

6,350

0.337

0.135

0.283

0.501

0.240

Zscore

6,350

2.534

1.063

2.091

3.296

2.890

Leverage

6,350

0.671

0.477

0.633

0.800

0.331

Ind.adj. ROA

6,350

-0.075

-0.106

-0.034

0.009

0.182

Number of analyst following

6,350

5.526

1.000

4.000

8.250

5.420

Institutional holdings

6,350

0.492

0.186

0.522

0.769

0.330

Have S&P issuer rating

6,350

0.648

0.000

1.000

1.000

0.478

S&P issuer rating (conditional on having rating)

4,116

9.938

9.000

10.000

11.000

2.703

Firm Characteristics

38

Table 3. Differences in Attributes of Dual Holder Loan Facilities and Non-Dual Holder Loan Facilities
This table shows the differences in various attributes between dual holder loan facilities and non-dual holder loan facilities in our sample. Definitions of the
variables are provided in the Appendix A. The total number of loan facilities in our sample is 11,137, including 2,008 dual holder loans and 9,129 non-dual
holder loans. Panel A, B, and C present the differences in the type of tranche purchased, issuer credit rating, and other loan characteristics, respectively.
Panel A.
Dual Holder Loans (1)

Non-Dual Holder Loans (2)

Diff (1) - (2)

Facility Type

N

Mean

N

Mean

Diff. (t-value)

% of Revolver

2,008

52.3%

9,129

55.7%

-3.4% (2.74***)

% of Term Loan A

2,008

6.3%

9,129

6.9%

% of Term Loan B

2,008

41.3%

9,129

37.4%

-0.6% (0.93)
3.9% (3.29)***

Panel B.
Dual Holder Loans (1)

Non-Dual Holder Loans (2)

Diff (1) - (2)

S&P Issuer Credit Rating

N

Mean

N

Mean

Diff. (t-value)

% of having issuer ratings

2,008

82.5%

9,129

51.6%

30.9% (-26.13)***

% of BBB (conditional on having ratings)

1,657

15.3%

4,709

9.1%

6.2% (7.03)***

% of BB (conditional on having ratings)

1,657

47.9%

4,709

41.3%

6.6% (4.67)***

% of B (conditional on having ratings)

1,657

29.0%

4,709

39.8%

-10.8% (-7.90)***

% of CCC and below (conditional on having ratings)

1,657

4.6%

4,709

8.5%

-3.8% (-5.08)***

Panel C.
Dual Holder Loans (1)
Facility Attributes

N

Mean

Non-Dual Holder Loans (2)
N

Mean

Diff (1) - (2)
Diff. (t-value)

Facility Amount ($MM)

2,008

461.0

9,129

212.0

249.0 (23.00)***

Number of participating lenders

2,008

14.089

9,129

8.285

5.805 (21.73)***

Maturity (Months)

2,008

58.41

9,129

52.54

5.87 (9.47)***

Secured Indicator

2,008

0.662

9,129

0.715

-0.053 (-4.49)***

Second-lien Indicator

2,008

0.014

9,129

0.024

-0.010 (-2.55)*

39

Table 4. Type of Dual Holders
This table reports selected statistics on the types of institutional investors who are dual holders. Columns (1) and (2) report the number and amount of loan
facilities with each type of institutional dual holders. The number of loan facilities in Column (2) sums to 2,399, which is greater than the total number of dual
holder loan facilities in our sample, because a loan facility can have more than one type of institutional investor as a dual holder. Columns (3) and (4) present the
frequency of participating in revolvers and Term B tranches by type of dual holders, respectively. Columns (5) and (6) report the average dollar amount and
syndicate size of loan facilities in which each type of dual holder is involved, respectively. The last Column (7) presents the average equity holdings of each type
of dual holders.

Fraction
Revolver

Fraction
TermB

(3)

(4)

507,070 (64.3%)

0.576

0.361

497 (24.8%)

240,205 (30.4%)

0.616

Mutual funds

436 (21.7%)

133,571 (16.9%)

Hedge funds/ Private Equity funds

106 (5.3%)

34,163 (4.3%)

Insurance company

90 (4.5%)

Others (Pension funds/ CDOs)

50 (2.5%)

Type of Dual Holder
Investment bank
Finance company

Average
facility amt.
($MM)
(5)

Average
number of
participants
(6)

Average
equity hldg.
(%)
(7)

417.0

11.6

2.45

0.324

483.0

17.2

2.92

0.271

0.677

306.0

18.4

4.25

0.217

0.755

322.0

19.3

4.31

36,392 (4.6%)

0.167

0.800

404.0

22.7

4.08

14,090 (1.8%)

0.080

0.920

282.0

28.7

3.01

Total number of
dual holding loans
involved
(1)

Total amount of
dual holding loans
involved ($MM)
(2)

1,215 (60.5%)

40

Table 5. Do Dual Holder Loan Facilities Have Higher Spreads?
This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values. Definitions of all variables are provided in the Appendix
A. The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the analysis is conducted at the loan facility level. Column (1)
employs the full sample. The number of loan facilities for which all required data are not missing is 6,350. Columns (2)-(4) employ the subsamples of revolvers,
all term loans, and just the Term Loan B facilities, respectively. All specifications include tranche-purpose fixed effects and year fixed effects. The specification
in Column (1) additionally includes tranche type fixed effects, because it considers the full sample of all tranche types. Standard errors are clustered at the
borrowing firm level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dependent Var.: All-in-drawn spread

All Tranche Types
Sample

Revolver
Sample

(1)
coef.
Institutional Dual Holding Indicator

All Term Loan
Sample

(2)
(p-val)

coef.

Term B
Sample

(3)
(p-val)

coef.

(4)
(p-val)

coef.

(p-val)

13.380*** (0.000)

11.996*** (0.002)

16.549*** (0.002)

17.695*** (0.003)

Log(Facility amount)

-23.756*** (0.000)

-30.700*** (0.000)

-15.903*** (0.000)

-17.370*** (0.000)

Log(Number of participating lenders)

-20.621*** (0.000)

-13.468*** (0.000)

-27.378*** (0.000)

-28.261*** (0.000)

% of participating lenders with past relationship

-14.301*** (0.002)

-5.581 (0.212)

-26.864*** (0.000)

-29.747*** (0.000)

Log(Maturity)

-13.151*** (0.000)

-13.431*** (0.000)

-15.095** (0.016)

-12.789** (0.049)

46.118*** (0.000)

54.327*** (0.000)

33.237*** (0.000)

33.225*** (0.000)

288.859*** (0.000)

265.706*** (0.000)

288.519*** (0.000)

283.738*** (0.000)

-4.902 (0.412)

-11.723** (0.047)

2.220 (0.809)

6.647 (0.471)

Log(Total assets)

0.767 (0.690)

2.245 (0.278)

-1.657 (0.580)

-0.595 (0.852)

Fixed assets/total assets

6.414 (0.387)

-0.617 (0.934)

13.011 (0.286)

10.649 (0.414)

-2.555*** (0.001)

-2.461*** (0.004)

-2.768** (0.027)

-3.210** (0.019)

16.403** (0.020)

21.134*** (0.003)

6.789 (0.515)

6.425 (0.567)

-96.577*** (0.000)

-89.911*** (0.000)

-102.053*** (0.000)

-104.075*** (0.000)

-9.789*** (0.001)

-7.138** (0.011)

-13.507*** (0.003)

-14.269*** (0.003)

-17.985*** (0.005)

-18.015*** (0.003)

-19.758** (0.042)

-14.496 (0.162)

0.147*** (0.000)

0.115*** (0.000)

0.191*** (0.000)

0.211*** (0.000)

Secured Indicator
Second-lien Indicator
Covenants Indicator

Z-score
Leverage
Ind-adj. ROA
Log(Number of analyst following)
Institutional holdings
High-yield spread
Term A Indicator

-23.677*** (0.000)

Number of obs.

6,350

3,713

2,637

2,232

Adjusted R2

0.516

0.493

0.484

0.473

41

Table 6. Is the Dual Holder Increase in Spreads Driven by Issuer Credit Rating?
This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values for different credit ratings and for issuers of no credit
ratings. Definitions of all variables are provided in the Appendix A. The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the
analysis is conducted at the loan facility level. Column (1) contains estimates for all facilities from issuers with credit ratings, including indicator variables for
different rating categories. Columns (2)-(5) present estimates for BBB and above rated firms, BB-rated firms, B-rated firms, and CCC and below rated firms,
respectively. Column (6) presents estimates for issuers with no credit ratings. All specifications include tranche-type fixed effects, tranche-purpose fixed effects
and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the borrowing firm level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

Dependent Var.: All-in-drawn spread

All Rating
Sample

BBB and Above
Sample

(1)
coef.
Institutional Dual Holding Indicator

BB-rated
Sample

(2)
(p-val)

10.998*** (0.001)

coef

B-rated
Sample

(3)
p-value

5.806 (0.492)

coef.

CCC and Below
Sample

(4)
(p-val)

12.037*** (0.004)

coef.

No Issuer Rating
Sample

(5)
(p-val)

coef.

(6)
(p-val)

17.424*** (0.005)

21.022 (0.411)

coef.

(p-val)

9.085 (0.291)

Log(Facility amount)

-18.812*** (0.000)

-7.960 (0.154)

-14.965*** (0.000)

-17.753*** (0.000)

-40.183*** (0.000)

-25.469*** (0.000)

Log(Number of participating lenders)
% of participating lenders with past

-15.867*** (0.000)

-18.499*** (0.008)

-17.294*** (0.000)

-15.777*** (0.000)

3.328 (0.762)

-19.503*** (0.000)

-15.552*** (0.001)

-11.924 (0.349)

-14.355*** (0.006)

-22.272*** (0.006)

-28.762 (0.233)

-23.748*** (0.002)

Log(Maturity)

-10.676*** (0.002)

2.029 (0.720)

1.052 (0.822)

-36.054*** (0.000)

-31.764** (0.017)

-13.416*** (0.007)

36.970*** (0.000)

46.507*** (0.000)

41.924*** (0.000)

6.377 (0.543)

53.289** (0.012)

30.397*** (0.000)

253.937*** (0.000)

300.883*** (0.000)

218.898*** (0.000)

253.756*** (0.000)

204.079*** (0.000)

295.445*** (0.000)

Secured Indicator
Second-lien Indicator
Covenants Indicator
Log(Total assets)
Fixed assets/total assets
Leverage
Ind-adj. ROA
Log(Number of analyst following)

-1.631 (0.765)

-16.450 (0.120)

-10.865 (0.103)

29.186** (0.016)

14.450 (0.455)

-6.426 (0.435)

6.843*** (0.000)

9.746* (0.076)

3.731 (0.151)

7.177** (0.022)

7.787 (0.364)

-4.652 (0.115)

4.869 (0.457)

19.962 (0.274)

-6.476 (0.420)

9.665 (0.389)

-22.904 (0.481)

9.892 (0.374)

11.540** (0.042)

-2.459 (0.911)

19.350** (0.019)

10.773 (0.216)

13.709 (0.498)

19.265** (0.025)

-61.594*** (0.000)

-67.986 (0.368)

-114.809*** (0.000)

-77.748*** (0.001)

69.304** (0.032)

-91.837*** (0.000)

-4.608* (0.056)

-9.074 (0.109)

-4.618 (0.142)

-4.434 (0.266)

9.839 (0.458)

-8.219** (0.049)

Institutional holdings

-13.953** (0.010)

0.003 (1.000)

-17.236** (0.022)

-13.798 (0.109)

-33.133 (0.377)

-7.215 (0.490)

High-yield spread

0.163*** (0.000)

0.161* (0.086)

0.174*** (0.000)

0.165*** (0.006)

-0.004 (0.976)

0.112** (0.043)

BB-rated Indicator

33.838*** (0.000)

B-rated Indicator
CCC and below-rated Indicator

81.941*** (0.000)
138.127*** (0.000)

Number of observations

5,426

671

2,397

2,010

348

2,989

Adjusted R2

0.566

0.393

0.495

0.439

0.429

0.480

42

Table 7. Is the Dual Holder Increase in Spreads Driven by
Unobservable Heterogeneity across Firms?
Panel A of this table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (2) and corresponding p-values
on the sample of loans that have multiple tranches. Definitions of all variables are provided in the Appendix A. The
dependent variable is the spread gap between different tranches within the same loan in basis points. The dummy
variable indicating which tranche the dual holder bought measures the incremental effect on spreads of the dual
holder’s existence, and the control variables are intended to capture other differences between the tranches. Column
(1) of Panel A presents estimates for the subsample of 227 tranche pairs that have both Term Loan A and Term Loan
B tranches, and Columns (2) and (3) present estimates for the subsample of 1,055 tranche pairs that have both a
Term Loan B tranche and a revolver. Panel B of this table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of
Equation (1) and corresponding p-values on the sample of dual holder loans and the matched non-dual holder loans
of the same tranche type. Column (1) employs 50 loans (100 facilities) that have both a dual holder loan and a nondual holder loan of the same tranche type. Column (3) considers 161 pairs (322 facilities) of a dual holder loan and a
non-dual holder loan of the same tranche type issued by the same borrower in the same year, but not necessarily in
the same deal. Number of observations drops in Column (3) and (4), as we require firm-level information. All
specifications include tranche-purpose fixed effects and year fixed effects. All regressions in Panel B additionally
include tranche type fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the borrowing firm level. ***, **, * correspond to
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Within Deal Spreads Gap between Tranches
Dependent Var.: Within Deal Spread Gap between Tranches

(TermB - TermA)
Spread in the Same
Deal
(1)
coef.

Dual Holder Bought TermB
Dual Holder Bought Revolver
Log(Facility amount)_Gap
Log(Number of participating lenders)_Gap
% of participating lenders with past relationship_Gap
Log(Maturity)_Gap
Secured_Gap
Second-lien_Gap
High-yield spread

(TermB - Revolver)
Spread in the Same
Deal
(2)

(p-val)

coef.

11.860 (0.368)
-1.845
-23.144*
-16.210
-12.887
68.940*
166.872***
0.100
Yes

Firm-level characteristic control

coef.

(p-val)

28.270*** (0.007)

(0.845)
(0.062)
(0.583)
(0.793)
(0.064)
(0.009)
(0.254)

-16.215***
-23.990**
-0.989
-9.255
-14.457
320.408***
-0.052
Yes

227
0.365

Number of observations
Adjusted R2

(p-val)

(TermB - Revolver)
Spread in the Same
Deal
(3)

(0.000)
(0.013)
(0.964)
(0.301)
(0.392)
(0.000)
(0.409)

1,055
0.293

-26.188*
-16.115***
-21.421**
-9.485
-8.100
-14.634
319.388***
-0.059
Yes

(0.089)
(0.000)
(0.029)
(0.645)
(0.362)
(0.381)
(0.000)
(0.348)

1,055
0.290

Panel B: Differences in Spreads between Dual Holder Loans and Matching Non-Dual Holder Loans
Matching
Dependent Var.: All-in-drawn spread

Same Tranche Type Within the Same Deal
(1)

Institutional Dual Holding Indicator
Log(Facility amount)
Log(Number of participating lenders)
% of participating lenders with past relationship
Log(Maturity)
Secured Indicator
Second-lien Indicator
High-yield spread
Firm-level characteristic control
Number of observations
Adjusted R2

Same Tranche Type to the Same Borrower
in the Same Year

(2)

coef.

(p-val)

36.073**
2.703
-36.432*
-29.591
-1.849
57.307**
-75.137
-0.096
No

(0.038)
(0.867)
(0.062)
(0.549)
(0.941)
(0.021)
(0.174)
(0.730)

100
0.545

coef.
30.715*
-15.096
-34.289
-4.477
9.192
9.648
562.962***
0.423
Yes
76
0.760

43

(3)

(4)

(p-val)

coef.

(p-val)

coef.

(p-val)

(0.062)
(0.493)
(0.172)
(0.917)
(0.594)
(0.670)
(0.000)
(0.308)

14.876**
-26.224***
-30.891***
-23.733
-19.427
30.398
259.985***
-0.377
No

(0.025)
(0.001)
(0.006)
(0.330)
(0.112)
(0.132)
(0.000)
(0.576)

13.745*
-18.981*
-20.097
35.384
-13.204
49.581***
297.765***
0.441
Yes

(0.088)
(0.071)
(0.156)
(0.278)
(0.450)
(0.009)
(0.000)
(0.504)

322
0.438

226
0.535

Table 8. Does the Type of Dual Holder Affect the Loan Facility Pricing?
This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values, with the
dual holders broken down by the type of institution. Definitions of all variables are provided in the Appendix A.
The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the analysis is conducted at
the loan facility level. In Columns (1) and (3) dual holders are classified into three different groups: HF/PE Dual
holder, Other Fund Dual holder, and Other Institutional Dual holder. HF/PE Dual holder indicates that the
institutional type of a dual holder is a hedge fund, a private equity fund, or other vulture fund. Other Fund Dual
holder indicates the cases in which a mutual fund, a pension fund, or a CDO participated as a dual holder. Other
Institutional Dual holder indicates the cases in which a financing company, insurance company, or an investment
bank participated as a dual holder. In Column (2) and Column (4) each type of dual holders is considered separately.
Columns (1) and (3) employ all loan facilities in our sample for which all required data are not missing (6,350 loan
facilities), whereas Column (2) and (4) present estimates for the subsample of loans in which the dual holders have
participated. All specifications include tranche-type fixed effects, tranche-purpose fixed effects, and year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the borrowing firm level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Dependent Var.: All-in-drawn spread

All Institutional Loans Sample
(1)
coef.

(2)
(p-val)

HF/PE Dual holder

53.743*** (0.000)

Other Fund Dual holder

27.667*** (0.000)

Other Institutional Dual holder

Dual holder Loans Sample

coef.

(3)
(p-val)

36.918*** (0.004)

coef.

(4)
(p-val)

44.759*** (0.000)

coef.

(p-val)

33.458*** (0.007)

16.373** (0.031)

6.425 (0.113)

Mutual fund Dual holder

22.537*** (0.000)

Pension fund/CDO Dual holder

8.180 (0.326)

1.643 (0.942)

Finance company Dual holder

12.050** (0.044)

0.392 (0.959)

Insurance company Dual holder

6.540 (0.601)

8.266 (0.477)

IB Dual holder

1.699 (0.703)

-9.038 (0.223)

Log(Facility amount)

-23.311*** (0.000)

-23.318*** (0.000)

-19.018*** (0.000)

-19.250*** (0.000)

Log(Number of participating lenders)
% of participating lenders with past

-21.683*** (0.000)

-21.944*** (0.000)

-23.966*** (0.000)

-24.117*** (0.000)

-16.107*** (0.001)

-16.174*** (0.001)

-16.368* (0.097)

-16.379* (0.097)

Log(Maturity)

-14.065*** (0.000)

-14.064*** (0.000)

-3.969 (0.521)

-3.466 (0.573)

44.759*** (0.000)

44.936*** (0.000)

52.858*** (0.000)

52.998*** (0.000)

288.110*** (0.000)

288.598*** (0.000)

278.607*** (0.000)

280.804*** (0.000)

-5.096 (0.393)

-5.671 (0.344)

-9.463 (0.433)

-10.926 (0.370)

Log(Total assets)

0.940 (0.624)

1.024 (0.595)

4.585 (0.214)

4.761 (0.203)

Fixed assets/total assets

7.093 (0.338)

6.818 (0.358)

-12.613 (0.313)

-13.367 (0.293)

-2.523*** (0.001)

-2.529*** (0.001)

-3.758** (0.012)

-3.826** (0.012)

16.386** (0.019)

16.335** (0.020)

14.977 (0.128)

14.722 (0.136)

-95.467*** (0.000)

-95.177*** (0.000)

-171.986*** (0.000)

-171.136*** (0.000)
-10.776** (0.033)

Secured Indicator
Second-lien Indicator
Covenants Indicator

Z-score
Leverage
Ind-adj. ROA
Log(Number of analyst following)
Institutional holdings
High-yield spread

-9.700*** (0.001)

-9.478*** (0.001)

-10.989** (0.027)

-17.705*** (0.005)

-17.542*** (0.006)

-10.624 (0.337)

-12.376 (0.266)

0.149*** (0.000)

0.150*** (0.000)

0.262*** (0.000)

0.262*** (0.000)

Number of observations

6,350

6,350

1,523

Adjusted R2

0.518

0.517

0.545

Wald-test

9.830*** (0.000)

2.820** (0.015)

44

4.660** (0.031)

1,523
0.544
2.970** (0.019)

Table 9. Does the Size of the Dual Holder’s Equity Position Affect the Loan Facility Pricing?
This table presents the OLS regression coefficient estimates of Equation (1) and corresponding p-values, using two
dual holder indicator variables: Below-Mean equity holding and Above-Mean equity holding. Below-Mean equity
holding indicates that there is a dual holder holding less than average (2.6%) equity stake and Above-Mean equity
holding indicates that the dual holder has above average holdings. Definitions of all other variables are provided in
the Appendix A. The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the
analysis is conducted at the loan facility level. Columns (1) and (5) employ the full sample of loan facilities for
which all required data are not missing (6,350 loan facilities). Columns (2)-(4) employ the subsamples of revolvers,
all term loans, and just the Term Loan B facilities, respectively. In Column (5) both Below-Mean equity holding and
Above-Mean equity holding are interacted with HF/PE Dual Holder indicator to measure the combined effect of the
size of equity ownership and the type of institution. All specifications include tranche-purpose fixed effects and year
fixed effects. The specifications in Columns (1) and (5) additionally include tranche type fixed effects, because they
consider the full sample of all tranche types. Standard errors are clustered at the borrowing firm level. Wald-test
statistics and the corresponding p-value are reported at the bottom of the table. ***, **, * correspond to statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dependent Var.: All-in-drawn spread

All Tranche Types
Sample
(1)
coef.

Below-Mean equity holding

Revolver
Sample
(2)

(p-val)

coef.

Term A and Term B
Sample
(3)

(p-val)

coef.

Term B
Sample

(5)

(4)
(p-val)

coef.

All Tranche Types
Sample

(p-val)

coef.

(p-val)

10.566*** (0.01)

8.468** (0.03)

14.696** (0.01)

15.782** (0.01)

8.642** (0.02)

20.437*** (0.01)

20.991*** (0.00)

20.425* (0.05)

21.920** (0.05)

17.062** (0.03)

-23.699*** (0.00)

-30.692*** (0.00)

-15.839*** (0.00)

-17.303*** (0.00)

-23.551*** (0.00)

Log(Number of participating lenders)

-20.815*** (0.00)

-13.690*** (0.00)

-27.449*** (0.00)

-28.358*** (0.00)

-21.347*** (0.00)

% of participating lenders with past relationship

-17.270*** (0.00)

-7.440 (0.12)

-32.090*** (0.00)

-35.735*** (0.00)

-16.525*** (0.00)

Log(Maturity)

-13.179*** (0.00)

-13.297*** (0.00)

-15.353** (0.01)

-13.104** (0.04)

-13.435*** (0.00)

46.289*** (0.00)

54.637*** (0.00)

33.388*** (0.00)

33.367*** (0.00)

45.792*** (0.00)

288.472*** (0.00)

265.363*** (0.00)

287.948*** (0.00)

283.043*** (0.00)

287.958*** (0.00)

Covenants Indicator

-4.890 (0.41)

-11.958** (0.04)

2.152 (0.81)

6.492 (0.48)

-4.765 (0.42)

Log(Total assets)

0.884 (0.65)

2.302 (0.26)

-1.447 (0.63)

-0.361 (0.91)

0.914 (0.63)

Fixed assets/total assets

6.742 (0.36)

-0.261 (0.97)

13.164 (0.28)

10.912 (0.40)

7.022 (0.34)

-2.537*** (0.00)

-2.436*** (0.00)

-2.764** (0.03)

-3.209** (0.02)

-2.557*** (0.00)

Below-Mean equity holding*HF/PE Dual Holder
Above-Mean equity holding

38.183** (0.01)

Above-Mean equity holding*HF/PE Dual Holder
Log(Facility amount)

Secured Indicator
Second-lien Indicator

Z-score
Leverage
Ind-adj. ROA
Log(Number of analyst following)
Institutional holdings
High-yield spread

45.963*** (0.01)

16.664** (0.02)

21.297*** (0.00)

7.199 (0.49)

6.894 (0.54)

16.168** (0.02)

-96.173*** (0.00)

-89.686*** (0.00)

-101.072*** (0.00)

-102.904*** (0.00)

-95.799*** (0.00)

-9.771*** (0.00)

-7.090** (0.01)

-13.390*** (0.00)

-14.115*** (0.00)

-9.778*** (0.00)

-18.226*** (0.00)

-18.386*** (0.00)

-19.902** (0.04)

-14.636 (0.16)

-18.008*** (0.00)

0.147*** (0.00)

0.115*** (0.00)

0.190*** (0.00)

0.210*** (0.00)

0.150*** (0.00)

Term A Indicator

-23.589*** (0.00)

Number of observations

6,350

3,713

2,637

2,232

6,350

Adjusted R2

0.516

0.494

0.484

0.474

0.517

0.460 (0.50)

0.430 (0.51)

Wald-test
(Above-Mean = Below-Mean)

3.560* (0.06)

2.800* (0.09)

(Above-Mean*HFPE = Below-Mean*HFPE)

3.550* (0.06)
0.150 (0.70)
4.370** (0.04)
13.970*** (0.00)

(Above-Mean =Above-Mean* HFPE)
(Below-Mean = Below-Mean* HFPE)

45

Table 10. Is the Spread Higher When the Dual Holder Has Funded a Larger Portion of the Loan Facility?
This table presents the OLS estimates and corresponding p-values of the spread regressions on measures of the dual holder’s loan share, in a subsample of dual
holder loans that have the lender share information available. Dual Holder’s loan share measures the portion of the total facility amount funded by dual holder(s).
Dual Holder is the largest lender indicates that the dual holder is the largest lender in the loan syndicate. Definitions of all variables are provided in the
Appendix A. The dependent variable is the all-in-drawn loan spread over LIBOR in basis points, and the analysis is conducted at the loan facility level. All
specifications include tranche type fixed effects, tranche-purpose fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the borrowing firm level.
***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
(1)
Dependent Var.: All-in-drawn spread
Dual Holder's loan share

coef.

(2)
(p-val)

147.507*** (0.003)

coef.

(3)
(p-val)

22.158** (0.011)

Above-Mean equity holding
Log(Number of participating lenders)
% of participating lenders with past relationship
Log(Maturity)
Secured Indicator
Second-lien Indicator
Covenants Indicator
Log(Total assets)

(4)
(p-val)

coef.

(p-val)

141.610*** (0.003)

Dual Holder is the largest lender
Log(Facility amount)

coef.

17.665* (0.058)

18.142** (0.032)
17.541* (0.063)

-7.897 (0.280)

-3.796 (0.602)

-7.686 (0.307)

-3.311 (0.661)

2.860 (0.797)

-3.601 (0.737)

-11.517 (0.213)

-17.886** (0.043)

-43.624*** (0.000)

-46.024*** (0.000)

-44.158*** (0.000)

-46.231*** (0.000)

-9.596 (0.307)

-10.266 (0.263)

-7.676 (0.404)

-8.426 (0.350)

76.112*** (0.000)

85.148*** (0.000)

78.188*** (0.000)

86.836*** (0.000)

249.907*** (0.000)

250.115*** (0.000)

281.690*** (0.000)

282.903*** (0.000)

-4.640 (0.802)

12.389 (0.530)

0.794 (0.966)

17.112 (0.387)

1.599 (0.766)

-5.227 (0.342)

3.466 (0.524)

-3.479 (0.530)

-32.660** (0.043)

-34.912** (0.028)

-30.411* (0.072)

-32.726* (0.052)

Z-score

-2.572 (0.113)

-2.303 (0.134)

-2.492 (0.130)

-2.219 (0.162)

Leverage

26.183 (0.247)

22.744 (0.356)

25.256 (0.267)

22.580 (0.369)

-192.279*** (0.000)

-238.909*** (0.000)

-181.184*** (0.001)

-227.553*** (0.000)

-21.105** (0.017)

-4.529 (0.610)

-21.220** (0.018)

-5.012 (0.582)

-8.721 (0.628)

1.936 (0.916)

-12.100 (0.506)

-1.739 (0.926)

0.179** (0.013)

0.171** (0.016)

0.170** (0.017)

0.160** (0.025)

Fixed assets/total assets

Ind-adj. ROA
Log(Number of analyst following)
Institutional holdings
High-yield spread
Number of observations
Adjusted R2

301

301

301

301

0.641

0.657

0.634

0.648

46

Table 11. Uses of Loan Proceeds
This table presents the estimation results from the following regression specification:
 loan proceed  
 loan proceed  
  1  Dual Holding Indicator
  1   2 ln 
Y   0  1 ln 
 total assets 0  
 total assets 0  
  3Dual Holding Indicator   4 lntotal assets 0  

20074 Q

 Year - Qtr  

i
i 19971Q

 Vt  V0  
  1 for V  cash, and total assets
, where Y  ln 
 total asets 0  
t

i 1Vi   1 for V  capex, acquisitio n, R & D, and reduction in long term debt
 ln 
 total asets 0  
 


t=1, 4, 8 corresponds to the fiscal quarter following the issuing quarter. All regressions include year-quarter fixed
effects. Loan proceeds are aggregated within a calendar-quarter. The coefficient for Dual Holding Indicator and
ln[total assets0] as well as fixed effects are omitted for the sake of brevity. Dollar changes are the implied change in
the dependent variable when the loan proceeds are increased by $1 for non-dual holder borrowers and for dual
holder borrowers, respectively (calculations are based on a median-sized firm/facility in the sample. Year-quarter
fixed-effects are for 2003Q3). ***, **, * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
β1
V
∆ Cash

Δ Total Assets

∑ CAPEX

∑ Acquisition

∑ R&D

∑ LT Debt Reduction

β2

t

N

Coeff. (p-val)

Coeff. (p-val)

1Q

5,517

0.227** (0.017)

4Q

5,209

$Change
2

Non-DH

DH

-0.213** (0.014)

0.201

0.013

adj-R
0.121

0.319*** (0.006) -0.290*** (0.006)

0.292

0.028

0.146

8Q

4,760

0.261** (0.015)

-0.239** (0.016)

0.217

0.018

0.109

1Q

5,523

0.711*** (0.000)

0.120 (0.227)

0.709

0.852

0.340

4Q

5,214

0.852*** (0.000)

0.062 (0.605)

0.756

0.841

0.271

8Q

4,766

0.914*** (0.000)

0.055 (0.709)

0.746

0.800

0.222

1Q

5,392

0.059** (0.022)

-0.040* (0.091)

0.050

0.016

0.116

4Q

5,003

0.197*** (0.006)

-0.100 (0.187)

0.164

0.082

0.137

8Q

4,508

0.226*** (0.001)

-0.115 (0.129)

0.176

0.088

0.092

1Q

5,227

0.096*** (0.004)

0.048 (0.464)

0.081

0.122

0.074

4Q

4,731

0.174*** (0.001)

0.024 (0.761)

0.148

0.169

0.100

8Q

4,154

0.261*** (0.000)

0.088 (0.413)

0.207

0.275

0.111

1Q

1,734

0.033 (0.287)

-0.048 (0.128)

0.027

-0.012

0.100

4Q

1,346

0.126 (0.139)

-0.185** (0.033)

0.090

-0.044

0.189

8Q

1,171

0.197 (0.134)

-0.312** (0.023)

0.123

-0.076

0.206

1Q

5,167

0.100*** (0.000)

0.042 (0.220)

0.091

0.128

0.052

4Q

4,644

0.210*** (0.001)

0.114* (0.094)

0.193

0.299

0.065

8Q

4,080

0.391*** (0.000)

0.174* (0.079)

0.352

0.506

0.088

Appendix A: Variable Descriptions
Variables

Definition

Leveraged Loan

An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan is classifed as a leveraged loan
segment by LPC DealSCan . LPC defines leveraged loans as loans that meet one of the
following two criteria: (1) the loan has a BB or lower rating; (2) the initial loan yield
spread of the loan is at least 150 basis points above LIBOR.
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if at least one non-commercial bank
institutional investor is involved in the loan syndicate, and zero otherwise.
Source: DealScan, Thompson Reuters Institutional Holding
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan facility has the participation of
at least one non-commercial bank institutional investor who held at least 0.1% of equity
stake in the same borrowing company during the1-year period leading up to the current
loan., and zero otherwise.
Source : DealScan, Thompson Reuters Institutional Holding
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if an institutional dual holder also takes a
major role in the loan syndicate, such as arranger, manager, or agent.
Source: DealScan, Thompson Reuters Institutional Holdings
Average equity stake held by dual holder(s) during the one-year period prior to the
current loan.
Source: Thompson Leuters Institutional Holdings
An indicator variable that akes a value of one if the loan facility has the presence of an
institutional dula holder who held a lower-than-average (2.6%) equity stake in the
borrowing company, and zero otherwise.
Source : DealScan, Thompson Reuters Institutional Holding
An indicator variable that akes a value of one if the loan facility has the presence of an
institutional dula holder who held a greater-than-average (2.6%) equity stake in the
borrowing company, and zero otherwise.
Source : DealScan, Thompson Reuters Institutional Holding
Loan allocation to dual holder(s).
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if dual holder is the largest lender in the
loan syndicate.
Source: DealScan
Spread over LIBOR plus the annual fee and the upfront fee spread, if there is any, in
basis points.
Source: DealScan
Natural log of the loan size.
Source : DealScan
Natural log of the number of participating lenders.
Source: DealScan
The portion of lenders in the loan syndicate that have made loans to the borrower within
the 36-month period prior to the current loan.
Source: DealScan
Natural log of the maturity of the loan in months.
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan is secured, and zero otherwise.
Source: DealScan

Institutional Loan

Institutional Dual Holding Indicator

Dual holder-Major Role Indicator

Dual holder's equity holding

Below-Mean equity holding

Above-Mean equity holding

Dual holder's loan share
Dual holder is the largest lender

All-in-drawn spread

Log(FacilityAmt)
Log(Number of participating lenders )
% of participating lenders with past relationship

Log(Maturity)
Secured Indicator
Senior Indicator

Second-lien Indicator

Syndicated Indicator

Covenant Indicator

An indicator variable that takes
otherwise.
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes
otherwise.
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes
and zero otherwise.
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes
otherwise.
Source: DealScan

48

a value of one if the loan is senior in priority, and zero

a value of one if the loan is second-lien, and zero

a value of one if the loan is distributed in syndication,

a value of one if the loan has covenants, and zero

Variables

Definition

Revolver Indicator

An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan is revolving line of credit
(Revolver/Line, Revolver, 364-Day Facility, Demand Loan, Limited Line in DealScan), and
zero otherwise.
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan is Term Loan A tranche, and
zero otherwise.
Source: DealScan
An indicator variable that takes a value of one if the loan isTerm Loan B tranche or
higher (C, D, …., H), and zero otherwise.
Source: DealScan
Natural log of the total assets of the borrower at the end of fiscal year prior to the current
loan.
Source : Compustat
The borrower's asset tangibility at the end of fiscal year prior to the current loan,
calculated as Net Property, Plant, and Equipment (PP&E)/total assets
Source : Computstat
Altman's Z-score for the borrower at the end of fiscal year prior to the current loan.. Zscore is calculated as Z=1.2X1 + 1.4X2 + 3.3X3 + 0.6X4 + 0.99X5 , where X1 is working
capital/total assets, X2 is retained earnings/total assets, X3 is EBIT/total assets, X4 is
market value of equity/book value of total liabilities, and X5 is sales/total assets (Altman
(1968)).
Source : Compustat
The borrower's book leverage at the end of fiscal year prior to the current loan.,
calculated as book value of total debt/book value of total assets.
Source : Compustat
The borrower's ROA in excess of the median of the corresponding 2-digit SIC industry
ROA at the end of fiscal year prior to the current loan.
Source : Compustat
Natural log of the number of analysts following the borrower's stock. Missing is treated
as zero.
Source: I/B/E/S
The sum of the borrower's stock held by all institutional investors at the end of fiscal
year prior to the current loan. Missing is treated as zero.
Source: Thompson Reuters Institutional Holdings
The borrower’s S&P long-term domestic issuer credit rating. Lower score corresponds to
lower rating, with the highest rating (AAA) receives 22 and the lowest rating (D)
receives 1. Missing ratings are assigned to zero.
Source: Compustat
Market credit spread in the month of loan issuance. Credit spread is measured as (BofA
Merill Lynch US Corporate High Yield BB Option-Adjusted Spread - BofA Merrill Lynch
US Corporate AAA Option-Adjusted Spread) in basis points.
Source: Federal Reserve Bank

Term Loan A Indicator

Term Loan B Indicator

Log(total assets)

Fixed assets/Total assets

Z-score

Leverage

Ind-adj ROA

Log(Number of analyst following)

Institutional holdings

S&P Issuer Rating

High-yield Spread

49

Appendix B: Spread and Payment Schedule by Loan Type (in sample)
Revolver
Total numer of facilities in sample

Term A

Term B+

6,136

757

2,438

Term Loans
1,806

234

272

318

331

Avg. all-in-drawn spread
Mean
Median

225

Payment Schedule

250

275

N (%)

14 (0.2)

451 (59.6)

1,420 (58.2)

781 (43.2)

Bullet / Final Payment

4 (28.6)

142 (31.5)

776 (54.6)

405 (51.9)

Annually

1 (7.1)

12 (2.7)

72 (5.1)

40 (5.1)

Semi-annually

0 (0.0)

13 (2.9)

33 (2.3)

18 (2.3)

Quarterly

8 (57.1)

275 (61.0)

525 (37.0)

269 (34.4)

Monthly

1 (7.1)

7 (1.6)

9 (0.6)

45 (5.8)

Other

0 (0.0)

2 (0.4)

5 (0.4)

4 (0.5)

Payment Schedule information avilable

N (%)

275

N (%)

N (%)

Payment Period

Figure A1. Distribution of Payment Period by Loan Type
100%

(7.1)

(0.6)

(1.6)

(37.0)

80%

60%

(5.8)

(57.1)

40%
(7.1)

20%

(34.4)

(61.0)
(2.3)
(5.1)

(2.3)
(5.1)

(2.9)
(2.7)

(28.6)

(31.5)

Revolver

Term Loan A

(54.6)

(51.9)

Term Loan B+

Term Loans

0%

Bullet/Final Pmt

Annually

Semi‐annually

Quarterly

Monthly

Other

50

