NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SLOW GROWTH OF NEW PLANTS:
LEARNING ABOUT DEMAND?
Lucia Foster
John C. Haltiwanger
Chad Syverson
Working Paper 17853
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17853

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

We thank seminar participants at UC-Berkeley, UCLA, Carnegie Mellon, Colorado, Harvard, LSE,
MIT, National Bank of Belgium, Penn State, Princeton, SITE, the Cowles Conference, CAED, CEPR
IO, and UBC Summer IO meetings for their comments. We thank Lauren Deason for her excellent
work developing the downstream demand indicators. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lucia Foster, John C. Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Slow Growth of New Plants: Learning about Demand?
Lucia Foster, John C. Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson
NBER Working Paper No. 17853
February 2012
JEL No. D2,E23,L1,L6
ABSTRACT
It is well known that new businesses are typically much smaller than their established industry competitors,
and that this size gap closes slowly. We show that even in commodity-like product markets, these
patterns do not reflect productivity gaps, but rather differences in demand-side fundamentals. We
document and explore patterns in plants’ idiosyncratic demand levels by estimating a dynamic model
of plant expansion in the presence of a demand accumulation process (e.g., building a customer base).
We find active accumulation driven by plants’ past production decisions quantitatively dominates
passive demand accumulation, and that within-firm spillovers affect demand levels but not growth.

Lucia Foster
Center for Economic Studies
Census Bureau
Room 211/WP11
Washington, DC 20233-6300
lucia.s.foster@census.gov
John C. Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu

Chad Syverson
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chad.syverson@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
The large literature using business-level microdata to study various aspects of production
behavior has, without exception, found considerable differences between producers in a given
industry. Enormous heterogeneity has been documented along many dimensions. One of the
more consistent findings is that entrants are different than incumbents, and in particular with
regard to size. New businesses tend to start small (e.g., Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988),
Caves (1998), Cabral and Mata (2003)). These patterns are tied to several facets of industry
evolution, from industry lifecycle features to the ways individual producers’ growth impact
industry aggregates.
In this paper, we look more closely at the sources of the size gaps between young and old
plants. While other work has focused on productivity/cost differences as an explanation (see
Bahk and Gort (1993), for example), this does not seem likely to be an explanation. We found in
an earlier paper that new plants in our sample of producers of commodity-like product are just as
technically efficient as—and often even slightly more efficient than—older plants (see Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008)). That is, entrants are small in spite of their prices, not
because of them. Their prices in fact actually tend to be lower.
This similarity in supply-side fundamentals suggests that idiosyncratic demand factors
might explain the well documented plant size differences. Our earlier work offers some
evidence of this. There is a clear dichotomy between the age profiles of plants’ physical
productivity and demand-side fundamentals. While young plants’ technical efficiency levels are
similar to established plants’ levels, they have much lower idiosyncratic demand measures.
Moreover, these demand gaps close very slowly over time. Supply-side fundamentals show no
such slow convergence.
We highlight these patterns in Table 1, which shows the evolution of physical total factor
productivity (TFP) and idiosyncratic demand across plants of various ages (this table is
analogous to Table 5 in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008)). Physical TFP is physical
units of output per unit input. Plant-level demand can be thought of as the logged output a plant
would sell relative to the average plant in the industry, if all plants charged a common, fixed
price. (Further details of the construction of the sample and the variables follow below.) We use
four age categories. “Entrants” are plants appearing for the first time in the Census of

1

Manufactures (CM). 1 “Young” establishments are those that first appeared in the census prior to
the current time period; that is, they were entrants in the previous census. Establishments first
appearing two censuses back are “medium” aged, and establishments that first appeared three or
more censuses prior are classified as “old.” Plants that will exit (die) by the next CM are placed
in their own category. We separately regress plants’ physical TFP and idiosyncratic demand
levels on dummies for each age category; old plants are the excluded category. The specification
also includes a full set of industry-year fixed effects, so all comparisons are among plants in the
same industry in a given year.
The results in the table’s top row indicate that new plants have slightly higher physical
TFP levels than established (“old”) incumbents. By the time plants are over five years old,
however, this TFP advantage is indistinct from zero. Incidentally, we also find that exiters of
any age are less efficient than incumbents, consistent with the large literature on the subject.
The patterns are very different for plants’ idiosyncratic demands, shown in the table’s
bottom row. The coefficient on the entrant dummy implies that, at the same price, a new plant
will sell only 58 percent (the demand measure’s units are logged output, so e-0.550 = 0.577) of the
output of a plant in the same industry that is more than 15 years old. This gap is also slow to
close. Young plants (five to nine years old) would sell 67 percent of the output of an old plant,
and even plants 10-15 years old would only sell 73 percent as much.
We explore the sources of this demand gap and its slow convergence here. Our proposed
explanation involves dynamic demand side forces—growth of a customer base or building a
reputation, for example—that take considerable time to play out. Shapiro (1982), Caminal and
Vives (1999), Radner (2003), and Fishman and Rob (2003 and 2005), and Bar-Isaac and Tadelis
(2008) model examples of such processes. These forces lead to gradual growth of an entrant’s
“demand stock,” at least among entrants good enough to survive. The uncertainties tied to such
processes may also create for the business an option value of waiting to expand until further
information about demand is revealed (e.g., Dixit and Pindyck (1994)). It is also likely that the
rate of demand stock growth and the level of uncertainty are related to the characteristics of a
plant or the firm that owns it.

1

Because the CM includes all manufacturing plants in the U.S., we observe all entry and exit, though only at fiveyear intervals.

2

We are purposefully not too specific about the particular process behind demand-stock
growth among the industries in our sample. Demand growth may well have multiple sources.
These could include customer learning through “word of mouth,” the firm’s own advertising
efforts, or several other possibilities, and can involve expansion of downstream buyers on either
the extensive or intensive margin. We refer to the process generically as “learning,” but the
building of any sort of relationship capital along buyer-supplier links fits our conceptual
framework. 2 What we seek to do here is characterize the basic mechanics of that generic process
and investigate how it interacts with producer behavior.
This paper fits into a new line of research extending the large literature tying productivity
to plant and firm survival (see Bartelsman and Doms (2000) and Syverson (2011) for surveys of
this literature) by explicitly accounting for demand-side effects on plants’ growth and survival.
Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007); Eslava et al. (2008); Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson
(2008); Kee and Krishna (2008); and De Loecker (2011) are examples of the new approach.
Earlier heterogeneous-productivity industry frameworks captured differences among industry
producers in a single index, often explicitly or implicitly taken to be producer costs/productivity
(e.g., Jovanovic (1982), Hopenhayn (1992), Melitz (2003), and Asplund and Nocke (2006)).
Related empirical work on business dynamics also did not make distinctions as to the forms of
heterogeneity (e.g., Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989a and 1989b); Troske (1996); Ericson
and Pakes (1998); Ábrahám and White (2006); Brown, Earle, and Telegdy (2006)). The new
research line expands the sources of heterogeneity to include both technological and demandbased idiosyncratic profitability fundamentals, each following separate (even independent)
stochastic processes. The new framework therefore allows an additional and realistic richness in
the market forces that determine producers’ fates. Further, this approach also suggests a
reinterpretation of productivity’s effects as inferred from standard measures. This is because
typical productivity measures incorporate not just technology but also demand-side shocks
through their (often unavoidable because of data limitations) inclusion of producer prices in the
output measure.
2

Our read of the evidence is that the customer “learning” that drives demand stock growth is much broader than the
simple process of buyers finding out about the existence of a producer. While spotty information about mere
existence might be consistent with the large gaps in idiosyncratic demand present at plants’ births, it seems unlikely
to explain why convergence takes upwards of 15 years. We posit that learning involves much deeper components,
like details of producers’ product attributes, the quality and quantity of their bundled services, the consistency of
their operations, their expected longevity, and so on. Having to learn about these features can impart considerable
inertia into producers’ demand stocks.

3

Our empirical analysis is two-pronged. We first document the evolution of plants’
idiosyncratic demand fundamentals in an atheoretic way. Once these facts are established, we
posit a simple dynamic model of producers’ decisions in the face of a dynamic demand process,
and estimate the model using producers’ behavior in our data. In the model, producers observe
realizations of a stochastic demand process and then choose output levels that in turn feed back
into future sales through a demand stock accumulation process. The model generates an Euler
equation describing establishments’ incentives for investing in this sort of demand capital. We
then use the Euler equation and the demand specification to estimate the model’s parameters.
The model is informative about the nature and size of the demand growth process and permits us
to run counterfactual simulations.
Our results show that while almost all entrants have lower idiosyncratic demand levels
than incumbents, the gap is especially large for those owned by firms that are part of new and/or
small firms. These patterns might in part reflect large or established firms’ pre-existing “brand
capital” imparting higher initial demand levels on their new plants. Nevertheless, all new plants,
regardless of the characteristics of the firm that owns them, exhibit a limited speed of
convergence in catching up to their more established competitors’ demand levels. The estimates
from our dynamic model indicate that the rate of demand-stock building is tied to plants’ past
activity (sales) levels. Selling more output today serves to shift out demand tomorrow.
Conditional on plants’ sales histories, age itself only accounts for a small fraction of demand
accumulation over time.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes data and measurement issues.
Section 3 documents basic empirical facts about the evolution of producers’ idiosyncratic
demands in our sample. Section 4 describes the empirical model that we estimate using plants’
dynamic choices. The main empirical results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 discusses
alternative explanations and provides robustness checks and Section 7 concludes.

2. Data and Measurement Issues
This paper uses essentially the same data set of homogenous goods producers we used in
Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008). 3 Details on the selection of our sample and
3

We drop good producers producing one product used in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008): gasoline. The
current study requires not only contemporaneous data but lagged data starting in 1963 to construct initial capital

4

construction of the variables we use are in that paper as well as the Appendix, so we only
highlight key points here.
The data is an extract of the U.S. Census of Manufactures (CM). The CM covers the
universe of manufacturing plants and is conducted quinquenially in years ending in “2” and “7”.
We use the 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1997 CMs in our sample based upon the availability and
quality of physical output data. Information on plants’ production in physical units is important
because we must be able to observe plants’ output quantities and prices, not just total revenue
(which is often the only output measure available in producer microdata). The CM collects
information on plants’ shipments in dollar value and physical units by seven-digit SIC product
category. 4
The roughly 17,000 plant-year observations in the sample include producers of one of ten
products: corrugated and solid fiber boxes (which we will refer to as “boxes” from now on),
white pan bread (bread), carbon black, roasted coffee beans (coffee), ready-mixed concrete
(concrete), oak flooring (flooring), block ice, processed ice, hardwood plywood (plywood), and
raw cane sugar (sugar). 5 These products were chosen because of their physical homogeneity
which allows plants’ output quantities and unit prices to be more meaningfully compared.
Note that physical homogeneity does not necessarily imply that producers operate in an

stocks and also lagged revenue measures. We found the historical data for the gasoline refining industry was
somewhat spotty, which limited the number of industry plants for which we had valid data. We also think that our
learning about demand model is somewhat less well suited to gasoline products, especially since there is so little
entry in gasoline to identify our learning effects. As will become clear, we think the model is especially well suited
to our local products industries.
4

A problem with CMs prior to our sample is that it is more difficult to identify balancing product codes (these are
used to make sure the sum of the plant’s product-specific shipment values equals the plant’s separately reported total
value of shipments). Having reliable product codes is necessary to obtain accurate information on plants’ separate
quantities and prices, important inputs into our empirical work below. A related problem is that there are erratic
time series patterns in the number of establishments reporting physical quantities, especially in early CMs. We thus
choose to focus on the data in 1977 and beyond. However, we do use revenue data from prior censuses as far back
as 1963 when constructing plants’ ages and demand stocks.

5

Our product definitions are built up from the seven-digit SIC product classification system. Some of our ten
products are the only seven-digit product in their respective four-digit SIC industry, and thus the product defines the
industry. This is true of, for example, ready-mixed concrete. Others are single seven-digit products that are parts of
industries that make multiple products. Raw cane sugar, for instance, is one seven-digit product produced by the
four-digit sugar and confectionary products industry. Finally, some of our ten products are combinations of sevendigit products within the same four-digit industry. For example, the product we call boxes is actually comprised of
roughly ten seven-digit products. In cases where we combine products, we base the decision on our impression of
the available physical quantity metric’s ability to capture output variations across the seven-digit products without
introducing serious measurement problems due to product differentiation. The exact definition of the ten products
can be found in section A.3 of the Appendix.

5

undifferentiated product market. Prices vary within industries because, for instance, geographic
demand variations or webs of history-laden relationships between particular consumers and
producers create producer-specific demand shifts. Further, as we have already shown, quantities
sold differ tremendously even holding price fixed. Trying to explain why they differ is the very
point of our analysis. Our quantity data are meaningful not due to the complete absence of
differentiation, but rather because there is no differentiation along the dimension in which we
measure output—the physical unit. The notion behind the selection of our sample products is
that a consumer should be roughly indifferent between unlabeled units of the industry output.
But that does not rule out consumers view as equivalent other products or services (real or
perceived) that are tied to those units of output. Much of such differentiation, we argue in our
earlier work, is horizontal rather than vertical in nature.

2.1. Idiosyncratic Demand: Concept and Measurement
The plant-level idiosyncratic demand measures that we used in Table 1 above and that we
will use in our descriptive analysis in the next section are obtained by estimating demand for
each of the ten products in our sample. We describe this process briefly here; again, details can
be found in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008).
We begin by estimating the following demand function separately for each of our ten
products:
(1)

ln q it = α o + α 1 ln p it + ∑t α t YEAR t + α 2 ln(INCOME mt ) + η it ,

where qit is the physical output of plant i in year t, pit is the plant’s price, and ηit is a plant-year
specific disturbance term. We also control for a set of demand shifters, including a set of year
dummies (YEARt), which adjust for any economy-wide variation in the demand for the product,
as well as the average income in the plant’s local market m (INCOMEmt). We define local
markets using the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Economic Areas (EAs). 6
Plant quantities are simply their reported output in physical units. We calculate unit
prices for each producer using their reported revenue and physical output. 7 These prices are then
6

EAs are collections of counties usually, but not always, centered on Metropolitan Statistical Areas. The 172 EAs
are mutually exclusive and exhaustive of the land area of the United States. See U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
(1995) for detailed information.

7

The reported revenues and physical quantities are annual aggregates, so the unit price is an annual average. This is
equivalent to a quantity-weighted average of all transaction prices charged by the plant during the year.

6

adjusted to a common 1987 basis using the revenue-weighted geometric mean of the product
price across all of the plants producing the product in our sample.
Of course, estimating the above equation using ordinary least squares (OLS) methods
could lead to positively biased estimates of the price elasticity α1. Producers may optimally
respond to positive (negative) demand shocks ηit by raising (reducing) prices, creating a positive
correlation between the error term and pit. A solution to this is to instrument for pit using supplyside (cost) influences on prices. While such instruments can sometimes be hard to come by in
practice, we believe we have very suitable instruments at hand: namely, plants’ physical TFP
levels. These embody producers’ idiosyncratic technical efficiency levels—their physical
production costs. As such, they should have explanatory power over prices. They do; the
correlation between plants’ physical TFP and prices in our sample is -0.54. Further, it is unlikely
they will be correlated with any short-run plant-specific demand shocks embodied in ηit. Hence
they appear quite suitable as instruments for plant prices. 8
The price and income elasticity estimates from the above demand equation are not
reported here for space reasons, but are available in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008).
The results are reassuring about our estimation strategy. All estimated price elasticities are
negative, and for all but carbon black, they exceed one in absolute value. This is what one
should expect; price-setting producers should be operating in the elastic portion of their demand
curves. (Carbon black’s inelastic point estimate may be due to the small number of producers of
that product in our sample. We cannot in fact reject that carbon black producers face elastic
demand.) Further, all products, again except for carbon black, have more elastic IV demand
estimates than in the OLS estimations. This is consistent with the theorized simultaneity bias
present in the OLS results as well as the ability of TFPQ to instrument for endogenous prices.
The idiosyncratic demand estimates for our sample plants are simply the residual from
this IV demand estimation, along with the estimated contribution of local income added back in.
8

There are two potential problems with using physical TFP as an instrument. The first is that selection on
profitability can lead to a correlation between TFP and demand at the plant level, even if the innovations to both
series are orthogonal as assumed. Producers with a higher TFP draws can tolerate lower demand draws (and vice
versa) while still remaining profitable. The second potential problem is measurement error. We compute prices by
dividing reported revenue by quantity and any measurement error in physical quantities will overstate the negative
correlation between prices and physical TFP, potentially contaminating the first stage of the IV estimation. We
describe in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) how we deal with these issues. We found the patterns of
demand estimates to be quite robust, reducing concerns about either measurement issue. In Tables 1-2 in the next
section, we use the innovation to physical TFP as the instrument since this approach is more consistent with the
estimation approach for demand and Euler equations used later in the paper.

7

Thus the measure essentially captures across-plant output variation that reflects shifts in the
demand curve rather than movements along the demand curve.
The dispersion of our producer-specific demand measure is huge. Its within-product-year
standard deviation is 1.16 (recall the measure’s units are logged output). This implies that a
plant sells 3.2 times as much output at a given price as another in its industry that is one standard
deviation lower in the idiosyncratic demand distribution. By way of comparison, the comparable
standard deviations of logged physical TFP and logged prices are 0.26 and 0.18, respectively.

3. Facts about Plants’ Idiosyncratic Demands
In this section, we expand on the exercise done in Table 1 to explore how the relative
levels and convergence of idiosyncratic demand levels change with plants’ attributes. As briefly
mentioned above, a possible source of differences in idiosyncratic demand patterns are the types
of firms that own the plants. Dynamic demand effects from customer learning or other similar
processes might be impacted by the type and form of firms to which plants are tied.
Consider the following example. Two new plants are built in an industry: one plant is a
de novo entry by a firm with no prior experience; the other plant is opened by a large firm with
considerable history, perhaps but not necessarily in the same industry and geographic area. We
might expect that the latter will enter with a higher idiosyncratic demand, because customers
may already be familiar with the plant’s product, or at least its firm. This might also impact the
speed at which demand convergence occurs.
To begin exploring these possibilities, we again project plants’ idiosyncratic demand
measures on plant age indicators but this time interact those indicators with characteristics of the
firms that own the plants. In the first specification, we simply allow the age dummies to differ
for plants that are part of a multi-plant firm. The firm’s other plants need not make the same
product, or even be manufacturers for that matter. This is essentially a crude proxy for firm size.
Such multi-plant firms account for 59 percent of the observations in our sample. The second
specification uses a series of dummies for the age of the firm, defined as the age of the firm’s
oldest plant. These are interacted with the plant age dummies. The notion is that plants of older,
more established firms may start larger and grow faster than those of newer firms.
The results looking at the impact of multi-plant firm status are shown in Table 2. The
upper row shows the coefficients on the age categories, the lower those for the age categories
8

interacted with the multi-plant firm indicator. Hence the upper row shows the evolution of
idiosyncratic demand for single-unit plant/firms, while the column-wise sum of the two rows’
values reflects the same evolution for plants in multi-plant firms. Note that the excluded group is
different here from that in Table 1. There, it was all old plants—those having first appeared
three or more CMs prior, and therefore being at least 15 years old. Here, it is only old plants in
single-unit firms. Hence the age coefficients in the table show average idiosyncratic demands
relative to this group rather than all old plants. Since, as we will see, old plants in multi-plant
firms are the largest plants in our sample, their separation from the excluded group is noticeable.
Single-unit plants exhibit similar patterns to those seen before for the whole sample.
Entrants have considerably smaller idiosyncratic demand levels than do established incumbents;
they sell 27 percent less output at a given price than do old single-unit plants, and undersell old
multi-unit plants by 58 percent. There is some convergence between entry and being young (5-9
years old), where young single-unit plants have demand levels 16 percent below old single-unit
plants. Convergence then largely stalls; medium-aged single-unit plants still have 14 percent
demand deficits.
For plants in multi-plant firms, similar qualitative relationships are present, but their
demand levels are significantly higher than single-unit plants at every age. That said, they are
still considerably smaller than old plants in multi-unit firms, with average demand levels for new
plants that are only two-thirds that of their older counterparts. Convergence is also slow among
multi-unit plants. Interestingly, exiting plants in multi-unit firms have lower average demand
levels than single-unit exiters.
It therefore appears that new plants in small firms (by our crude size measure) face
significantly lower idiosyncratic demand levels than do their new competitors in multi-plant
firms. Nevertheless, both types of plants see the inertial convergence patterns observed in the
broader sample, suggesting demand dynamics are at work in both cases. 9 We develop a model
of dynamic, endogenous demand accumulation in the next section that we will take to our sample
to further investigate the nature of the accumulation process.
9

Of course, single-unit plants are not restricted to remaining in single-unit firms their entire life, nor for that matter
are multi-unit plants restricted to that type of firm. The more common transformation between these is for a plant in
a single-unit firm to become part of a multi-unit firm, either through acquisition by another firm or through its own
firm acquiring additional plants. From this perspective, the low demand levels and slow convergence of single-unit
entrants becomes even starker vis-à-vis their demand levels relative to old plants in multi-unit firms. In the
appendix (see section A.2 of the appendix) we also show that the patterns in Tables 1 and 2 are robust to controlling
for firm age. That is, there is slow growth of new plants even in large, mature firms.

9

4. Model
The analysis above shows various relationships between the attributes of plants and firms
and the evolution of producers’ idiosyncratic demand levels. The patterns suggest dynamic
demand factors are at play—perhaps involved with producers having to build a customer base or
reputation, for instance. To address the inherent dynamics more directly, we now pose a model
that explicitly builds in a dynamic demand process with both exogenous and endogenous growth
components. We estimate this model using producers’ expansion patterns in our dataset to learn
about the nature of the processes driving demand growth.
We assume the plant faces an isoelastic contemporaneous demand curve:
(2)

qt = θ t Agetφ Z tγ pt−η ,

where pt is the current price charged by the plant. Several factors shift the demand curve. θt is
an exogenous demand shock that we assume follows an AR(1) process. Aget is the plant’s age.
Along with parameter φ, this accounts for deterministic changes in plants’ demand as they age.
Finally, Zt is a demand shifter that with parameter γ links a plant’s current activity to its future
expected demand level. Specifically, we assume Zt evolves according to the following process:
(3)

Z t = (1 − δ ) Z t −1 + (1 − δ ) Rt −1 .
Thus, Zt is a sort of operating history of the plant. It grows with past plant sales Rt-1

(defined as pt-1qt-1; we use lagged rather than current sales only for analytical convenience),
subject to depreciation at a rate δ. This process captures dynamic demand processes where a
plant’s potential customer base is related to its past sales activity. For instance, the process
embodies many types of “word of mouth” effects consumers are more likely to have heard about
a producer or its product if it has operated more in the past. This nests the demand-side analog to
the specification common in the supply-side learning-by-doing literature, where learning
depends only on cumulative output; i.e., δ = 0. We consider both this and the more general
specification in our estimation.
The plant’s production function is given by
(4)

qt = At xt ,

where qt is the plant’s output, At is its TFP level, and xt is its input choice. This input can be
thought of as a composite of labor, capital, energy, and materials inputs, weighted appropriately.
10

(For example, if the technology is Cobb-Douglas and there are constant returns to scale, the
composite would be the plant’s inputs raised to their respective input elasticities.)
The plant faces two costs: a factor cost of ct per unit of xt and a fixed operating cost of f
per period. This along with the production function implies the plant’s periodic profit function is
(5)

π t = pt At xt − ct xt − f .

Using the demand curve to substitute in for price and simplifying, we have
1

(5a)

φ

γ

π t = θ tη Agetη Z tη ( At xt )1−η − ct xt − f .
1

The plant manager maximizes the present value of the plant’s operating profits. 10 This
problem can be expressed recursively as follows:
1
1
1
φ
γ
1−
1−


η
η η
η
η
(6) V (Z t , At , Aget , θ t ) = max 0, sup θ t Aget Z t At xt − ct xt − f + βEV (Z t +1 , At +1 , Aget +1 , θ t +1 ) ,
 xt


where V(⋅) is the plant’s value given state variables. Z is endogenously affected by the plant’s
input choices; the plant’s age, TFP, and demand shock θ evolve exogenously. The plant
discounts the future by a factor of β < 1.
The plant’s continuation decision is made explicit in (6). It can operate and earn the
profits this entails (the second item in the braces), or it can exit and earn the outside option
(normalized to zero here). If it chooses to operate, it takes as given its past operating history as
summarized in Zt and chooses current inputs xt to maximize its present value. Because of the
form of the production function and the demand curve, this choice of xt simultaneously pins
down the plant’s output and its price as well.
The dynamics inherent in the plant’s choice problem are apparent: by producing more
today, the plant can shift out its demand curve tomorrow. The optimal production level
(equivalently: the optimal price) in this case will be higher (lower) than that implied by a purely
static problem where current price is not tied to future demand. This is consistent with what we
found in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008): young plants had lower average prices than
older plants in the same industry.
It is important to note that the only sources of dynamics in this model come through the
demand process. That means that if other dynamic forces affect plant behavior, it will be
10

We abstract from any agency issues that may arise between plants’ managers and the owners of these
establishments (if they are different people).

11

interpreted through the lens of our model as demand. It is therefore important that we consider
any other such forces and how they might impact the interpretation of our results. We do this in
detail in Section 6 below.
Optimal dynamic behavior (the plant’s xt trajectory) conditional on survival is given by
the Euler equation implied by the supremum in (6):
ct

(7)

1
−
(1 − δ ) pt At 1 − δ

1

φ

γ

1

1
−
−1
1 − θ tη Agetη Z tη ( At xt ) η pt
η



φ
1
γ
1


ct +1 
1 
 η

−
−1  γ pt +1 At +1 xt +1
η
η
= βE θ t +1 Aget +1 Z t +1 ( At +1 xt +1 ) η pt +1 
− 1 −  +

η
η
Z
p
A




t
t
t
+
1
+
1
+
1





.

This expression is slightly unwieldy. Moreover, it includes a state variable θt that is observable
to the plant manager but unobserved by us. 11 While there are techniques for estimating Euler
equations with unobserved state variables, it is preferable to work only with observables.
Fortunately, we can use the demand curve to substitute for the unobservable. We solve
(2) for θt and substitute the result into (7). This yields, after some algebra,
(7a)

  c
  1 
 1  β (1 − δ )γ 1
ct
E [Rt +1 ] + β (1 − δ ) E  t +1  − 1 −  .
− 1 −  =
pt At  η 
Z t +1
η
  pt +1 At +1   η 

The intuition behind the plant’s optimal dynamic behavior can be seen in this simplified
Euler equation. The first term on the left hand side is the inverse of the plant’s price-cost ratio
(the production function implies the plant’s marginal cost is ct/At). The second term is a function
of the elasticity of demand familiar as the inverse of the optimal markup for a firm facing a
residual demand elasticity of –η. Thus the left hand side of the equation, in a completely static
production/pricing optimization problem, would be zero. It is not generally so here because of
the dynamics discussed above. Because the plant shifts out its demand curve tomorrow by
making more sales today, it will markup price less over marginal cost than it would in a static
world to induce extra sales. (Another way to think about this is that its marginal revenue now is
not just what is implied by the contemporaneous demand function. It also includes the effect on
the discounted expected increase in future demand via growth in “demand stock” Z). With a
11

We observe all the other state variables in our dataset, the Census of Manufactures (CM) microdata. Age, by fiveyear categories, is available because we have a census of all establishments every fifth year. A, total factor
productivity, can be measured from the plant’s reported output and inputs. Z, the plant’s sales history, can be
constructed (given a value of δ) from the plant’s sales reported in past CMs.

12

lower markup than implied by the static rule, the cost-price ratio in the first term will be larger
than the second term, and thus the left hand side generally positive.
The first right-hand-side term is a parameter-dependent constant multiplied by the ratio of
the plant’s expected next-period revenue and its operating history captured in Zt+1. (Zt+1 is not
preceded by an expectation operator because it is solely a function of period-t values; see (3).)
This term is positive as long as the endogenous impact of age on demand is positive (i.e., as long
as γ is positive). Alternatively, if γ = 0, this is no longer a dynamic problem and there is no
incentive to deviate from the optimal static markup.
The second term on the right hand side is the same markup function as that on the left
hand side of the Euler equation, except it is for prices and costs in the next period. Of course,
being in the future, it is affected by discounting and the depreciation of Zt, and it holds in
expectation rather than ex-post. Again, this term would be zero in a static setting but is positive
here, as long as the first right-hand-side term is also positive.

4.1. Estimation
We estimate the model’s parameters using two complementary mappings from the data to
our model. The first is the demand equation (2). This equation alone can be used to estimate all
of the model’s parameters, actually. But our model also offers the additional structure of the
Euler equation (7a). The benefit of using this equation to estimate the model as well is that it
explicitly exploits the plant’s dynamic choices, using different data variation than the demand
equation estimation. As will be clear below, however, not all parameters are identified by the
Euler equation alone.
A basic measurement and estimation issue for both the demand and Euler equations is to
construct measures of the demand stock, Z. We observe plant revenues in every Census of
Manufactures back to 1963, so Rt is directly observable. Past revenues can be used to construct
the plant’s demand stock Zt as a function of past sales and the depreciation rate:
τ

(3a)

Z t = (1 − δ )τ Z t −τ + ∑ (1 − δ ) i Rt −i ,
i =1

where τ is the number of periods the plant has operated.
The remaining issue for measuring demand stocks is how to initialize Z for entrants, Z0.
Here, we draw insights from the descriptive empirical results in Section 3. We allow a plant’s
13

initial demand stock to be a function of the structure of the firm that owns it. Specifically, we
specify the initial demand stock of plant e as
(8)

Z 0e = ( K 0e )

λ2

λ1

 K 0 s( e) + K 0e 


K
0
e

 ,

where K0e is the initial physical capital stock of e, K0s(e) is the sum of the physical capital stocks
of plant e’s siblings (i.e., the total capital stock that year of the other plants owned by the same
firm within manufacturing), and λ1 and λ2 are parameters. The logic behind (8) is that a plant’s
initial demand stock can be related to its own physical size (K0e) as well as the size of its owning
firm. This specification therefore incorporates the possibility, seen in the previous section’s
results, that entrants of larger firms start with larger idiosyncratic demand levels than do those of
smaller firms. Note that (8) mechanically allows for single-plant firm entrants, where the entrant
is the firm, because in that case K0s(e) = 0 and the ratio in the parentheses is unity. Additionally,
(8) nests the possibility that multi-plant firm entrants do not have initial demand advantages,
which would be the case if λ2 = 0. This specification lets the data tell us how important the
owning firm’s characteristics are in determining the initial demand stock of a new plant. 12
Now consider the measurement and econometric issues specific to estimating the demand
equation (2). One reason for needing to estimate the demand equation as well is that the effect of
age on plant demand φ in the simplified Euler equation (7a) is missing. While equation (7)—the
version of the Euler equation with the plant’s unobservable state variable θt—includes all of the
model’s parameters, equation (7a) is missing φ, the effect of age on plant demand. Substituting
out for θt using the demand curve causes the Aget terms to cancel. Estimating the demand
equation lets us recover φ as well as harness additional data variation to identify the other
parameters.
We must address the issue of endogeneity in estimating the demand equation (2), as its
right-hand-side variables include endogenous plant level prices as well as state variables Zt and
12

We face a two other practical constraints in the construction of Zt. The first is that while we are able to trace back
plant revenues almost 20 years before our sample begins, several plants—about a third of our sample—had been in
existence before that year. Our measures of Z are therefore left-censored for these plants. Since we cannot see these
plants’ past sales, we cannot fully construct an initial Z for these firms. Instead, we extend the logic of our modeling
of new plants’ Z0 by letting the 1963 cohort’s Z1963 be given by the same form as (8). A second estimation issue is
that we do not observe plant sales in the four years between censuses. Hence we can only build Z stocks using
observed revenues. Essentially, we are assuming that sales are constant between censuses and ignoring the impact
of depreciation in the intervening years. We expect the fact that the cross-sectional variation in sales swamps
intertemporal variation within plants to mitigate this measurement problem.

14

Aget that, in the presence of serially correlated demand shocks, are correlated with the
unobserved demand shock. To deal with these issues, we first take logs of (2), which yields
(2a)

ln qt +1 = θ t +1 + φ ln Aget +1 + γ ln Z t +1 − η ln pt +1

where without loss of generality we have dated the demand equation in t+1 to keep the estimated
demand equation’s timing consistent with the Euler equation. We assume that the unobserved
demand shock follows an AR(1) process:
(9)

θ t +1 = ρθ t + υt +1

where υ t +1 is iid. We then quasi-difference the demand equation (2a) so that we have:
(2b)

ln qt +1 = ρ ln qt + φ ln Aget +1 − ρφ ln Aget + γ ln Z t +1 − ργ ln Z t − η ln pt +1 + ρη ln pt + υ t +1
The residual from the quasi-differenced demand equation (2b), υt+1, is the unobserved

demand shock innovation. As such it is uncorrelated with variables dated t and earlier and with
instruments dated in t+1 that are correlated with the RHS variables of (2b) but uncorrelated with
the innovation to demand shocks. As discussed (and implemented) in section 2.1, physical
productivity is a valid instrument for plant-level prices in the demand equation. We use this
instrument here as well.
Estimation of this demand equation relies on variation (both across plants and within
plants over time) in age, past revenues, and cost-driven price shifts for identification. A
challenge in the estimation of (2b) is to obtain sufficient variation in the data to identify
separately the dynamics of the unobserved demand shock, the role of plant age and the role of
learning about demand through experience. It is partly for these identification challenges that we
also exploit the variation important for identification of the Euler equation, (7a).
For the estimation of (7a), we note that it can be further simplified by multiplying both
the numerator and the denominator of the cost-price ratio by the plant’s quantity. Then the ratio
becomes the plant’s total variable costs as a share of revenue. That is,
(7b)

  C   1 
C t  1  β (1 − δ )γ 1
E [Rt +1 ] + β (1 − δ ) E  t +1  − 1 −  ,
− 1 −  =
η
Rt  η 
Z t +1
  Rt +1   η 

where Ct are total variable costs. Both plants’ variable costs and revenues are readily observable
in our data. Thus we can observe all of the components of the Euler equation, up to parameters.
To estimate the Euler equation, we assume that the expectation errors are additively
separable and have zero mean at the true parameter values. This gives us the moment condition:
15

(7c)

E [ε t +1 ] =

C
C t  1  β (1 − δ )γ Rt +1
 1 
− β (1 − δ ) t +1 − 1 −   = 0 .
− 1 −  −
Rt  η 
η
Z t +1
 Rt +1  η  

We use this moment condition and instruments that are orthogonal to the expectation error to
estimate the model’s parameters by GMM. The instruments we use for the Euler equation are
variables dated t and earlier. These include lagged cost-revenue ratios, lagged revenues, and age
dummies. We note that the Euler equation identifies the model’s parameters from changes in
plants’ variable-costs-to-revenue and revenue-to-demand-stock ratios, different variation from
that used to identify the demand equation.
One potentially important econometric issue in estimating both equations (2b) and (7c) is
selection. Estimation of each of these equations requires plants that are present in both t and t+1
and accompanying measurement of all variables in both equations in t and t+1. The average
five-year exit rate for our data sample is around 20 percent, so selection could be empirically
important. We also know from our earlier work (Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008)) that
selection is non-random and related to plant-level fundamentals including physical productivity
and demand shocks. We found, for example, that a one standard deviation increase in the
demand shock (which in this paper reflects the combined influence of unobserved shocks, age
and Z effects) decreases the probability of exit by 5 percent. We will therefore control for
selection bias in our estimations below.

4.2. Discussion
The comparison between the estimates of φ and γ, which respectively parameterize the
influence on demand of plant age and past sales, is informative about the sources of the
dynamics of the demand process discussed above. Age captures deterministic demand shifts that
would happen regardless of the level of a plant’s past activity. We think of this process as
“demand accumulation by being.” Zt, on the other hand, captures the influence of past sales
activity, or “demand accumulation by doing.” Models that posit dynamic demand growth
through passive consumer learning imply that the influence of plant age—the simple existence of
the plant for a period of time—will be greater. This shows up in the demand accumulation by
being channel. Those emphasizing endogenous demand-stock building—resulting from the
active efforts of the plant—will show a large influence of Zt, demand accumulation by doing.
We can measure the relative importance of each in the data.
16

5. Estimation Results
We jointly estimate via GMM the demand (2b) and Euler (7c) equations. 13 We estimate
the model for the entire sample, for local products only and for concrete plants only. Local
products are defined as products for which the majority of output is shipped less than 100 miles
according to the Commodity Flow Survey. These products include boxes, bread, concrete, and
ice. We highlight the local products subsample since it is possible that our model is better suited
to such products, or the parameters of the learning dynamics might easily be different for these
products. The concrete-only subsample enables us to focus on a specific product where we have
many observations, permitting estimation of industry-specific parameters. We would prefer to
let all parameters to vary across all products in our estimation, but some of our 10 sample
industries simply do not have enough plant-year observations to separately identify their
industry’s parameters with any useful precision. (Recall that we need to observe a plant in at
least two periods to identify the dynamic parameters, so the number of observations useful for
estimation is even smaller than the sample description reported in appendix Table A.4.) These
subsamples serve as an alternative means of exploring the robustness of our findings across
products. However, we do also report some results below where we permit key parameters to
vary with a function of the industry’s attributes.
The variables included in our estimated model are defined as above. However, we make
one change in the specification from (2b). We allow the influence of plant age to vary nonparametrically rather than imposing the constant-elasticity form shown in the equation. We do
this by including a set of plant age dummies in the estimated version of (2b): a young dummy
equal to one if the plant in period t is one census period (i.e., 5-9 years) old, and a medium age
dummy equal to one if the plant is two census periods (10-14 years) old. The omitted group
consists of mature plants at least three census periods (15+ years) old in period t. (Recall that we
have no entrants in the estimation sample because we need to use lagged variables to identify the
dynamic parameters.)
We also include controls in the demand equation not explicitly referenced in the above
discussion of the model. Specifically, because we are pooling data across products and years, we
We do not estimate β in the Euler equation but rather set it to be consistent with annual discount factor of 0.98.
We check below the robustness of our results to alternative values.
13

17

include a set of fully interacted product and year effects. We also include measures of the local
market for those products that are deemed local products. Specifically, we include a measure of
local income in the local market (see Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) for details) as
well as a measure of the average price of local competitors in the same industry. These latter
two variables are potentially important in accounting for shifts in demand that would otherwise
be subsumed into the unobservable demand component θ. There is no reason to believe that they
should be directly relevant for the Euler equation, however.

5.1. Estimates of the Model on the Full Sample
We estimate two versions of the model. One imposes that the depreciation rate of the
demand stock, δ, is zero. The other version allows δ to be estimated with the other parameters.
In the δ = 0 case, the demand stock simply reflects cumulative real revenue. This case is the
demand-side analog to standard learning-by-doing models that do not allow for “forgetting” in
the style of Benkard (2000). The results of the estimation are reported in Table 3. Column1
reports the results of the cumulative learning model with no depreciation, and column 2 reports
the results of the model when δ is estimated.
We find qualitatively similar results in the two alternative models. For example, we find
roughly similar elasticities of demand, positive and significant estimates of γ consistent with
“demand accumulation by doing” and also evidence of “demand accumulation by being.” In
what follows, we focus our attention on the model with estimated depreciation because the
evidence clearly rejects the hypothesis that the depreciation rate of the demand stock is zero.
The estimate for the full sample for δ is 0.893. This reflects total depreciation over a five-year
horizon, so the implied annual depreciation rate is 36 percent ((1 – 0.36)5 = 0.107). As will
become clear, the finding of an economically and statistically significant depreciation rate is a
common finding in alternative specifications we consider. We focus on such specifications in
the remainder of the paper.
We now turn to a more detailed discussion of the estimates of this model. First, consider
the estimates of the price elasticity of demand η. The estimate for the full sample is -1.8. This
value is in a similar range as those in Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) with a
significantly richer specification of the demand structure and its determinants. Also, note that we
include as a control a measure of competitors’ price in the local market for those products that
18

are shipped locally (for national products this effect is not separately identified, as we are already
including product-by-year effects). We find that the elasticity of a plant’s demand with respect
to a price increase by its local competitors is 0.338. This is consistent with the hypothesis that
higher prices of competitors, other things equal, increase demand for the plant in question. 14
In terms of the main parameters of interest, the results are consistent with the basic notion
of a dynamic demand-accumulation process that we discussed earlier. We find positive and
significant effects of “demand accumulation by doing” in the elasticity of future demand to the
demand stock, γ. The estimated value of γ is around 0.8. Producing more today will
significantly shift the plant’s demand curve out tomorrow; a 10 percent increase in a plant’s
demand stock corresponds to an 8 percent increase in the number of units the plant sells at any
given price. As reflected in the Euler equation, a producer’s output (or price) choice in the
current period affects its marginal revenue not just in the present period but in the future as well.
This parameter estimate can also help us get a feel for the potential return to a business
“investing” in its demand stock by lowering prices today in hopes of shifting out its demand
tomorrow. Based on the estimated price elasticity in the model with depreciation, a ten percent
price cut will increase current quantity sold by about 18 percent and current revenues by eight
percent. (This is a sizeable price deviation from one’s competitors, but not unusual. The
average within-market standard deviation of plants’ logged prices is 0.18.) This increase in
revenues will shift out the plant’s demand in the following year by about four percent, taking
into account both depreciation and γ. This means the plant will be able to sell four percent more
units at a given price than it would otherwise. A ten percent price cut that persists for five years
will cumulatively yield (taking into account depreciation) a 13 increase in the demand stock Z
above what it would be in absence of the cut.
In addition to the endogenous demand accumulation effect, we find that, having
controlled for a plant’s demand stock, “demand accumulation by being” also contributes to the
demand gap. The coefficient on the young dummy is negative and significant, and the
coefficient on the medium age dummy is much smaller and not significant. Since the omitted
group is the oldest plants, this means the demand impact of age increases monotonically. This is
qualitatively consistent with the raw demand gap patterns in Table 1, but these effects are much
smaller than those in Table 1. The demand gap closed from young to old plants due to age
14

We also find that local income increases demand.

19

effects alone is about seven percent here, only about one-fifth the Table 1 gap. This indicates
that once we have accounted for endogenous demand accumulation (and other factors), the
remaining “exogenous” age gap is much smaller.
Remember that both of these “accumulation by doing” and “accumulation by being”
effects are estimated while controlling for the potential presence of serially correlated
unobserved demand shocks. We parameterize the persistence of these demand shocks with the
five-year AR(1) coefficient ρ, which we estimate to be about 0.37. This five-year persistence
rate corresponds to an annual rate of 0.82.
The impact of the characteristics of the owning firm on an entering plant’s initial demand
stock is seen in the comparison of the estimates of λ1 and λ2. The value of λ1, which
parameterizes how a plant’s initial demand stock Z is related to its physical capital stock, is
0.651, indicating that, not surprisingly, plants with larger initial physical capital tend to have
larger starting demand stocks. The parameter also indicates that the ratio between the two types
of capital falls in the plant’s size. The estimated value of λ2, which is the elasticity of a plant’s
initial demand stock to the size of the firm (in physical capital terms) relative to the entering
plant, is 0.548. This indicates that, consistent with the descriptive results seen in Table 2, new
plants of larger firms do in fact have higher initial demand stocks. A plant started by a firm that
is twice as large as another entering plant’s firm will start with about a 38 log point (0.548*ln2 =
0.38) higher demand stock.
The table also reports the coefficient estimates for two selection controls. As noted
above, our estimation sample is selected on survivorship because we need to observe plant
activity in both the current and previous periods. To account for possible selection bias, we
include the estimated Mills ratio from an (unreported) probit specification on plant survival into
the next period. We include this Mills ratio in both the demand and Euler equations, because
both could be influenced separately by selection bias. To be able to rely on more than just
functional form to identify these selection corrections, we include the plant’s logged capital stock
in the survival probit. We showed in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) that capital
predicted plant survival. At the same time, it is also excluded from the plant’s dynamic profit
maximization problem in our model, making it a candidate excluded instrument for selection. 15
15

Of course, this raises the issue of what happens if plant capital is a dynamic choice in reality despite our exclusion
of it. We address this point in detail in Section 6 below when we consider alternative explanations for our findings.

20

The coefficient estimates on the selection controls suggest that any selection bias is
relatively modest in our sample. The estimates are statistically significant but small in
magnitude. The values of the other parameter estimates are roughly similar in unreported
specifications that exclude the selection controls. We have also tried more flexible ways of
controlling for selection bias, such as using various polynomials of the plant’s estimated survival
probability in place of the standard Mills ratio control. 16 The model’s main parameter estimates
are robust across these alternative specifications. Hence it seems that selection issues are not
skewing our reported estimates.

5.2. Estimates Using Local Products and Concrete Plants
To explore the consistency of our parameter estimates across the industries in our sample,
we estimate the model on two successively smaller subsamples. One uses only those plants in
local products industries (boxes, bread, concrete, and ice), and the other uses concrete plants
alone. (We choose concrete for the single-industry subsample because it has the largest number
of plants in our sample of any industry.) The results are in Table 4; column 1 reports the
estimates for the local products subsample, and column 2 reports the concrete results. We again
focus on the specification with depreciation since in both of these subsamples the estimated rate
of depreciation is far from zero.
Overall, the results for the two subsamples are qualitatively similar to the results for the
full sample, suggesting it is not ridiculously restrictive to constrain the parameters to be the same
across all product industries. There are some quantitative differences, however, that we discuss
briefly. Demand is more own-price elastic for concrete than for the entire sample. Concrete
demand is also more responsive to local competitors’ prices. 17 These elasticities for the alllocal-products subsample are essentially the same as those in the entire sample, however.
The main parameter of interest, the elasticity of demand to the plant’s endogenously
acquired demand capital, is roughly the same in these subsamples as for the whole sample, with γ
estimated at about 0.8. While γ is similar across products, concrete has a substantially lower
depreciation rate (an implied 13 percent per year as opposed to 27 percent per year) which is
16

Pakes (1994) and Aguirregabiria (1997) discuss the use of polynomials to approximate unknown functional forms
for selection corrections.
17

The estimated price elasticity of demand for concrete is somewhat lower than that reported in Foster, Haltiwanger
and Syverson (2008).

21

important for the demand accumulation dynamics. Combining these depreciation and price
elasticity estimates suggests that a plant that cuts prices by ten percent to invest in future demand
will raise current revenues by seven percent for local products and 13 percent in the concrete
subsample. This increase in sales will in turn increase the producer’s quantity demanded next
year by about four percent for local products and seven percent for concrete. The same ten
percent price drop sustained for five years increases the producer’s demand stock Z by 15
percent in local products and 44 percent on concrete, the former reflecting the cumulative effect
of higher depreciation rates.
We also find that the exogenous (age-related) demand accumulation process has similar
qualitative patterns as for the entire sample. There is a positive estimated demand-accumulationby-being effect for both local products and concrete. The quantitative effects are somewhat
larger in local products than for the full sample, and larger still in concrete.
The estimated value of λ1 is 0.937 for local products and 1.086 for concrete, which again
indicates larger plants tend to have larger starting demand stocks. For these products, the ratio
between initial demand and physical capital stays about the same with plant size. The influence
of firm size on a plant’s initial demand stock, which is embodied in λ2, is 0.285 for local products
and 0.410 for concrete. A plant started by a firm that is twice as large as another entering plant’s
firm will start with about a 19 percent higher demand stock if the plant is in the local products
industries and a 28 percent higher demand stock if the plant is in the concrete industry.
Again, selection does not appear to be quantitatively important. Three of the four inverse
Mills ratios are statistically significant, but all are small. Estimating the model without including
any selection correction terms (not shown) yielded similar estimates of the other parameters.

5.3. Interactions with Multi-Plant Firm Status
One of the most striking results of the descriptive exercises in Section 3 is that entrants
that are part of larger, multi-plant firms enter with a higher demand stock than those in smaller or
single-plant firms. This was confirmed in the estimated model above as well, as the elasticity of
initial demand stock to the ratio of the firm’s size to the entering plant’s size, λ2, was positive.
However, it was less clear in the descriptive results whether the rate of convergence of
idiosyncratic demand levels was faster for young plants in multi-plant firms than those in small
firms. To look for this possibility through the lens of our model, we also estimate a specification
22

that interacts an indicator for plants that are owned by a multi-plant firm with the model’s
parameters (except for λ1 and λ2, which already incorporate such multi-unit firm effects). The
results, for both entire sample (column 1) and the local-products-only sample (column 2), are
shown in Table 5. To interpret the results in this table, the “main” effects provide estimates for
single-unit plants, and the interaction effects with the MU dummy provide an estimate of
whether MU plants have a significant differential from the single-unit plants (so that the total
MU coefficient is the sum of the main and interaction effect).
There is some evidence that endogenous demand accumulation forces are slightly
stronger among plants owned by multi-unit firms, at least for the overall sample. The interaction
between the multi-unit indicator and γ is 0.084 (s.e. = 0.037) for the full sample and 0.030 (s.e. =
0.025) for the local product sample. In addition, estimated depreciation is lower for multi-unit
plants. 18 However, the fact that demand is slightly more inelastic for multi-unit plants implies,
once the effects are worked through the model, that the implied incentives to cut price in order to
build future demand capital are quantitatively not that different for single- and multi-unit plants.
We do find evidence of more of an “accumulation by being” effect for multi-unit as
opposed to single-unit plants. This can be interpreted as suggesting that the residual unexplained
component of the patterns observed in Table 2 is larger for multi-unit plants. We return to this
issue below.
As we noted above, one of the largest differences in Table 2 is the difference in the
intercepts. This is captured here by permitting the presence and size of the parent firm at the
time of entry of the plant to contribute to the demand stock. Given the large estimated
coefficient for λ2 (0.397 for the full sample and 0.442 for local products), there is a large level
shift in the demand curve for multi-units from the point of entry. Establishments that are part of
multi-unit establishment firms have initial firm-level capital stocks that are about 1.9 times that
of the median entering establishment. Using the full-sample estimates, such an establishment
will start with a 25 log point (0.397*ln1.9 = 0.25) higher demand stock.

5.4. Evolution of Demand by Age: Exogenous versus Endogenous Demand Accumulation
To further quantify the contribution of exogenous versus endogenous demand
18

We note that the estimated depreciation rate, while far from zero, is substantially lower for both single- and multiunit plants than the depreciation rates without such distinctions reported in Tables 3 and 4. Apparently, interacting
other parameters with multi-unit status yields a lower implied depreciation rate.

23

accumulation to the observed evolution of demand across plant ages, we return to the metric used
in Table 1. In particular, we use the estimated coefficients from our model along with the actual
data to compute the implied levels of both demand components for every plant-year observation
in our sample. We then derive the type of statistics reported in Table 1 for each of these
computed components.
We compute the component of demand from the exogenous demand accumulation
(“accumulation by being”) using the estimates of dummy variables for age reported in Tables 3
and 4. For the endogenous demand component (“accumulation by doing”), we first compute Zt
for every plant in the sample using our data on plants’ revenues and capital stocks along with the
estimates of λ1, λ2 and δ. We then combine the estimated Zt with our estimate of γ to compute
the endogenous demand accumulation component for every plant-year observation.
Table 6 reports the results of these exercises. The top panel shows the results for the full
sample, the middle panel for local products plants, and the bottom panel for concrete plants.
Plants are classified into three age categories: “Young” for plants that either entered in the
current or prior Census (i.e., those that are less than 10 years old); “Medium” for plants that
entered two Censuses ago (10-14 years old); and “Old” for plants that entered three or more
Censuses ago (15 or more years old). We combine the “Entrants” and “Young” categories from
Table 1 into a single “Young” category here for two reasons. First, the model only yields
estimates of the exogenous demand accumulation component for these same young and medium
categories relative to older plants. 19 Second, this grouping of ages implies that all counterfactual
estimates of endogenous demand accumulation component reflect actual past sales rather than
just our estimated demand stock initialization.
Because we use somewhat collapsed age categories and capital stock data are not
available for all plants used in Table 1, the first row in each of the panels of Table 6 repeats
exactly the type of analysis done in Table 1 for this restricted sample. As in Table 1, these
estimated coefficients are from a regression of the demand shock on age dummies and industryyear fixed effects. The demand shock patterns for each panel in Table 6 are similar qualitatively

19

While the learning by being component for the young reflects plants between 5-9 years old, one can obtain for a
plant of any age an estimate of the contribution of all components of demand other than the endogenous demand
accumulation at any age by taking the difference between the overall demand shock observed in the data and the
endogenous demand accumulation component. This difference includes the accumulation by being component but
also other components, like the unobserved idiosyncratic persistent demand component θ.

24

and quantitatively to those in Table 1. Young and Medium aged plants have much lower
demand than old plants and convergence is slow.
Our model lets us decompose this overall demand residual into multiple components. 20
The age patterns for the endogenous accumulation component are reported in the second row of
each panel. For the full sample, the endogenous accumulation component is much lower for
young and medium aged plants relative to old plants in a manner that quantitatively is very
similar to the first row. The accumulation by being component is relatively small in magnitude,
although it does exhibit modest growth over time. These results imply that most of the overall
demand shock patterns for our sample plants are accounted for by endogenous accumulation of
demand rather than exogenous components.
Results for local and concrete plants are similar. The endogenous accumulation
component in all cases is much lower for young plants (e.g., 32 log points lower for local product
plants and 24 log points lower for concrete plants) than old plants, and there is only slow
convergence. Accumulation by being accounts for a larger share of demand growth in the local
products and concrete subsamples, but in all cases the majority of demand accumulation occurs
via the endogenous channel.

6. Alternative Explanations and Robustness Checks
In this section, we attempt to address two basic concerns that we anticipate readers might
have with our work and provide some additional robustness checks. The first basic concern is
relatively minor and is addressed in the first subsection. It regards whether our idiosyncratic
demand measures—the ones used in Sections 1 and 2 to motivate our model—actually reflect a
plant’s demand state in a given period. In the second subsection we address the more serious
concern that we have allowed only one channel for dynamics in our model, demand stock
accumulation. If a plant’s management takes into account other dynamic factors when making
decisions, we would mistakenly measure these other factors’ influence as a response to our
specified demand dynamics. We agree that both of these concerns are theoretically valid, and
they almost surely have some empirical relevance. However, we believe that the setting of the
problem and the way we estimate the model substantially mitigates such concerns.
20

The two components we report do not add up to the total because there are other factors—in particular, the serially
correlated demand component θ — that enter into the demand equation.

25

6.1. What Do Our Idiosyncratic Demand Stock Measures Reflect?
Our idiosyncratic demand stock measures reflect the cross-plant variation in units of
output sold that is, by construction, purged of the effects of plants’ physical production costs. If
plant A both sells more output and has a higher idiosyncratic demand measure than plant B, plant
A’s high sales are not simply the result of plant A having lower prices because it has low costs.
Plant A would sell more than plant B even if it were charging the same price. Regardless of any
other measurement issues with these idiosyncratic demand measures, they reflect quantities sold
that are orthogonal to plants’ physical production costs as captured in our TFP measures.
That said, there are other measurement issues that might lead these demand measures to
capture other factors. Primary among these is the issue of capacity utilization. The demand
measure is based on the quantity (i.e., the number of units) the plant sells. Our descriptive
results could be explained by an alternative story where new plants are built to be the same size
(at least in terms of capital) as older plants in their industry, but they look like they have low
demand because they are slow to be fully utilized. In this case, firms design plants to be “grown
into”; they have the physical infrastructure to handle output levels typical of older incumbents,
but are only lightly utilized at first.
We have two responses to this possibility. First, this story is not inconsistent with our
theorized demand-accumulation process. New plants may operate at low utilization levels
precisely because their demand stock is low. As they accumulate a customer base or build
supplier-consumer relationship capital in one form or another, their output slowly grows to fit the
capacity of the plant. Why a firm might find it optimal to build an initially oversized plant will
depend on the size of capital adjustment costs (more on this below), but our idiosyncratic
demand measures could still reflect the demand accumulation process in this case.
Second, the data do not support this sort of capacity utilization pattern. We cannot
measure capacity utilization directly, but we can construct two good utilization proxies for each
plant: the capital-stock-to-output ratio, and the energy-use-to-capital-stock ratio. The former
measures whether plants’ production quantities are proportional to their reported capital stocks.
The latter relates a common proxy in the literature for the flow of capital services—energy use—
to reported capital stock measures. For capacity utilization to explain the demand patterns
discussed above, younger plants would have to have systematically higher capital-to-output
26

levels and lower energy-to-capital ratios than older plants.
Table 7 presents the utilization patterns for our sample. The table replicates the
specification of Table 2, except using the capacity utilization proxies as the dependent variables
(each is used in a separate regression). The results indicate mixed patterns of utilization across
plant ages, but even in those cases where utilization moves in the right direction, there is not
nearly enough quantitative movement to explain our patterns above. When measured by capitalto-output ratios, as in the top half of the table, utilization is actually higher at younger single-unit
plants than older ones (that is, their capital-output ratio rises with age). This pattern is reversed
among plants in multi-unit firms, but there the total utilization difference between new and old
plants is about 4.5 percent. Thus it can explain only about 10 percent of the measured demand
gap. Similar patterns hold, though with less monotonicity over age groups, for the results using
energy-capital ratios to measure utilization. Utilization is actually higher for new single-unit
plants than old ones and only about five percent lower in the case of new multi-unit plants.

6.2. Other Dynamic Forces
A more serious concern is that the demand accumulation process is the only source of
dynamics in our model. If plant decisions are made in response to additional dynamic forces, our
estimation will only see such actions through a demand accumulation lens, not the true economic
process driving the decisions. We see three broadly-defined alternative dynamic factors that our
plants might face. The first is a dynamic process in physical productivity—i.e., shifts in At over
time. The second is financing constraints, and the third is capital adjustment costs. We address
each of these possibilities in turn.
Physical productivity dynamics would involve predictable moves in a plant’s At.
Certainly, many have documented that plants experience persistent productivity shocks (see the
papers in Bartelsman and Doms (2000), for example). Indeed, a possible source of such
movements, though certainly not the only one, would be a traditional learning by doing
mechanism.
However, the patterns in the data are not consistent with supply-side learning by doing—
this is, after all, a basic motivation of our investigation. This suggests that physical productivity
dynamics are less of a concern in our context. While individual plants in our sample no doubt
experience some persistent, predictable At shocks, the results in Table 1 indicate these do not
27

have much of a systematic correlation with plant age. Certainly they do not hold clear patterns
over the 15+ year horizons we are explaining demand movements. Further, the quantitative
movements in physical TFP that do exist across ages are very small relative to the demand
variation that we focus on here. So while we agree that physical productivity dynamics exist and
can play important roles in explaining certain plant-level behaviors, we do not think they are
playing a major role in explaining the plant-level choices of the type and horizon that we use to
identify the parameters of the demand accumulation process.
Capital constraints can create dynamics because constrained businesses may accumulate
financial capital in one period in order to loosen a constraint on expansion in the future. They
would also be a reason for new businesses starting small, since if barriers to obtaining credit
exist, it is plausible that new producers would be more likely to face them than would more
established businesses.
We do not have plant-specific information on credit access or costs of capital, so we
cannot directly test for the presence of credit constraints. However, we are able to look at the
measured demand levels and growth for different types of firms that might be expected to vary
systematically in the extent to which they are credit constrained. The most applicable exercise
that we have done in this regard is the breakout of demand patterns for plants of multi-unit firms
in Table 2. Plants in these larger firms expectedly face lower credit constraints than do singleunit plant/firms. And while these multi-unit plants tend to be larger, they still exhibit the slow
convergence in measured demand levels seen among plants of smaller firms. This seems
inconsistent with a world where the measured patterns primarily embody financing constraints
instead of long-horizon demand accumulation.
Capital adjustment costs, even in the absence of any credit constraints, could produce
qualitative patterns similar to those we see in the data. Plants may respond slowly to even longrun demand shifts if it is costly for them to change the size of their business. In such a case, the
slow output growth we observe may not reflect gradual demand accumulation, but rather a
gradual expansion in the face of persistent high demand. We expect that capital adjustment costs
do play a role in plants’ decisions—after all, most capital is not rented via short-term
agreements, and there are several potential frictions in capital sales markets.
However, the estimates from the literature on the size of capital adjustment costs suggest
that they cannot quantitatively explain the patterns we document. Even assuming adjustment
28

costs at the high range of estimates, the time it would take for a plant to close the output gap
(assuming capital utilization rates are constant over time) observed in Table 1 is relatively short.
For example, the capital adjustment costs estimates in Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), which
were estimated using similar plant-level data to our own sample except on an annual frequency
and spanning the entire manufacturing sector, suggest plant size could fully adjust in less than
one year. Even some of the larger estimates of capital adjustment costs, like those in Gilchrist
and Himmelberg (1995), suggest the capacity adjustment will occur in only three years.
Hence it seems unlikely that capital adjustment costs could explain all, or even most, of
the 15+ years it takes for plants in our sample to close their measured idiosyncratic demand gap.
Much as with physical productivity dynamics discussed above, therefore, we expect that while
capital adjustment costs are important in some contexts, they do not have the quantitative impact
necessary to explain the long-horizon demand-growth patterns we observe in the data.

6.3. Robustness Checks
We discuss briefly a number of robustness checks that we conducted on our analysis in
this subsection. Relevant estimates for these robustness checks are reported in the appendix.
First, we investigated the sensitivity of our results to permitting a different discount factor

β. The results reported in Tables 3-6 reflect an assumed annual discount factor of 0.98. Figure
A.1 shows how the key parameters of γ and δ vary for discount factors ranging between 0.96 and
0.98. The estimates are quite robust across this range. We focus on these two parameters
because they are the critical estimates for the endogenous demand accumulation, but we also
found (results available upon request) that other estimated parameters are also robust over this
range of β.
Second, we explored refinements of the role of being part of a multi-unit firm upon entry.
The main results imply that plants entering as part of a multi-unit firm have significantly higher
initial demand stocks. To explore this mechanism further, we considered whether this is tied to
the nature of the overlap of a new plant’s activity with its parent firm. Specifically, we tested
whether the entering plant’s initial demand was higher if its owning firm had experience
operating other plants in the same geographic area (using the BEA Economic Area definition of
geographic areas) and industry (using 4-digit SIC industries). We found some evidence in favor
of this conjecture for plants in the local products subsample, but not much for concrete alone or
29

for national product plants. We report in Table A.1 results that consider this refinement for local
product plants. Even for this subsample we note that the contribution of initial demand capital
from the firm’s plants that are not part of the same geography or industry remains significant. It
might seem surprising that we did not find evidence in support of this conjecture for concrete
plants, but we note that for concrete plants in particular there is not much variation to exploit on
these dimensions (i.e., concrete plants that belong to a multi-unit firm upon entry are largely
from firms that operate in the same industry and geographic area). While we recognize that we
only explored this refinement in a limited fashion, we think the results imply that the demand
stock advantage of being part of a multi-unit does not stem simply from the activity of the firm’s
other plants in the same industry or geographic market.
A third set of refinements we conducted was to allow some systematic variation in the
model’s parameters across industries by permitting the estimated parameters to vary with
observed characteristics of our sample products. We already saw in Tables 3 and 4 that while the
results are qualitatively similar across our sample products, there is some quantitative variation
in the parameter estimates across the full sample, the subsample of local product producers, and
concrete plants. We considered allowing the parameters to vary with several alternative product
characteristics, and in particular the nature of the downstream industries that purchase our
sample products (we identified these downstream industries using the input-output matrix). We
conjectured, for example, that producers who sell to downstream industries with more turnover
of producers would face weaker incentives for demand stock accumulation, while those selling to
more concentrated downstream industries would face stronger incentives. We found only
modest evidence in favor of these conjectures (see Table A.2 for details). For example, the
elasticity of demand with respect to the demand stock (γ ) tends to increase with the
concentration of downstream producers when using the full sample. However, this result was
not observed in the local product plant subsample, where we found no statistically significant
variation in γ on these dimensions. Also, while the point estimates in both the full and local
products samples indicated that γ decreases when downstream turnover rises, neither of these
estimates were statistically significant.

7. Conclusion
We have used a unique dataset to examine the sources of the persistent gap in size across
30

young and old establishments. Building upon our earlier work which had suggested that supplyside factors were not primarily responsible for this gap, we focused on demand-side factors in
this paper. Our results imply that, even in commodity-like product industries, entry is difficult.
It takes a long time for new businesses, even those owned by large firms, to reach a point where
they have built enough relationship-specific capital with their potential customers to expect (at
the same price) to sell the same amount of output as do their more established competitors.
These results further buttress the recent literature pointing towards the importance of
idiosyncratic demand factors in explaining the fortunes of businesses.
To explore the qualitative and quantitative nature of the demand accumulation process,
we built and estimated a model of a producer’s dynamic growth problem that allowed for
expansion through both endogenous (“demand accumulation by doing”) and exogenous
(“demand accumulation by being”) processes. While both processes play a role in new
businesses’ expansions, the majority of demand accumulation is the product of the producers’
own efforts to build their demand stocks.
Besides speaking to the literature on the role of idiosyncratic demand factors in shaping
businesses’ trajectories, we believe our results can offer insights to several lines of research that
have focused on various aspects of demand-side influences on firm growth, including those in
the fields of industrial organization, macro, and trade (e.g., Klepper (2002), Cabral and Mata
(2003), Arkolakis (2010), Dinlersoz and Yorukoglu (2010), Gourio and Rudanko (2011) and
Luttmer (2011)).

31

References
Ábrahám, Árpád and T. Kirk White. “The Dynamics of Plant-Level Productivity in U.S.
Manufacturing.” Center for Economic Studies Working Paper 06-20, 2006.
Aguirregabiria, Victor. “Estimation of Dynamic Programming Models with Censored Dependent
Variables.” Investigaciones Economicas, 21(2), 1997, 167-208.
Arkolakis, Costas. “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International
Trade.” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118(6), 1151-1199.
Asplund, Marcus and Volker Nocke. “Firm Turnover in Imperfectly Competitive Markets.”
Review of Economic Studies, 73(2), 2006, 295-327.
Bahk, Byong-Hyong and Michael Gort. “Decomposing Learning by Doing in New Plants.”
Journal of Political Economy, 101(4), 1993, 561-583.
Bar-Isaac, Heski and Steven Tadelis. “Seller Reputation.” Foundations and Trends in
Microeconomics, 4(4), 2008, 273-351.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Mark Doms. “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
Microdata.” Journal of Economic Literature, 38(3), 2000, 569-95.
Benkard, C. Lanier. “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production.” American
Economic Review, 90(4), 2000, 1034-54.
Brown, J. David, John S. Earle, and Almos Telegdy. “The Productivity Effects of Privatization:
Longitudinal Estimates from Hungary, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine.” Journal of
Political Economy, 114(1), 2006, 61-99.
Cabral, Luís M B, and José Mata. “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and
Theory." American Economic Review, 93(4), 2003, 1075–1090.
Caminal, Ramon and Xavier Vives. “Price Dynamics and Consumer Learning.” Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, 8(1), 1999, 95-131.
Caves, Richard E. “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and Mobility of
Firms.” Journal of Economic Literature, 36(4), 1998, 1947-82.
Cooper, Russell W. and John C. Haltiwanger. “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment Costs.”
Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 2006, 611-33.
Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout. “Market Entry Costs, Producer
Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics.” Econometrica, 75(3), 2007, 837-73.

32

De Loecker, Jan. “Product Differentiation, Multiproduct Firms, and Estimating the Impact of
Trade Liberalization on Productivity.” Econometrica, 79(5), 2011, 1407-51.
Dinlersoz, Emin and Mehmet Yorukoglu. “Information and Industry Dynamics.” US Census
Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-10-16.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Robert S. Pindyck. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1994.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. “Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in
U.S. Manufacturing Industries.” RAND Journal of Economics, 19(4), 1988, 495-515.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. “Firm Entry and Postentry
Performance in the U.S. Chemical Industries.” Journal of Law and Economics, 32(2) Part
2, 1989a, S233-71.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. “The Growth and Failure of U.S.
Manufacturing Plants.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4), 1989b, 671-98.
Eslava, Marcela, John Haltiwanger, Adriana Kugler and Maurice Kugler. “Plant Survival,
Market Fundamentals and Trade Liberalization.” Mimeo, 2008.
Fishman, Arthur and Rafael Rob. “Consumer Intertia, Firm Growth and Industry Dynamics.”
Journal of Economic Theory, 109(1), 2003, 24-38.
Fishman, Arthur and Rafael Rob. “Is Bigger Better? Customer Base Expansion through
Word‐of‐Mouth Reputation.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(5), 2005, 1146-1162.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review,
98(1), 2008, 394-425.
Gilchrist, Simon and Charles P. Himmelberg. “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for
Investment.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 36(3), 1995, 541-72.
Gourio, Francois and Leena Rudanko. “Customer Capital.” NBER Working Paper No. 17191,
2011.
Hopenhayn, Hugo. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.” Econometrica,
60(5), 1992, 1127-1150.
Jovanovic, Boyan. “Selection and Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica, 50(3), 1982, 25-43.
Kee, Hiau Looi and Kala Krishna. “Firm-Level Heterogeneous Productivity and Demand
Shocks: Evidence from Bangladesh.” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 98(2), 2008, 457-62.
33

Klepper, Steven. “Firm Survival and the Evolution of Oligopoly.” The RAND Journal of
Economics, 33(1), 2002, 37-61.
Luttmer, Erzo G. J. “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth.” Review of Economic Studies, 78(3),
2011, 1042-1068.
Melitz, Marc J. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6), 2003, 1695-1725.
Pakes, Ariel. “Dynamic Structural Models: Problems and Prospects. Mixed Continuous
Discrete Controls and Market Interactions” in C. Sims (ed.) Advances in Econometrics.
Sixth World Congress. Vol 2. 1994, Cambridge University Press.
Pakes, Ariel and Richard Ericson. “Empirical Implications of Alternative Models of Firm
Dynamics.” Journal of Economic Theory, 79(1), 1998, 1-45.
Radner, Roy. “Viscous Demand.” Journal of Economic Theory, 112(2), 2003, 189–231.
Shapiro, Carl. “Consumer Information, Product Quality, and Seller Reputation.” The Bell
Journal of Economics, 13(1), 1982, 20-35.
Syverson, Chad. “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2), 2011,
326-65.
Troske, Kenneth R. “The Dynamic Adjustment Process of Firm Entry and Exit in Manufacturing
and Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate.” Journal of Law and Economics, 39(2), 1996,
705-35.
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. “Redefinition of the BEA Economic Areas.” Survey of
Current Business, February 1995, 75-81.

34

Table 1. Evolution of Productivity and Demand across Plant Ages

Plant Age Dummies
Variable

Entrant

Young

Medium

Exiter

Physical TFP

0.013
(0.005)

0.004
(0.006)

-0.004
(0.006)

-0.018
(0.005)

Demand Shock

-0.550
(0.022)

-0.397
(0.024)

-0.316
(0.026)

-0.339
(0.021)

Note: This table shows the coefficients on indicator variables for exiting, entering, and continuing plants of two age
cohorts (shown by column; “young” establishments first appeared in the census five years ago, “medium”
establishments first appeared in the census ten years ago) when we regress plant-level productivity and demand
levels on these indicators and a full set of product-year fixed effects. The excluded category is “old” plants (those
that appeared three or more censuses prior). The sample includes roughly 17,000 plant-year observations for from
the 1977, 82, 87, and 92 Census of Manufactures. Standard errors, clustered by plant, are in parentheses. This table
is similar to Table 5 in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) but uses a measure of demand shock that is more
consistent with that used in subsequent exercises and a smaller sample (we exclude plants manufacturing gasoline
from the analysis).

Table 2. Evolution of Demand across Plant Ages—Interactions with Firm’s Multi-Unit Status

Plant age dummies
Variable

Entrant

Young

Medium

Old

Exiter

Demand Shock

-0.318
(0.034)

-0.176
(0.035)

-0.150
(0.038)

Excl.

-0.183
(0.031)

Demand Shock x
MU firm

0.106
(0.038)

0.132
(0.041)

0.237
(0.045)

0.530
(0.026)

-0.283
(0.042)

Note: This table repeats the analysis of Table 1, but now allows plant age effects to vary with the multi-unit (MU)
status of the plant’s owning firm. The excluded category is “old” plants (those that appeared three or more censuses
prior) that are part of a single-unit firm. N is roughly 17,000 plant-year observations. Standard errors, clustered by
plant, are in parentheses.

35

Table 3. Estimated Coefficients for Entire Sample, Cumulative Learning and Depreciation
Models

0.287
(0.068)

Learning
with
Depreciation
0.795
(0.014)

-η
(price elasticity of demand)
Young dummy
(demand shift for entering and young plants)

-2.576
(0.235)

-1.808
(0.082)

-0.179
(0.073)

-0.066
(0.031)

Medium age dummy
(demand shift for medium-aged plants)

-0.051
(0.055)

-0.025
(0.026)

ρ

1.188
(0.035)

0.366
(0.085)

λ1

1.803
(0.177)
0.103
(0.340)
0.315
(0.334)

0.651
(0.051)
0.548
(0.063)
0.338
(0.073)
0.893
(0.026)
-0.022
(0.009)
0.026
(0.005)

Cumulative
Learning

Parameter

γ
(elasticity of future demand to the demand stock)

(persistence of exogenous demand shocks θ)
(elasticity of initial demand to plant’s own K)

λ2
(elasticity of initial demand to ratio of firm’s K to plant’s K)
Competitor’s Price
(local products only)

δ
(demand depreciation rate)
Inverse Mills Ratio, Demand
(selection correction, demand equation)
Inverse Mills Ratio, EE
(selection correction, Euler equation)

0.052
(0.020)
0.002
(0.003)

Notes: Joint Demand and Euler Estimation is based on joint estimation of equations (2b) and (7c). Demand
equation also includes year dummies (not reported) and control for local demand (local BEA economic area
income). Young plants here refer to plants that are present in the current and prior Economic Census. Medium age
plants are those that have been present for at least two Economic censuses. The omitted age group is mature plants
that have been present for at least three Economic Censuses. The instruments for demand equation include
log(TFPQ), lagged revenues (up to six lags), lagged price, local income, age and year dummies. Instruments for
Euler equation include lagged revenue (up to six lags), lagged cost/revenue ratios (up to two lags), lagged price (up
to two lags), and age dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses.

36

Table 4. Estimated Coefficients for Local Industry and Ready Mix Concrete Sample,
Depreciation Model
Parameter

γ
(elasticity of future demand to the demand stock)

Local
Products
0.843
(0.010)

Concrete
0.751
(0.023)

-η
(price elasticity of demand)
Young dummy
(demand shift for entering and young plants)

-1.705
(0.077)

-2.321
(0.141)

-0.102
(0.027)

-0.211
(0.043)

Medium age dummy
(demand shift for medium-aged plants)

-0.027
(0.022)

-0.066
(0.033)

ρ

-0.142
(0.043)

0.277
(0.061)

δ

0.787
(0.023)
0.317
(0.064)
0.937
(0.030)
0.285
(0.055)
-0.035
(0.010)
0.030
(0.004)

0.500
(0.048)
1.416
(0.225)
1.086
(0.029)
0.410
(0.033)
-0.018
(0.013)
0.017
(0.003)

(persistence of exogenous demand shocks θ)
(demand depreciation rate)
Competitor’s Price

λ1
(elasticity of initial demand to plant’s own K)

λ2
(elasticity of initial demand to ratio of firm’s K to plant’s K)
Inverse Mills Ratio, Demand
(selection correction, demand equation)
Inverse Mills Ratio, EE
(selection correction, Euler equation)
Notes: See notes to Table 3.

37

Table 5. Estimated Coefficients for Learning with Depreciation Model, Interactions with MultiPlant Firm Status
Parameter
Entire Sample
Local Products
0.705
0.770
γ
(0.030)
(0.023)

η

-2.507
(0.173)

-2.140
(0.188)

Young dummy

-0.026
(0.075)

0.053
(0.044)

Medium age dummy

0.038
(0.051)

0.036
(0.042)

ρ

0.571
(0.095)

0.240
(0.093)

λ1

1.106
(0.035)

1.028
(0.025)

λ2

0.397
(0.050)

0.442
(0.031)

δ

0.584
(0.069)
0.733
(0.171)
0.084
(0.037)
0.407
(0.158)
-0.305
(0.105)
-0.169
(0.068)
0.451
(0.096)
-0.104
(0.079)
-0.475
(0.161)
0.002
(0.013)
0.010
(0.003)

0.673
(0.043)
0.338
(0.186)
0.030
(0.025)
-0.055
(0.209)
-0.347
(0.062)
-0.123
(0.053)
0.137
(0.115)
-0.144
(0.049)
0.042
(0.207)
-0.020
(0.010)
0.016
(0.003)

Competitor’s Price

γ*MU
η*MU
Young dummy*MU
Medium age dummy*MU

ρ*MU
δ*MU
Competitor’s Price*MU
Inverse Mills Ratio (Demand)
Inverse Mills Ratio (EE)

Notes: See notes for Table 3 above. “MU” is an indicator variable equal to one if the plant is owned by a multi-unit
(multi-plant) firm.

38

Table 6. Evolution of Demand across Plant Ages— Endogenous Learning vs. Learning By Being
Effects

Variable

Young

Medium

Old

All Plants
Demand shock

-0.575
(0.020)

-0.287
(0.029)

Endogenous Accumulation
(Accumulation by Doing)

-0.617
(0.017)

-0.271
(0.025)

Exogenous Accumulation
(Accumulation by Being)

-0.066
(0.031)

-0.025
(0.026)

Excl.

Local Product Plants
Demand shock

-0.573
(0.020)

-0.287
(0.029)

Endogenous Accumulation
(Accumulation by Doing)

-0.321
(0.017)

-0.276
(0.025)

Exogenous Accumulation
(Accumulation by Being)

-0.102
(0.027)

-0.027
(0.022)

Excl.

Concrete Plants
Demand shock

-0.467
(0.023)

-0.228
(0.035)

Endogenous Accumulation
(Accumulation by Doing)

-0.236
(0.019)

-0.159
(0.028)

Exogenous Accumulation
(Accumulation by Being)

-0.211
(0.043)

-0.066
(0.033)

Excl.

Notes: The results in this table are based on the estimates from Tables 3 and 4, respectively. The Demand Shock is
computed as the difference between (log) output and the price determinants of demand. The endogenous learning
effect is computed from the evolution of the demand capital for each plant using the estimated parameters for 𝛾and
𝛿. The learning by being effects are repeated from Tables 3 and 4 from the estimated Young and Medium age
dummies. Recall “young” establishments first appeared in the census five years ago, “medium” establishments first
appeared in the census ten years ago), and the excluded group “old” are establishments that first appeared in the
census 15 or more years ago.

39

Table 7. Capacity Utilization Patterns Across Plant Ages and Multi-Unit Status

Capacity
Utilization
Measure

Plant age dummies
Entrant

Young

Medium

-0.110
(0.019)
-0.077
(0.021)

-0.086
(0.020)
-0.087
(0.023)

-0.042
(0.022)
-0.099
(0.025)

Utilization

0.090
(0.029)

-0.021
(0.031)

-0.057
(0.033)

Excl.

0.074
(0.027)

Utilization x
MU firm

-0.070
(0.033)

0.012
(0.035)

-0.003
(0.039)

-0.022
(0.023)

-0.017
(0.036)

Variable
Utilization

Capital

Energy

Utilization x
MU firm

Old
Excl.
-0.111
(0.015)

Exiter
-0.022
(0.018)
0.055
(0.024)

Note: This table estimates the same specification as Table 2, except now uses as the dependent variable two different
plant-level proxies for capacity utilization, hence showing patterns of plant utilization over age and plant multi-unit
status. The two proxies are the log of the capital stock to output ratio (“Capital”) and the log of energy use to
equipment capital ratio (“Energy’). N = roughly 17,000 plant-year observations. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

40

Appendix
A.1. Robustness Checks
Figure A.1 reports the estimates of the two key parameters for endogenous demand accumulation as the
discount factor varies. The results reported are for the full sample but similar patterns hold for local plants and for
concrete plants only (i.e., the parameter estimates are not very sensitive to the discount factor over this range).
Table A.1 reports the estimates when the impact of being part of a multi-unit firm upon entry is allowed to
vary depending on whether the multi-unit firm has activity in the same industry or same geography. The results
presented are for local product plants. The specification of (8) is modified as follows for this estimation:
𝑍0𝑒

𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒
𝐾0𝑠(𝑒) + 𝐾0𝑒 𝜆 𝐾0𝑠(𝑒)
2
= (𝐾0𝑒 ) (
) (
) 𝜆3
𝐾0𝑒
𝐾0𝑠(𝑒)
𝜆1

where the “same” refers to same industry in the first column and same geographic area (BEA Economic Area) of
Table A.1.
Table A.2 reports estimates when 𝛾 is permitted to vary with the product characteristics – specifically
downstream product characteristics. The specification of 𝛾 is in this case:
𝛾 = 𝛾0 + 𝛾𝑘 𝑑𝑜𝑤𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑘

where 𝑑𝑜𝑤𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑘 is the herfindahl index (based upon employment concentration of firms) of downstream
industries in the first panel and is the firm turnover rate (sum of firm entry and exit rates) in the second panel. These
measures were constructed using the input-output matrix to identify the downstream industries and then using the
Longitudinal Business Database to measure concentration and firm turnover rates for these industries.
A.2 Demand Patterns by Firm and Establishment Age
Estimating the interactions between firm and plant age yields the results in Table A.3. A fully interacted
model with four plant and firm age categories each, for both single- and multi-unit firms, would unfortunately create
some subsample cells that are too small to be useful for identification and would possibly violate data confidentiality
standards. So we pool some categories together. First, we only break out firm age effects for plants in multi-unit
firms. Further, we pool young- or medium-aged firms (i.e., whose first plant was observed either one or two CMs
prior). Note also that some plant-firm-age categories cannot exist by definition, and as such are missing from the
estimation (e.g., there cannot be a medium-aged plant in an entering or young firm). Old plants in single-unit firms
are again the excluded group.
We focus on the multi-unit plant results in the bottom three rows of Table A.3. Starting with the bottom
row, we see that among old firms (those that are at least 15 years old), the basic convergence patterns seen before
hold here. Entering plants of old firms have demand levels that are 63 percent of old plants in this type of firm.
Growth is slow for the first five years: old firms’ young plants have 65 percent of the demand level. Demand
growth accelerates after this somewhat, but medium-aged plants still have notably (24 percent) lower demand levels.
For young- and medium-aged firms, we also observe that entrants are smaller than longer-lived plants in
such firms (though there can be no old plants in these firms). Notice, too, that plants in young- and medium-aged
firms have lower demands than plants of the same age in older firms. The only result that is not in accordance with
these general patterns across firm and plant ages involves new plants in new multi-unit firms. While as might be
expected their demand levels are smaller than that of old plants in old firms (on average 68 percent of the level),
their idiosyncratic demands are higher than new plants in older firms. Another interesting result is that exiting
plants in old firms tend to have exceptionally low demand levels—lower, in fact, than new single-unit plants.
The results in Table A.3 show there are nontrivial distinctions in the levels and growth of plant demand in
firms of different ages. The broadest pattern is one of older firms being tied to higher demand levels at any plant
age, just as with firm size again. But also as with the firm-size results above, the demand gaps are still large within
any firm type, and these diffuse demands close only slowly over time.
A.3. Defining Our Products
As background to how we define our products, it is first necessary to understand the product coding scheme
that Census uses. There are three types of codes that we highlight. First, Census codes flags products from
administrative records (AR) sources. We exclude all of these AR products from our analysis. (Including in our

41

measures of PPSR since it is obviously not possible to assign these AR products to a single 7-digit code.) Second,
Census uses balancing codes to correct cases in which the sum of the total value of shipments of reported individual
products does not sum to the reported total value of shipments. Census identified these balancing codes using special
suffixes for the product codes in every census year except in 1987. Where balancing codes are identified, they have
been deleted. Finally, Census collects data on receipts for contract work, miscellaneous receipts, and resales of
products. These products are excluded from our calculations of PPSR (again, because it is obviously not possible to
assign these AR products to a single 7-digit code). As a final exclusion, we did not include any products in that have
a negative value since these are presumably balancing codes. The precise definitions of our ten products are listed
below (with 7-digit product codes in parentheses).
Boxes is defined as the sum of boxes classified by their end use and boxes classified by their materials. Boxes
classified by end use are: food and beverages (2653012), paper and allied products (2653013), carryout boxes for
retail food (2653014 category starts in 1987) glass, clay, and stone products (2653015), metal products, machinery,
equipment, and supplies except electrical (2653016), electrical machinery, equipment, supplies, and appliances
(2653018), chemicals and drugs, including paints, varnishes, cosmetics, and soap (2653021), lumber and wood
products, including furniture (2653029), and all other ends uses not specified above (2653029 in 1977 and 1982,
2653030 in 1987). Boxes classified by their materials are: solid fiber (2653051), corrugated paperboard in sheets
and rolls, lined and unlined (2653067), and corrugated and solid fiber pallets, pads and partitions (2653068). The
physical data for boxes is measured in short tons.
Bread is defined as one 7-digit product, white pan bread (2051111), until 1992 when it was split into two products
white pan bread, except frozen (2051121) and frozen white pan bread (2051122). The physical data for bread is
measured in thousands of pounds.
Carbon Black is defined as one 7-digit product, carbon black (2895011 in 1977, 2895000 thereafter). The physical
data for carbon black is measured in thousands of pounds.
Coffee is the sum of whole bean (2095111), ground and extended yield (2095117 and 2095118 in 1982 and 2095115
thereafter), and ground coffee mixtures (2095121). The physical data for coffee is measured in thousands of pounds.
Concrete is defined as one 7-digit product, ready-mix concrete (3273000), over our entire sample. Some of the
products coded as 3237300 in 1987 were in fact census balancing codes and thus were deleted from our sample. The
physical data for concrete is measured in thousands of cubic yards.
Flooring is defined as one 7-digit product, hardwood oak flooring (2426111), over our entire sample. The physical
data for flooring is measured in thousands of board feet.
Block Ice is defined as one 7-digit product, can or block ice (2097011), over our entire sample. The physical data
for block ice is measured in short tons.
Processed Ice is defined as one 7-digit product, cubed, crushed, or other processed ice (2097051), over our entire
sample. The physical data for processed ice is measured in short tons.
Plywood is defined as one 7-digit product, hardwood plywood (2435100), over 1977-1987. Starting in 1992,
plywood is the sum of veneer core (2435101), particleboard core (2435105), medium density fiberboard core
(2435107), and other core (2435147). The physical data for plywood is measured in thousands of square feet
surface measure.
Sugar is defined as one 7-digit product, raw cane sugar (2061011), over our entire sample. The physical data for
sugar is measured in short tons.
A.4. Measurement of input levels and input elasticities in the TFP indexes.
This section reports details on the measurement of input levels and elasticities in the TFP measures
described in Section 3.
Labor inputs are measured as plants’ reported production-worker hours adjusted using the method of Baily,
Hulten and Campbell (1992). This involves multiplying the production-worker hours by the ratio of total payroll to

42

payroll for production workers. Prior work has shown this measure to be highly correlated with Davis and
Haltiwanger’s (1991) more direct imputation of nonproduction workers, which multiplies a plant’s number of
nonproduction workers by the average annual hours for nonproduction workers in the corresponding two-digit
industry calculated from the CPS. Capital inputs are plants’ reported book values for their structure and equipment
capital stocks deflated to 1987 levels using sector-specific deflators from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The
method is detailed in Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2001). Materials and energy inputs are simply plants’
reported expenditures on each deflated using the corresponding input price indices from the NBER Productivity
Database.
To compute the industry-level cost shares that we use to measure the input elasticities αj, we use the
materials and energy expenditures along with payments to labor to measure the costs of these three inputs. We
construct the cost of capital by multiplying real capital stock value by the capital rental rates for the plant’s
respective two-digit industry. These rental rates are from unpublished data constructed and used by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics in computing their Multifactor Productivity series. Formulas, related methodology, and data sources
are described in U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1983) and Harper, Berndt, and Wood (1989).
A.5. Rules for Inclusion in the Sample
While the Economic Census data we use is very rich, it still has limitations that make necessary three
restrictions on the set of producers included in our sample. First, we exclude plants in a small number of productyears for which physical output data are not available due to Census decisions to not collect it or obvious recording
problems. Second, we exclude establishments whose production information appears to be imputed (imputes are not
always identifiable in the CM) or suffering from gross reporting errors. Third, we impose a product specialization
criterion: a plant must obtain at least 50% of its revenue from sales of our product of interest. This restriction
reduces measurement problems in computing physical TFP. Because plants’ factor inputs are not reported
separately by product but rather at the plant level, we must for multi-product plants apportion the share of inputs
used to make our product of interest. Operationally, we make this adjustment by dividing the plant’s reported output
of the product of interest by that product’s share of plant sales. This restriction is not very binding in seven of our
products whose establishments are on average quite specialized. Bread, flooring, and block ice producers are less
specialized, however, so care must be taken in interpreting our sample as being representative of all producers of
those products. We test below the sensitivity of our results to the inclusion of less specialized producers. 21
Characteristics of the final sample can be seen in Table A.4.
Census reports physical product data for only a subset of the 11,000 products reported in the Census of
Manufactures. While we use only products for which physical output is reported, the collection of this data has
changed over time for two of our products (see Table A.4). Census did not collect physical output for ready-mix
concrete in 1997 and the unit of measurement for boxes changed over our sample period in a way that makes the
1992 and 1997 data incomparable to the earlier periods. Additionally, there are recording flaws in the 1992 quantity
data for processed ice that make using it unfeasible.
The Census Bureau relies on administrative record data for very small establishments (typically with less
than five employees). In these cases all production data except total revenues and the number of employees are
imputed, and production operations are classified only up to the four-digit industry level. Since our unit of analysis
is more detailed than the four-digit industry, we cannot determine whether a particular administrative record
establishment actually produces the product of interest. For these reasons, we exclude administrative records cases
from our sample. While about one-third of CM establishments are administrative records, their output and
employment shares are much less because they are such small plants.
We also exclude establishments whose data appear to be imputed or suffer from reporting or recording
errors. The Census Bureau imputes physical quantities when product-level data are not fully reported.
Unfortunately, imputed data are not explicitly identified. To distinguish and remove imputed product-level data
21

This input-adjustment method in effect assumes inputs are used proportionately to each product’s revenue share.
For example, a plant producing 1000 cubic yards of ready-mixed concrete accounting for 80% of its shipment
revenues will have the same physical TFP value as a completely specialized plant producing 1250 cubic yards of
concrete, assuming they employ the same measured inputs. Without adjusting the output, the first plant would
appear less productive because the inputs it uses its other products would be instead attributed entirely to readymixed production. The average share of our sample plants’ values of shipments accounted for by the corresponding
product is given in parentheses: boxes (93), bread (39), carbon black (96), coffee (86), concrete (92), flooring (46),
block ice (37), processed ice (76), plywood (64), and sugar (90).

43

from the sample, we use techniques similar to those employed by Roberts and Supina (1996, 2000). To minimize
the influence of reporting and recording errors, we also remove a small number of plants reporting physical
quantities that imply prices greater than ten times or less than one-tenth the median price in a given year. In order to
maintain the same sample over all exercises, we delete observations that are missing any one of the main regression
variables. We also delete observations when the plant’s labor or materials cost share is less than one-tenth of the
corresponding industry’s average cost share for that year, or when the cost share is more than one. Finally, we still
find a relatively small number of obvious outliers in physical quantity measures, so we trim the one-percent tails of
the physical productivity (TFPQ) distribution.
Our product specialization criterion requires that plants obtain at least 50% of their revenue from our
product of interest. The text discusses the measurement reasons for imposing this restriction as well as describing a
robustness check with respect to this product specialization cutoff.
A.6. Characteristics of Establishments by Product
In this section we briefly characterize some of the relevant properties of the establishments that produce our
products. Table A.4 shows characteristics of the sample by product. The first five columns show the number of
establishments in our sample by year for each product. The second to last column shows the real revenue shares of
each product. Real revenue is the weight used in our weighted regressions. Concrete clearly dominates our sample
in terms of the number of establishments while boxes slightly dominates in terms of the revenue share. The table’s
last column shows mean logged income (income is taken from Census reports for the county in which the plant is
located) for each product in our sample. Concrete has the highest mean log income while carbon black has the
lowest.
Table A.5 shows the entry and exit rates by product for the data pooled over all available years. Entry rates
range from a low of 3.9 for sugar to a high of 26.6 for concrete, while exit rates range from a low of 10.3 for
plywood to a high of 27.7 for processed ice. Some products appear to be in a period of retrenchment or
consolidation. Sugar for example, has a very low entry rate (3.9) but a high exit rate (17.0). The number of plants
in the sugar and confectionary products industry (SIC 2061) has fallen from 66 in 1977 to 39 in 1997. Other
products appear to simply have a high degree of churning. For example, concrete and both types of ice products all
have entry rates and exit rates that exceed 20 percent. The number of establishments in ready-mixed concrete (SIC
3273) industry increases over our sample period, while the number of establishments in the block and processed ice
industry (SIC 2097) falls somewhat over our sample, from 675 establishments in 1977 to 582 establishments in
1997.

44

Appendix References
Baily, Martin N., Charles Hulten, and David Campbell. “Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing Establishments.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1992, 187-249.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger. “Wage Dispersion between and within U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 19631986.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1991, 115-180.
Foster, Lucia, Haltiwanger, John, and C.J. Krizan. “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic
Evidence.” In New Developments in Productivity Analysis, eds. Edward Dean, Michael Harper and Charles
Hulten, 303-363. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Harper, Michael, Ernst R. Berndt, and David O. Wood. “Rates of Return and Capital Aggregation using Alternative
Rental Prices,” in Technology and Capital Formation, Dale W. Jorgenson and Ralph Landau (eds.), MIT
Press, 1989.
Roberts, Mark J. and Dylan Supina. 1996. “Output Price, Markups, and Producer Size.” European Economic
Review, 40(3-5), 1996, 909-921.
Roberts, Mark J. and Dylan Supina.“Output Price and Markup Dispersion in Micro Data: The Roles of Producer
Heterogeneity and Noise.” In Advances in Applied Microeconomics, Vol. 9, Industrial Organization, ed.
Michael R. Baye, 1-36. Greenwich: JAI Press, 2000.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Trends in Multifactor Productivity: 1948-81.” Bulletin 2178. Washington D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1983.

45

Table A.1. Contribution of Owning Firm in Same Industry or Geography: Local Product Plants

Same
Industry
0.846
(0.010)

Same
Geography
0.838
(0.011)

-η
(price elasticity of demand)
Young dummy
(demand shift for entering and young plants)

-1.701
(0.081)

-1.782
(0.090)

-0.172
(0.029)

-0.159
(0.030

Medium age dummy
(demand shift for medium-aged plants)

-0.018
(0.022)

-0.049
(0.023)

ρ

-0.058
(0.044)

-0.056
(0.045)

δ

0.777
(0.022)
0.324
(0.068)
1.035
(0.023)
0.379
(0.077)
1.964
(0.625)

0.772
(0.022)
0.308
(0.067)
1.039
(0.022)
0.470
(0.050)
0.867
(0.128)

-0.027
(0.010)
0.027
(0.004)

-0.028
(0.010)
0.028
(0.004)

Parameter

γ
(elasticity of future demand to the demand stock)

(persistence of exogenous demand shocks θ)
(demand depreciation rate)
Competitor’s Price

λ1
(elasticity of initial demand to plant’s own K)

λ2
(elasticity of initial demand to ratio of firm’s K to plant’s K)

λ3
(elasticity of initial demand to ratio of firm’s K in same
industry or geography to firm’s total K)
Inverse Mills Ratio, Demand
(selection correction, demand equation)
Inverse Mills Ratio, EE
(selection correction, Euler equation)

Note: Both columns report results for the joint estimation of demand and Euler equations using plant-year
observations for local products. The only difference in specifications is the inclusion of a term in initializing 𝑍0
reflecting the ratio of firm’s parent/sibling capital in the year of entry in the same industry (column 1) or same
geography (column 2) to the overall firm’s parent/sibling capital. See text of the appendix for details.

46

Table A.2. Allowing Elasticity of Future Demand to Current Demand Stock (γ ) to Vary with
Product Characteristics

Parameter

Full Sample

Local
Products

0.734
(0.015)

0.847
(0.010)

0.098
(0.020)

-0.005
(0.005)

0.770
(0.015)

0.837
(0.010)

-0.011
(0.009)

-0.001
(0.006)

Downstream Concentration Interactions

γ0
(elasticity of future demand to the demand stock)

γH
(Interaction with downstream demand concentration

Downstream Turnover Interactions

γ0
(elasticity of future demand to the demand stock)

γT
(Interaction with downstream demand concentration

Note: The reported estimates are from specifications where γ is specified to vary with downstream product
characteristics. Each column and panel represents a separate estimation of the joint demand and Euler equation.
The interaction with product characteristics is specified so that the reported γ holds for a product with mean
product characteristics and the interaction effect captures any changes in the parameter as a product characteristic
deviates from the mean. Downstream concentration is measured by the herfindahl index and downstream turnover
is based on the sum of the entry and exit rate of the downstream industries. The latter were identified using the
input-output matrix. See text of appendix for details.

47

Table A.3. Evolution of Demand across Plant Ages—Interactions with Firm’s Age

Plant Age Dummies
Variable

Entrant

Young

Medium

Old

Exiter

Demand Shock

-0.317
(0.034)

-0.178
(0.036)

-0.147
(0.036)

Excl.

-0.183
(0.031)

Demand Shock x
MU firm and entrant

0.168
(0.066)

N/A

N/A

N/A

-0.167
(0.110)

Demand Shock x
MU firm and young or medium

0.004
(0.074)

N/A

-0.120
(0.077)

Demand Shock x
MU firm and old

0.091
(0.042)

0.538
(0.026)

-0.332
(0.045)

0.139
(0.044)
0.122
(0.044)

0.267
(0.048)

Note: This table repeats the analysis of Table 1, but now allows plant age effects to vary with the multi-unit (MU)
status and age of the plant’s owning firm. The excluded category is “old” plants (those that appeared three or more
censuses prior) that are part of a single-unit firm. N = roughly 17,000 plant-year observations. Standard errors,
clustered by plant, are in parentheses.

48

Table A.4: Characteristics of the Sample by Product

Number of Observations
Product

1977

1982

1987

1992

1997

Real
Revenue
Share (%)

Boxes

936

905

1045

NA

NA

7.9

17.4

Bread

195

142

110

92

92

2.4

17.0

Carbon Black

31

23

22

21

18

0.7

16.2

Coffee

61

84

79

77

77

4.7

18.0

Concrete

2184

3316

3236

3427

NA

7.0

17.1

Hardwood Flooring

8

10

16

25

24

0.2

16.7

Block Ice

40

43

26

23

10

0.0

16.9

Processed Ice

87

155

144

NA

NA

0.1

16.8

Plywood

71

68

42

42

37

0.6

16.5

Sugar

40

36

30

35

26

1.3

16.6

Mean (log)
Income

Note: This table shows the number of establishments in our sample by product and year, as well as each product’s
share of total real revenue in the sample (pooled across all years). Mean log income, used in our demand estimation
procedure, is for plants’ corresponding BEA Economic Areas (see text for details) based on data pooled over all
years.

49

Table A.5: Entry and Exit Rates by Product

Products

Entry Rates

Exit Rates

Boxes

12.4

12.2

Bread

7.6

18.9

Carbon Black

4.8

13.4

Coffee

9.1

15.6

Concrete

26.6

21.8

Hardwood Flooring

18.7

11.9

Block Ice

24.5

26.5

Processed Ice

23.1

27.7

Plywood

7.4

10.3

Sugar

3.9

17.0

Note: This table shows the plant entry and exit rates (averaged across all years in the sample). Entry (exit) is
determined by plants’ first (last) appearance in a CM. See text for details.

50

Figure A.1

Sensitivity of Endogenous Learning
Estimates to Discount Factor
1.000
0.900
0.800
0.700
0.600
0.500
0.960

0.965

0.970

0.975

Discount Factor (Annualized)
γ

δ

51

0.980

