                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 CRISIS-RELATED SHIFTS IN THE MARKET VALUATION OF BANKING ACTIVITIES

                                        Charles W. Calomiris
                                           Doron Nissim

                                        Working Paper 17868
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17868


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions made by seminar participants
at Baruch College, Columbia University, FASRI, Insead, Northwestern, and Yale University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Crisis-Related Shifts in the Market Valuation of Banking Activities
Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim
NBER Working Paper No. 17868
February 2012
JEL No. E32,E43,G01,G21

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine changes in the market valuation of banking activities over the last decade, focusing on
the effects of the financial crisis. Our valuation model recognizes that banks create value through the
types of assets and liabilities that they create and the various types of risk they undertake (including
their leverage, their lending risk, and their interest rate risk). The model also allows for heterogeneous
bank income streams, dividend signaling effects, and changes in capitalization rates for income streams
over time depending on changing market conditions. This approach explains substantial cross-sectional
variation in observed market-to-book values, allowing us to identify the market pricing of various
banking activities and changes in market pricing over time. We find that the declines in bank stock
values since 2007 reflect declining values of various categories of banking activity and changes in
market conditions. Dividend payments matter for market values increasingly over time. “Carry-trade”
effects from taking on interest rate risk are also apparent. The effects of leverage on bank valuation
changed sign during the crisis; while the market rewarded high leverage with higher market values
prior to the crisis, leverage become associated with lower values during and after the crisis. Contrary
to the view that the declines in market-to-book values for U.S. banks from 2006-2011 mainly reflect
unrecognized losses, we find that other factors explain most of the decline in market-to-book ratios.
Although model parameters do change over time, more than three-quarters of the change in market-to-book
values that occurred from 2006 to the end of 2008 were predictable based on changes in fundamental
determinants of value using the model coefficients estimated in 2006.


Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Doron Nissim
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
dn75@columbia.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

This study examines the market valuation of banking activities and how it has changed over the last

decade, focusing on the effects of the financial crisis in changing the way the market perceives the

relationship between various dimensions of bank performance and bank value.

         Many researchers have drawn attention to the dramatic declines in banks’ market-to-book values.

Those researchers have argued that the declining market-to-book ratios largely reflect the purposeful

understatement of losses in bank holding companies – especially losses related to mortgage activity –

“in an effort to preserve book capital” (Huizinga and Laeven 2011). Huizinga and Laeven (2011) argue

that: (1) the presence of greater proportions of mortgage-related assets on a bank’s balance sheet was

associated with greater declines in the ratio of market-to-book value, (2) banks augmented their book

values in 2008 by classifying mortgage-backed securities (MBS) as held-to-maturity rather than as available-

for-sale, a behavior that increased in the difference between the amortized cost and fair value of a bank’s

MBS portfolio, and (3) banks with greater mortgage exposure reported relatively low rates of loan loss

provisioning and loan charge-offs. In the working paper version of their paper, Huizinga and Laeven

(2009) also report that at moments when accounting rules for valuing assets under “fair value”

accounting standards were relaxed, banks with larger mortgage exposure experienced higher excess

returns (reflecting the value to banks of possessing more book capital for regulatory purposes).1

         This evidence reinforces a line of argument in a large literature about regulatory forbearance

during financial crises, defined as regulatory understatement of bank losses designed to limit the costs to

banks from those losses. The inflation of bank capital via forbearance may be motivated either by

political favoritism toward banks or by the desire to encourage banks not to cut the supply of credit to
1
  Transfers of securities from available-for-sale category to the held-to-maturity category should not affect book value under
GAAP, since transferred securities are supposed to be valued at current fair value, not at amortized cost. The authors,
however, believe that violations of this rule were tolerated, and that transferred securities were valued at amortized cost.
Furthermore, it is important to note that provision for loan losses under GAAP rules is not supposed to measure expected
losses but rather incurred losses, and therefore, the fact that provisions understate expected losses is inherent in the
accounting rule, not a violation of the rule.

                                                               1
borrowers. Kane (1989), Brewer (1995), and Kroszner and Strahan (1996), for example, argued that

forbearance kept under-capitalized savings and loans afloat in the 1980s, and encouraged risk taking by

those under-capitalized institutions. Brown and Dinc (2005, 2011) show that forbearance is a more

general international phenomenon, especially in the wake of severe financial crises, and especially prior

to elections. With respect to the recent U.S. crisis, in addition to Huizinga and Laeven (2009, 2011),

many other researchers have argued that the under-recognition of loss was significant for U.S. banks,

reinforcing the view that the decline in market-to-book values largely reflects flawed accounting rules,

and banks’ and regulators’ attempts to preserve book capital (Goh et al. 2009, Knaup and Wagner 2009,

Kolev 2009, Plantin et al. 2008). Laux and Leuz (2010) find little evidence that such effects are the

result of pro-cyclical biases in fair value accounting, per se, indicating that regulatory forbearance with

regard to particular aspects of bank behavior (as documented by Huizinga and Laeven) are more

important than the presence of fair value accounting, per se, for encouraging the understatement of loss

by banks. Although these authors provide powerful evidence in favor of the view that the

understatement of expected loss by book values contributed to the observed declines in banks’ market-

to-book values during and after the crisis, there are many other potential sources of change that could

have contributed to the dramatic decline in the market-to-book value ratio of banks.

       First, the market values of loan and deposit relationships may have been affected by changes in

market conditions that do not affect book values. The costs of servicing loan relationships during the

crisis included banks’ having to honor draw-downs on lines of credit at a time when banks themselves

were scrambling for liquidity. More generally, the values of loan and deposit relationships may have

declined as a consequence of reductions in the expected per-period profits flowing from those

relationships, or because of increases in the risk factors and discount rates used to value those flows.

With respect to the value of deposit relationships, the crisis was associated with a dramatic change in



                                                    2
monetary policy and a decline in interest rates, which reduced the value of zero- or low-interest deposits

to banks.

       Second, perceptions of the value of other sources of income, or the capitalization rates applied to

those sources of income, may have fallen during the crisis. For example, mortgage servicing fees may

have been perceived as highly valuable before the crisis, but less valuable after the crisis, perhaps

because of expected changes in the extent of mortgage refinancing and origination, rising mortgage

defaults, or a decline in expected interest income earned on mortgage servicing-related float. Market

capitalization of banks’ trading income also may have fallen, as banks saw a greater need to reduce

trading to preserve scarce capital, or because of regulatory initiatives (e.g., the Volcker Rule) which

reduced the expected ability of banks’ to continue engaging in proprietary trading.

       Third, investors may have altered their views about the desirability of some bank practices in

light of the crisis. For example, as we will show, investors seem to have favored higher leverage by

banks prior to the crisis (as a source of greater returns on equity), but after the crisis, higher leverage

was penalized by investors.

       Fourth, banks engage in the “carry trade,” borrowing primarily short-term debts, and lending a

substantial amount of those funds at fixed rates for longer terms. Changes in interest rates, and

particularly changes in the term structure of interest rates, likely affected banks’ profitability, depending

on the extent to which they engaged in the carry trade.

       In order to explore all of the potential influences on banks’ market-to-book values related to the

crisis, we construct an econometric valuation model of banks that takes all of these various categories of

influence into account, and use that model to “decompose” the sources of change in the market-to-book

ratio of capital, which can be linked to the various influences posited above. Although our model is not

structural (and therefore the interpretation of coefficients and the decomposition of effects must be



                                                     3
treated with some caution), we are able to show that these alternative sources of influence on banks’

market-to-book values are substantial, and that they likely account for more of the decline in market-to-

book values than does the understatement of expected losses.

           Bank holding companies (BHCs) engage in different types of activities, including obtaining and

maintaining deposits; generating, acquiring and servicing loans; investing in securities; trading a wide

range of financial instruments on securities and futures exchanges, as well as the over-the-counter

(OTC) markets; borrowing; providing fee-based financial services (e.g., fiduciary, advisory,

underwriting, brokerage, and acting as counterparties for clients in swaps and other hedges); and selling

and securitizing financial assets. The extent of each of these activities is reflected in financial reports,

including balance sheets and income statements. Using information from FR Y-9C reports, which are

prepared by BHCs for each calendar quarter, we estimate the value created in the various banking

activities as reflected in market valuations.

           The approach is based on the cross-sectional relationship between the market-to-book ratio (our

dependent variable) and proxies for the value generated by the various bank activities and bank

attributes, which are based on measures derived from accounting concepts.2 The estimated coefficients

of the valuation model are generally consistent with expectations. For example, we find that persistent

streams of noninterest income have larger valuation coefficients than less persistent ones. Furthermore,

the model generates reasonable estimates of the contributions of different bank activities to value, both

in terms of magnitude and time-series variation. For example, the estimated average value creation per

dollar of loans changed from more than five cents on the dollar prior to the financial crisis to a slightly

negative amount during the financial crisis. Similarly, the estimated average value creation per dollar of




2
    This approach follows the valuation methodology developed in Calomiris and Nissim (2007).

                                                             4
core deposits has ranged between five and eight cents throughout the 2000s, but has declined

significantly in the last two years as a result of the post-crisis low interest rate environment.

       The individual valuation coefficients we report for various activities – including deposits, loans

and components of income and expense – are partial correlations estimated in regressions, and thus

cannot be interpreted as measures of the overall valuation consequences of strategic business decisions.

For example, acquiring a customer loan relationship may have value, in part, because of the deposits or

noninterest income items that tend to be associated with that loan relationship, but in our analysis the

various components of a relationship enter separately. Furthermore, to the extent that there are

production economies of scope across different activities, our approach will not identify them, although

the valuation consequences of any economies of scope, measured at the sample mean, will affect our

regression estimates for each activity. For both reasons, caution is required in using the estimated

coefficients to measure business concepts like “the value of acquiring a loan relationship.” Our

estimates, however, are able to capture the average valuation consequence of each activity or financial

instrument, irrespective of the nature of the relationship that gives rise to it. Despite the inherent

limitations, we find that the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients in our regressions are broadly

consistent with expectations. Furthermore, and perhaps even more interestingly, the magnitudes of those

coefficients substantially vary over time, and co-vary in plausible ways with measures of market

conditions that should matter for valuation.

       The estimated effects on bank value of activity-specific attributes generally have the expected

signs and are significant. For example, estimated value creation by loans increases with average loan

yield and decreases with the relative magnitude of nonperforming loans. The value of loan relationships

also varied dramatically over time, and actually fell to negative values in the midst of the financial crisis

(perhaps reflecting the costs to banks of maintaining loan customers’ access to credit during the crisis).



                                                      5
       The estimated value creation by core deposits decreases with the average interest rate paid on

deposits, and increases with the relative proportions of transactions and savings accounts, which

typically have greater “relationship” value than certificates of deposit. Furthermore, changes over time

in the value of deposits are closely related to changes in market interest rates, albeit apparently with a

lag.

       Noninterest expense flows have negative effects on value, while noninterest income flows have

positive effects. Interestingly, the value consequences of these effects shrink in absolute value in the

post-crisis period, suggesting either a perception of lower expected persistence of these streams of

expense and income, or higher discount rates during the aftermath of the crisis, or both.

       Other attributes of banks also matter importantly for market value ratios. Banks that pay higher

dividends, ceteris paribus, exhibit higher market value ratios. This effect becomes much higher during

and after the crisis than before, a fact that is consistent with the view that dividends provide a signal of

hard-to-observe bank quality, which should be more important during times of greater uncertainty.

       Our measure of the “carry trade” also contributes to bank profitability (the difference in the

amount of assets and liabilities subject to fixed interest rates), and the magnitude of that contribution

varies over time with the term structure of interest rates.

       Higher bank leverage was associated with higher market values prior to the crisis, but this

relationship reversed during the crisis; higher leverage became associated with lower market values.

This finding suggests that, consistent with recent work by Cheng, Hong, and Schenkman (2010), the

market may have rewarded the high leveraging of financial institutions prior to the crisis (see also

Adrian and Shin 2009), but that once the crisis revealed problems in banks’ balance sheets and saw

rising concerns about bank counterparty risk, high leverage became penalized by the market.




                                                      6
         The paper proceeds as follows. The valuation model is developed in Section 2. Section 3

presents empirical results, and Section 4 concludes.



2. VALUATION APPROACH

BHCs generate value through the different activities they undertake. They compete in the market to

obtain noninterest or low-interest bearing deposits (“core deposits”) and invest these funds in loans and

other financial assets, with the spread earned being the primary source of income for most BHCs. They

also generate noninterest income from traditional fees related to deposits, loans, and fiduciary activities,

as well as from other sources, such as trading, securities brokerage, investment banking, asset

management, servicing, insurance, securitization, and loan sales. In addition, many BHCs engage in the

“carry trade,” that is, they obtain short-term funds (e.g., federal funds, repos, commercial paper,

brokered deposits) and invest these funds in longer term instruments, primarily securities.3 These

various activities contribute to bank value in ways that should vary significantly over time and across

banks depending on the volume, profitability, persistence, risk and other attributes of the activities, as

well as on bank-specific attributes, such as size, capital and diversification.

         Furthermore, valuations should also vary with market circumstances. For example, banks that

engage more in the carry trade should show higher valuation effects related to the carry trade when the

term structure is steep. Similarly, core deposits are more profitable when interest rates are high

(implying more savings on interest paid from possessing the deposit relationship). Capitalization rates

associated with any income or expense stream (which are captured by the estimated coefficients in our

regressions) should vary over time, too, depending on changes in the riskless interest rate and the time-

varying risk premia associated with various activities.

3
 This strategy is typically profitable due to the “liquidity premium,” and it is value-creating if, compared to other investors,
banks have a greater ability to absorb interest rate risk.

                                                                7
         Our approach to identifying the market valuation consequences of bank activities is to start with

balance sheet information – captured using financial ratio concepts – and then capture additional

concepts related to value creation using ratios from the income statement and supplementary schedules.

The use of balance sheet accounting concepts for banks is likely to be a more accurate point of departure

than for other firms since banks’ balance sheet assets and liabilities are often reported at amounts close

to fair value or, at least, provide a reasonable starting point for valuation. For non-bank firms this is less

likely to be the case for important classes of assets (e.g., when assets are long-term physical assets,

carried at historical cost and subject to valuation bias from price inflation and depreciation schedules).

Income statements and related information can also be used to supplement balance sheet information,

and in particular, to account for systematic differences between the market and book values of reported

assets, as well as to incorporate the value of economic assets and liabilities that are omitted from the

balance sheet (e.g., most intangibles, including relationship values of deposits and loans).

         Assets and liabilities reported at fair value on the balance sheet include the following concepts:

cash and balances due from depository institutions, available-for-sale securities, federal funds sold and

reverse repos, trading assets, federal funds purchased and repos, and trading liabilities. In addition,

short-term borrowing – primarily commercial paper – and floating rate debt are reported at amounts that

are typically close to fair value. And while held-to-maturity securities are generally reported on the

balance sheet at amortized cost, their fair value is disclosed in the FR Y-9C report and can be used to

adjust equity book value by adding the difference between the fair and book value of the securities,

times one minus the marginal tax rate.4



4
 BHCs are also required to disclose fair value estimates for most other financial instruments, including loans and deposits.
However, these fair value estimates are not available on the FR Y-9C reports. More importantly, the disclosed fair value of
existing loans and deposits do not reflect the value of relationship intangibles. This is especially true for transactions accounts
and savings deposits whose disclosed fair value is the current account balance. Finally, the disclosed fair values of loans and
other illiquid financial instruments are often unreliable (e.g., Barth at el (1996), Nissim (2003)).

                                                                8
       While we recognize that book values do not perfectly capture value creation in the above

mentioned activities, they should serve as a reasonable basis for gauging the relative extent of various

activities. For some asset and liability categories – those with respect to which we expect to find little

value creation – market and adjusted book values should be similar. In particular, most securities are

traded in relatively liquid and efficient capital markets, and we expect that banks’ ability to create value

by investing in securities is limited. Similarly, banks’ ability to generate value from federal funds and

repo-related activities is limited since the market for borrowing reserves among banks is highly

competitive. In addition, the effect on earnings from holding cash and below-market interest rate

reserves should be captured elsewhere in our model. Specifically, to the extent that banks’ motive for

holding reserves is to facilitate deposit-taking activities and generate deposit service fees, the cost of

forgone interest will be reflected in our model in a lower estimated value for core deposits and

noninterest income. Similarly, any value creation due to short-term borrowings that fund investments in

long-term securities should be captured in our model using a proxy for interest-rate exposure.

       Unlike cash and investment securities, trading activities are likely to generate significant value

above that reflected in the fair value of existing trading assets and liabilities. After all, if trading

activities were not expected to generate future risk-adjusted returns, banks would not commit economic

resources such as capital, human resources and information technology to support trading. We proxy for

the ability of the BHC to generate value in future trading activities by using the amount of trading

revenue included in noninterest income, as discussed in detail below.

       Other economic assets and liabilities either have book values that could significantly differ from

fair value or are not reported at all. These include loans, fixed assets, intangible assets, “other assets,”

deposits, long-term fixed-rate debt, and “other liabilities.” In addition, non-controlling (minority)

interest in consolidated subsidiaries and perpetual preferred stock, which are included in equity, are



                                                     9
reported at amounts which are likely to differ significantly from fair value. From the perspective of

common equity, these equity instruments represent outside claims, similar to liabilities.

       To capture value creation in activities with omitted assets or liabilities, or for which the fair and

book values of the related net assets may differ significantly, we use the following approach. We

explicitly model value creation associated with loans and core deposits using identifiable attributes of

these activities (e.g., the type of deposit or loan), and we capture the value of intangibles and the impact

of fair-book differences related to fixed assets using income statement and related information. For

example, to the extent that depository banking is associated with higher noninterest expense (i.e., brick

and mortar costs of servicing deposits, which are not accounted for separately), those cost consequences

of deposit relationships – while not incorporated into the measure of the book value of a deposit – would

affect bank valuation through the capitalized value of noninterest expense.

       Fixed assets are recorded in the books at depreciated historical cost. Due to inflation and

conservative accounting principles, the book value of fixed assets typically understates their fair value,

often significantly so. Unfortunately, BHCs are not required to disclose the fair value of their fixed

assets. Still, fixed assets are a small proportion of bank value, and to the extent that low asset book

values result in low depreciation expense, our model will capture the fair-book difference related to

fixed assets through the impact on non-interest expense.

       Intangible assets (goodwill, servicing rights, favorable leasehold rights, the values of different

types of customer relationships, etc.) are generally recognized only when acquired; under GAAP, most

internally developed intangibles are not reported on the balance sheet. As a result, the book value of

intangible assets is likely to be a poor proxy for their economic value. Indeed, including intangible assets

in a valuation model would introduce non-comparability across banks, related to their varying

experiences in mergers and acquisitions, which generally would not be associated with similar variation



                                                    10
in the valuation consequences of those transactions. We therefore capture the value of intangible assets

(both recognized and unrecognized) using other measures, including the characteristics of loans and

deposits (which proxy for the value of lending relationships and core deposit intangibles), and measures

of non-interest income and expense (which proxy for the value of intangibles used in generating fee-

based income).

         The valuation model can be presented as follows:

Adj. market      Gross loans
            1               Value creation per $1 of loans
 Adj. book       Adj. book
                     Core deposits
                                   Value creation per $1 of core deposits
                      Adj. book
                  Value creation in other activities


Here adjusted book value is calculated as the book value of common equity, minus intangible assets,

plus the product of the allowance for loan and lease losses and one minus the marginal tax rate, and plus

the difference between the fair and book values of held-to-maturity securities times one minus the tax

rate. The held-to-maturity and intangibles adjustments are explained above. The allowance-related

adjustment is motivated by its discretionary nature, as explained in the “Loans and Leases” section

below.

         Adjusted market value is calculated by multiplying the end-of-quarter market value of common

equity by one plus the cumulative stock return over the subsequent 75 days. The reason for this time

adjustment is that end-of-quarter stock prices are not likely to fully reflect the value implications of FR

Y-9C information. These reports are prepared and disseminated after the end of the quarter. As

discussed in Section 3 below, FR Y-9C data are generally available within two months from fiscal




                                                        11
quarter end.5 Hence, we assume a 75-day lag between the accounting date and the date that information

is actually available to the market.

           Exhibit 1 below lists the variables used in our regression model of value creation, grouped into

three categories by lending, deposit taking, and other activities, with value creation in each activity

being specified as a linear combination of a constant and the corresponding variables. The subsequent

discussion explains the rationales for the inclusion of these variables, and can be skipped without loss of

continuity.6

                                          Exhibit 1: Summary of the Variables

           Value Creating
              Activity                                                     Variables
       Loans and leases                Average tax-equivalent loans’ yield
                                       Allowance / gross loans held for investment
                                       Nonperforming loans / gross loans
                                       Provision for loan losses / average gross loans
                                       Net charge-offs / average gross loans
       Core deposits                   Noninterest-bearing deposits / core deposits
                                       Small denomination time deposits / core deposits
                                       Average interest rate on interest-bearing core deposits
       Other activities and            Recurring fees / adjusted book value
       attributes                      Other noninterest income / adjusted book value
                                       Noninterest expense / adjusted book value
                                       Total assets – four Box-Cox transformations ( = 0, -.33, -.67, -1)
                                       Adjusted book value / total assets
                                       Dividend / adjusted book value
                                       (Fixed-rate assets – fixed rate liabilities) / adjusted book value




5
  An alternative approach is to simply use the market value of equity 75 days after the end of the quarter with no further
adjustment. However, market capitalization after the publication of the quarterly report may not be properly aligned with the
book value since the bank may pay dividends or issue or repurchase shares between the end of the quarter and the report
publication date. Such changes in market capitalization are not reflected in the book value of equity and may therefore bias
the results.
6
    An important consideration in specifying the model is to restrict the number of free parameters.

                                                                12
Loans and Leases

Consistent with much of the theoretical literature on value creation by banks (e.g., Diamond 1984,

Calomiris and Kahn 1991, Rajan 1992), for many BHCs, loans and leases are the primary driver of value

on the asset side of the balance sheet. Banks’ ability to generate value by investing in securities (the

main alternative to loans) is limited since most securities are traded in competitive markets. In contrast,

banks are often able to generate value in lending activities due to their special access to customer

relationships (based on privileged information or special control rights associated with bank lending

contracts) or potential market power in some market areas and product niches with fewer competitors.

Thus, the economic value of existing loans is typically larger than their book value, and this difference

possibly could explain a large portion of the difference between the market and book values of bank

equity.

          The value premium of existing loans should not be uniform, but rather should reflect the effects

of access to different types of customer relationships, as well as differences in banks’ abilities to monitor

borrowers and control their activities, which bankers hope will result in current and future (expected)

earnings that more than compensate for the economic (risk-adjusted) cost of funding, originating,

servicing and monitoring the loans. Some banks should be more successful at managing those

relationships than others. Although our measures are derived from cross-sectional differences in

accounting information, customer relationships and the human and physical resources of banks persist.

The persistence of relationships may also vary across banks: for example, since the value premium of

existing loans increases with the strength of customer relationships, it may also proxy for expected

persistence of value creation in future lending (i.e., a relationship today may imply a greater probability

of obtaining another relationship in the future).




                                                     13
         As described above, we model value creation related to loans and leases (hereafter loans) as the

product of the gross book value of loans and the average value creation per dollar of loans. All else

equal, we assume that the value of existing loans and the value of lending relationships increase with the

loans’ average yield, and decrease with the loans’ credit risk. We therefore specify average value

creation per dollar of loans as a linear combination of an intercept, the average tax-equivalent yield on

loans, and the following four (imperfect) measures of credit risk.7

         The ratio of the allowance for loan losses to the gross book value of loans held for investment.

The allowance for loan losses represents management’s estimate of the amount of loans held for

investment that the bank will be unable to collect, based on current information and events as of the date

of the financial statements.8 Thus, the allowance-to-loans ratio should inform on the extent to which the

bank’s loans are at risk of not being repaid.

         The ratio of nonperforming loans to the gross book value of loans. Prior research has

demonstrated that banks often “manage” the allowance for loan and lease losses, hence reducing the

meaningfulness of that proxy for credit risk (e.g., Beaver et al., 1989; Elliott et al., 1991; Griffin and

Wallach, 1991). The NPL-to-loans ratio may therefore contain incremental information about credit risk.

Of course, NPLs may not be a perfect measure of portfolio risk either, since banks have some discretion

in measuring nonperformance (e.g., loan terms can be recast to avoid delinquency, a practice sometimes

referred to as “evergreening”). To increase the comparability of NPLs in the cross-section, we include in

our NPL measure all loans past due 90 days or more that are still accruing interest. This adjustment is

important since banks differ in the delinquency periods that trigger non-accrual classification. We also



7
  Note that the value created from a higher loan interest rate should be measured relative to some money market benchmark
interest rate. Because banks participate in the same market for such instruments, and because we use cross-sectional analysis,
interest rates in our model can be expressed in simple levels rather than as differentials with respect to a common market
benchmark.
8
  Loans held for sale are reported at the lower of cost or fair value and therefore require no allowance.

                                                             14
reduce non-performing loans by the portion guaranteed or otherwise covered by the U.S. government or

its agencies.

         The allowance and non-performing loans measures are not likely to fully capture lending-related

credit risk for three additional reasons apart from their discretionary nature. First, firms that employ

relatively conservative charge-off policies will have lower allowance and NPL levels since they tend to

remove large portions of problem loans from their books (the allowance and NPL relate to reported

loans only, not to loans that already have been charged off). Second, under current U.S. GAAP, the

allowance only reflects incurred losses, not expected ones. Indeed, under GAAP banks are specifically

prohibited from forecasting future losses in their allowances, even when they have strong reason to

believe that those losses will occur. Similarly, nonperforming loans reflect loans that have already been

proven problematic, not those that may become problematic. Third, both the allowance and NPL

measures provide a snapshot at a point in time and do not reflect activity during the entire accounting

period. This omission is important especially because loans’ yields, which measure interest income

during the period, are likely correlated with the rate of credit loss. We therefore include the following

two additional risk “flow” proxies: the annualized ratio of the provision for loan losses to the average

balance of loans, and the annualized ratio of net loan charge-offs to the average balance of loans.9

         While the value of existing loans and the value of lending relationships generally decrease with

the loans’ credit risk, there is a possibly offsetting effect related to the value of relationships. Firms

develop relationships with bank lenders to mitigate the costs of screening and monitoring attendant to

borrowing, which are higher for high-risk firms or firms with less transparent credit risks. So high risk

loans may indicate more valuable lending relationships. To the extent that opacity and relationship value



9
  Note that while gross charge-offs is affected by management discretion regarding the events that trigger charge-off, net
charge-offs is less sensitive to variation in charge-off policies since firms that use conservative charge-off policies have large
recoveries which offset the inflated charge-offs.

                                                               15
is paid for by borrowers – as theory suggests it should be (Rajan 1992) – those concepts should be

captured in higher interest rates on loans.

Core Deposits

On the liability side, banks generate value primarily by obtaining and maintaining deposits which carry

low or zero interest. The nonpecuniary benefits to depositors that are associated with deposits, along

with the brick and mortar costs of producing deposits, explain why in a competitive market deposits will

not pay an interest rate equal to other debt instruments. Deposits contribute, in a gross sense, to bank

earnings and value creation by reducing banks’ financing costs, as well as by potentially creating “cross-

selling” opportunities, which allow banks to generate earnings from selling non-deposit services to

depositors. So long as those gross contributions to earnings offset the incremental brick and mortar costs

(non-interest expenses) of attracting deposits, attracting low-interest deposits will also make a net

contribution to earnings.

       In most cases, the book value of deposits, which generally equals the amount payable on

demand, overstates the economic liability attached to deposits. The contribution of deposits to bank

value increases with the spread between market borrowing rates and the average interest rate on

deposits, since this spread reflects the impact of deposits on net interest income (compared to the

alternative of funding earning assets with capital market borrowings). The value contribution of deposits

also increases with service charges, cross selling opportunities for the particular customer niche, and the

stability of deposits, and it decreases with non-interest costs of servicing the deposit and the forgone

interest on required reserves associated with offering the deposit. These characteristics, which are

captured in some of our income and cost measures, potentially contribute to our model as proxies for

omitted aspects of the future value expected from deposits – the core deposit intangible – given that the

intangible itself is typically omitted from the balance sheet, but is correlated with these other



                                                    16
characteristics.10 Nonetheless, we expect that most of the intangible value of deposits is captured by our

measures of the ratio of core deposits to equity, the composition of core deposits, and the interest rate

paid on core deposits.

         Core deposits consist of demand deposits and other noninterest-bearing deposits as well as most

interest-bearing deposits. Interest-bearing core deposits include NOW, ATS, and other interest-bearing

transaction accounts, money market deposits and other savings accounts, and time deposits of less than

$100,000. Noninterest-bearing deposits may be particularly valuable if the cost to maintain them is not

significantly greater than that for interest-bearing deposits. We accordingly use the ratio of noninterest-

bearing deposits to core deposits in modeling the value per dollar of core deposits. We also include the

following two variables.

         Average interest rate on interest-bearing core deposits. This variable should be negatively

related to the value created by core deposits for two reasons. First, all else equal, the economic liability

associated with existing time deposits increases with their average interest rate. Second, the current

interest rate on core deposits predicts future interest rates, which in turn affect the value of the core

deposits intangible. 11,12

         The ratio of small-denomination time deposits to core deposits. The average interest cost and

stability of deposits, and therefore their value implications, are not identical across the various categories

of deposits. Although we include the average interest cost of interest-bearing core deposits as an

10
  The core deposit intangible is recognized on the balance sheet only when the branches giving rise to this asset were
purchased from other banks. Organically developed core deposit intangibles are never recognized. When recognized, the core
deposit intangible is amortized to earnings over a period selected by the bank.
11
  Note that the value created from a low deposit interest rate should be measured relative to some money market benchmark
interest rate. Because banks participate in the same market for such instruments, and because we use cross-sectional analysis,
interest rates in our model can be expressed in simple levels rather than as differentials with respect to a common market
benchmark.
12
  The value of the core deposits intangible is equal to the present value of net interest savings in future periods due to the use
of core deposits instead of borrowed money to fund assets, plus the value added from cross-selling services to depositors, and
minus the present value of cash outflows required to obtain and maintain core deposits. The latter benefits and costs are
reflected primarily in noninterest income and expense, which we account for separately.

                                                               17
explanatory variable, this variable is not likely to fully capture the value implications of differences in

interest cost across deposit categories. For example, a bank that generates large amounts of time deposits

during a period of particularly low interest rates is not likely to be able to sustain the low interest cost of

deposits. In contrast, a bank that primarily provides NOW accounts for its customers is likely to have

persistently low interest cost.

Noninterest Income

Non-interest income is an important source of income for most banks, especially large ones. To capture

value creation related to this source of income, we define two measures of non-interest income, deflated

by the adjusted book value of common equity. These variables partition non-interest income based on

categories that we expect will reflect different degrees of income persistence. The more persistent the

income stream, the higher should be the valuation coefficient on that income stream. By partitioning

income streams according to expected persistence, which should be reflected in different coefficient

magnitudes – higher magnitudes for more persistent streams – we improve the accuracy of the valuation

model.

         The ratio of recurring fees to adjusted book value. Recurring fees include service charges on

deposit accounts in domestic offices, income from fiduciary activities, investment banking, advisory,

brokerage, underwriting fees and commissions, insurance commissions and fees, and net income from

servicing real estate mortgages, credit cards and other financial assets held by others. We also include in

this variable unspecified sources of noninterest income (“other noninterest income”), because FR Y-9C

instructions suggest that the items included in this category relate primarily to recurring activities.

         The ratio of other noninterest income to adjusted book value. Some BHCs, primarily mortgage

banks or the largest financial institutions, generate significant gains from activities such as trading,

venture capital, securitization, and loan sale. To the extent that these gains persist over time, they should



                                                      18
contribute to market value incremental to the amounts already reflected in equity book value. Still, we

expect that the income stream associated with these activities is likely to be viewed by the market as less

persistent than income from fees.13

Noninterest Expense

Non-interest expenses are incurred in obtaining and servicing core deposits and loans, and in generating

non-interest income. Failure to account for cross-sectional variation in these expenses, therefore, would

result in biased valuation of core deposits, lending relationships and fee-related intangibles. For

example, if two banks had the same composition of deposits, but one could achieve that composition

with lower noninterest expenses related to deposit acquisition (so-called “brick and mortar costs”), then

that bank would be more valuable. We measure non-interest expense as the total of salaries and

employee benefits, expenses of premises and fixed assets, and “other non-interest expense,” divided by

the adjusted book value of common equity. We exclude amortization and impairment charges because

we do not include the book value of intangibles in our model, but rather focus on their earnings-

generating ability. To the extent that intangible assets have been impaired, this will be captured in our

model by the lower associated earnings stream.

Size

Large banks may enjoy implicit government subsidies by virtue of their size – that is, they may be

perceived to be “too big to fail” (O’Hara and Shaw, 1990; Stern and Feldman 2004). They also may

have more market power (e.g., Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan, 1999), enjoy economies of scale (e.g.,

Sitroh, 2000; Hughes, Mester and Moon, 2001) or scope (e.g., Demsetz and Strahan, 1997), or benefit

13
  In addition to noninterest income, BHCs income statements include net gains (losses) on realized gains and losses on held-
to-maturity and available-for-sale securities. These gains and losses are highly transitory so their value effect is generally
captured by existing assets (e.g., the cash that was received when the gain or loss was recognized). In fact, net gains are
sometimes associated with negative firm performance. Several studies have demonstrated that realized securities gains and
losses are used for earnings, capital and tax management (e.g., Warfield and Linsmeier, 1992; Collins, Shackelford and
Wahlen, 1995), so that firms are more likely to realize gains when they have low earnings, low regulatory capital, or negative
taxable income.

                                                             19
from increased diversification (e.g., Penas and Unal, 2004). Compared to small banks, large banks also

may have greater financial flexibility, as they may be able to obtain capital market funds more readily

when needed (e.g., Jayaratne and Morgan, 2000; Kashyap and Stein 1995, 2000). Size may also proxy

for some of the omitted details of banks’ activities and strategies (e.g., small banks rarely engage in

some types of trading activities) and may affect the cost of capital (e.g., large banks may have lower

information risk and higher stock liquidity). Given the importance of firm size in explaining market-to-

book ratios as well as the non-linearity of this relationship, we include four BOX-Cox transformations of

firm size, measured using total assets ( = 0, -.33, -.67, -1).

Interest Rate Risk Exposure

The value of fixed-rate financial instruments is inversely related to interest rates. Therefore, the

sensitivity of the market value of equity to changes in interest rates should be related to the difference

between fixed-rate earning assets and fixed-rate financial liabilities. BHCs do not report data that would

permit a full analysis of the “duration gap” of each bank (that is, a measure of interest rate risk exposure

of equity that is based on the Macaulay duration of bank assets and liabilities). Instead, as a proxy for

the duration gap, we use the difference between fixed-rate earning assets and fixed-rate financial

liabilities, divided by the adjusted book value of common equity. This rough measure compares the

magnitude of net assets exposed to interest rate risk with total net assets (i.e., common equity), without

taking account of cross-bank differences in the durations of their fixed-rate earning assets or fixed-rate

financial liabilities.

        Many banks engage in the so-called “carry trade” – a strategy whereby an investor borrows at a

relatively low interest rate, and then uses the proceeds to buy securities with higher yields, typically

further out in the yield curve. In doing so, banks earn higher returns from bearing interest rate risk.

Banks take advantage of this strategy by borrowing short-term funds and buying bonds, primarily


                                                      20
mortgage-backed securities (MBS). If the value impact of carry trade-related earnings is larger than the

risk effect – that is, if banks have a greater ability to absorb interest rate risk than other investors – their

value should increase with the difference between fixed-rate earning assets and fixed-rate financial

liabilities.

         Furthermore, this gap variable is also relevant as a proxy for the ex post impact of interest rate

exposure. For example, in periods of increasing interest rates, a positive (negative) gap implies a

declining (increasing) market value of equity, and vice versa in declining interest rate environments.

Thus, our estimated effects of interest rate risk combine expected discounted risk-adjusted gains/losses

with those that are realized during the sample period.

Capital Adequacy

The capital position of the bank may be value-relevant for several reasons. First, BHCs with high capital

ratios pay lower FDIC insurance premiums, incur lower regulatory costs and risks, and have higher

flexibility in operations and greater ability to grow.14 Second, related to the previous point, high capital

ratios may reflect the purposeful accumulation of capital to facilitate value-creating growth. Capital in

excess of regulatory requirements creates option value for banks by allowing them to forego having to

raise external equity in the market (which would entail physical costs of underwriting, as well as

adverse-selection announcement effects on the value of bank stock). Third, excess capital may proxy for

market power or franchise value, since banks with greater market power may perceive that they have

more to lose from regulatory intervention than other banks (e.g., Keeley, 1990) and consequently have a




14
  For example, undercapitalized banks are required to submit capital restoration plans to regulators and are subject to
restrictions on operations, including prohibitions on branching, engaging in new activities, paying management fees, making
capital distributions such as dividends, and growing without regulatory approval. They may even be required to dispose of
assets. Some of these costs and restrictions also apply to banks that are classified as adequately capitalized, especially
restrictions on growth and new operations. In general, there is probably a monotonic relationship between capital ratios and
regulatory costs and restrictions.

                                                             21
greater incentive to maintain excess capital. These effects suggest that the market-to-book ratio should

be positively related to measures of capital adequacy.

         On the other hand, to the extent that banks may seek to benefit from the value of safety net

protection (via deposit insurance and anticipated government bailouts), they may be rewarded by the

market for undertaking higher leverage (e.g., Brewer 1995). Adrian and Shin (2009) argue that the rise

in leverage by financial institutions leading up to the crisis was a key contributor to the severity of the

crisis, and Cheng, Hong and Schenkman (2010) argue that institutional investors may have actively

encouraged financial institutions to take on greater leverage, rewarding them for doing so with higher

demand for their shares, and thus, higher market values.

         Another reason that market-to-book ratios may be positively related to leverage is unobserved

cross-sectional heterogeneity related to aspects of risk that are not captured fully by the measures of risk

in our model. A high level of bank capital may indicate relatively risky operations or opaque assets (e.g.,

Calomiris and Wilson, 2004) which require more of a capital cushion. This effect might lead to a

negative observed empirical relationship between capital adequacy and bank value given the incomplete

measurement of risk in our model. Moreover, higher capital could reflect a lack of positive net present

value investments or the presence of inefficient management which fails to maximize the net benefits

from leverage; in that case, higher capital should also have negative consequences for the market-to-

book ratio.15 Therefore, the empirical relationship between the market-to-book ratio and measures of

capital adequacy is an open question. Still, the above arguments suggest that capital ratios may explain

cross-sectional variation in market-to-book ratios and should therefore be included in our analysis.

         In evaluating capital adequacy, regulators use various capital ratios and apply different

benchmarks to those ratios. They also use other relevant information (e.g., the fair values of instruments

15
  Benefits from leverage include the ability to increase the asset base (and consequently income), the tax-benefits of debt
and, specific to banks, the maximization of the deposit insurance put option.

                                                              22
that are measured at historical cost for regulatory capital purposes). Indeed, research has demonstrated

that regulatory capital measures are more “noisy” than book capital in reflecting capital adequacy (e.g.,

Blankespoor at el. 2011). We therefore measure capital adequacy using the ratio of the adjusted book

value of common equity to total assets.16

Dividends

Firms are reluctant to cut dividends (e.g., Lintner, 1956). Hence high dividend payments may indicate

management expectations of higher earnings or more sustainable earnings, ceteris paribus, both

implying a positive relationship between the market-to-book ratio and dividend payments. More

generally, dividends may be a signal of the unobserved qualities of a bank. If earnings and risk are

measured with error, then banks with better asset quality and management may use dividends to signal

their unobservable quality. The signaling role of dividends may be especially important for banks, since

banks that are perceived as weak by their regulators – based on supervisory examinations, which include

privileged as well as public information – sometimes are restricted in their ability to pay dividends,

giving dividend payout even more significance as a proxy for the bank’s strength. We therefore include

the ratio of cash dividends declared on common stock to the adjusted book value of common equity.



3. EMPIRICAL ANALAYSIS

Sample and Data

We extract all accounting data from regulatory consolidated financial statements (FR Y-9C reports) that

BHCs submitted to the Federal Reserve System for the period Q1:2000-Q3:2011. Under the Bank

Holding Company Act, BHCs with total consolidated assets above a certain threshold amount, or that

satisfy certain other conditions (e.g., have public debt), are required to file the FR Y-9C report on a

16
 Adding regulatory capital measures alongside the book value of common equity has an insignificant effect, and does not
materially affect the results reported here.

                                                           23
quarterly basis. The asset-size threshold for filing the FR Y-9C report was $150 million through the

fourth quarter of 2005, after which it was increased to $500 million. To make the sample comparable

over time, we delete observations with total assets less than $500 million in March 2006 prices.

           FR Y-9C reports contain a uniform and detailed calendar year-to-date income statement, an end-

of-quarter balance sheet, and supplementary information. Approximately two months after the end of

each calendar quarter, the Federal Reserve creates a file with data for all domestic BHCs and makes it

available on its web site.17 To create our sample, we downloaded these files and merged them with the

quarterly COMPUSTAT files and CRSP files to obtain market value and return data.18

           We start the sample period in 2000 primarily because many of the variables we use were added

to FR Y-9C reports in 2000. We measure all income statement quantities combining the trailing four

quarters of data to eliminate the effects of seasonality and smooth out short-term shocks. To mitigate the

impact of outliers, we trim extreme values of each of the analysis variables (listed in Exhibit 1).19

Summary statistics from the distributions of these variables are provided in Table 1.

                                                      [Table 1 about here]

Preliminary Results and Model Statistics

Due to the large number of regressions (one for each of 47 quarters), and given our focus on time-series

patterns, we present our main results using time-series plots. To ease pattern identification over time, all


17
     FR Y-9C reports are available at http://chicagofed.org/applications/bhc_data/bhcdata_index.cfm.
18
  To identify CUSIPs, we first used a dataset that is provided by the federal reserve bank of New York
(http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/banking_research/datasets.html), which documents the historical linkage between
regulatory entity codes and CRSP permcos for publicly traded banks and bank holding companies. The link is valid through
December 2007 for supervised institutions that are listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ. We supplemented this
matching with an alternative matching that we developed, which uses COMPUSTAT and FR Y-9C data and considers bank
name and financial characteristics. We verified that all matches are valid and unique.
19
  Extreme values of the variables are identified using the following procedure. For each variable, we calculate the 1st and 99th
percentiles of the empirical distribution (P1 and P99 respectively) and trim observations outside the following range: P1 – 0.5
× (P99 – P1) to P99 + 0.5 × (P99 – P1). For normally distributed variables, this range covers approximately 4.7 standard
deviations from the mean in each direction (= 2.33 + .5 × (2.33 - (-2.33)), which is more than 99.99% of the observations. For
variables with relatively few outliers, the percentage of retained observations is also very high (often 100%). However, for
poorly-behaved variables a relatively large proportion of the observations is deleted.

                                                               24
plots are smoothed using a spline function (Reinsch 1967). As an alternative way to describe our results,

we also report four sets of panel data regressions which pool data for different sample periods, namely,

the entire sample, and three sub-periods: the pre-crisis (Q1:2000-Q2:2007), the crisis (Q3:2007-

Q4:2009), and the post-crisis (Q1:2010-Q3:2011). The three sub-periods were characterized by very

different market conditions, as indicated by the differences in the period-specific average values of the

variables in Table 2.

                                             [Table 2 about here]

        Turning to the panel data regressions, the results, reported in Table 3, demonstrate the instability

of many of the coefficients across the different sub-periods. We therefore focus on the cross-sectional

regressions, although many of the patterns that emerge in the cross-sectional regressions are also

reflected in the sub-period panel data regressions.

                                             [Table 3 about here]

        Figure 1 presents statistics from the cross-sectional distribution of the market-to-book ratio for

each quarter during the period Q1:2000-Q3:2011. The market-to-book ratio has declined from an

average of more than two prior to the financial crisis to about one in 2011. The cross-sectional variation

in the market-to-book ratio has also declined significantly since the beginning of the financial crisis,

although there is still substantial variation in the sample throughout. The bottom 10th percentile of the

market-to-book value began the sample period with values at or above one, but at the height of the crisis,

it fell to less than one third.

                                             [Figure 1 about here]

        Figure 2 presents summary statistics from the 47 separate cross-sectional quarterly regressions

(Q1:2000-Q3:2011) of the valuation model. The number of observations each quarter ranges between

250 and 350, with a maximum reached just prior to the beginning of the financial crisis. Thus, although

the number of estimated parameters is quite large – 21 per regression – in each of the regressions there

                                                      25
are more than 5 observations per parameter (an often-used rule of thumb). The R-squared is very high

throughout the sample period, indicating that the model performs well in explaining value. Since the

early 2000s, there is a slight positive trend in R-squared, which is due to a strong declining trend in the

RMSE. The decline in RMSE is consistent with the decline in the cross-sectional dispersion of the

market-to-book ratio (see Figure 1).

                                             [Figure 2 about here]

Lending

Panels A and B of Figure 3 plot the cross-sectional coefficients and t-statistics, respectively, for each of

the five variables used to model value creation per dollar of loans. Since the beginning of the financial

crisis, all the coefficients appear to converge toward zero. This is due in part to a decline in the

explanatory power of the variables (particularly loans’ yield), but also to the large increases in the

variability of the credit loss variables (not shown in the figure). Indeed, the magnitudes of the t-statistics

of the credit loss variables have not changed significantly.

                                             [Figure 3 about here]

        As expected, value creation per dollar of loans increases with the average yield on loans. In fact,

loans’ yield was by far the most important determinant of the value of loans throughout most of the

sample period. However, as noted above, this variable lost its explanatory power during and after the

financial crisis. A possible explanation for the decline in the significance of the loans’ yield coefficient

is the increase in investors’ risk aversion since the financial crisis. High-yield loans are on average more

risky than other loans, perhaps increasingly so, and perhaps in ways that are not fully captured by the

credit risk variables.

        Consistent with prior research (e.g., Beaver et al., 1989) the provision and allowance for loan

losses do not subsume the information about credit risk contained in nonperforming loans and loan

charge-offs. In fact, nonperforming loans is the only variable that was consistently significant

                                                      26
throughout the sample period; in contrast, the allowance coefficient was insignificant throughout the

sample period. The coefficient on the provision for loan losses was marginally significant during

recessions (in 2001 and during the financial crisis) and was insignificant in other periods. Net charge-

offs exhibits the opposite pattern. It appears that during recessions the provision variable captures real

losses, while at other times it is “noisy” and possibly “managed.” In contrast, charging-off loans during

recessions may indicate a willingness to “clean the books” and recognize the required provisions

(charge-offs reduce the allowance and so often lead to increased provisions), which may explain the

positive effect of charge-offs during the financial crisis.

       Panel C of Figure 3 presents statistics from the cross sectional distribution of the predicted

bank/quarter-specific value creation per dollar of loans, calculated as the fitted value from that portion of

the model that explains value creation per dollar of loans. Prior to the financial crisis, each dollar of

loans on average generated more than five cents of value. However, at the height of the financial crisis,

the average value creation by loans was negative. This is probably due to a combination of factors,

including (1) the large increase in the loans’ credit risk (see the period-specific average values of the

credit risk variables in Table 2), (2) the increase in the pricing of credit risk, as measured by credit

spreads (discussed below), (3) the negative effect on the bank’s own liquidity position during the crisis

from having to provide credit to its existing borrowers (Ivanova and Scharfstein 2009), (4) a decline in

the value of lending relationship due to lower expected loan growth, and (5) an increase in the opacity of

loans combined with the price discount for opacity.

       To the extent that loan relationships are durable, the expected value creation in future lending is

correlated with value creation in past lending, and thus the estimated value creation per dollar of loans

measures the long-term value of lending-related intangibles. However, this estimate does not reflect any

value due to cross-selling, which is captured by other variables in the model (e.g., taking borrower



                                                      27
deposits, earning noninterest income by providing services to borrowers), nor does it reflect the

noninterest expense that banks incur in generating and servicing the loan portfolio. The noninterest

income and expense variables, as well as the deposit variables, are discussed below.

       Panel C of Figure 3 also shows that the cross-sectional variation in estimated loans’ value

creation declined substantially since the beginning of the financial crisis. This trend likely reflects the

fact that during the crisis the negative aspects of borrower relationships listed above, which drove the

declining value of loans for all banks during the crisis, were more similar among banks than were the

positive values of borrower relationships during the pre-crisis period. The positive aspects (the quasi

rents associated with different borrowers) became less relevant than the negative aspects during the

crisis, which compressed the cross-sectional variation of the value contribution of loans. Other

contributing factors to the decline in the cross-sectional variation in estimated loans’ value creation

likely include the increase in the opacity of loans, and the heightened pricing of loans-related off-

balance sheet exposures (e.g., Bank of America exposures related to Countrywide’s mortgages), which

are at best weakly captured by the model’s variables.

       Increased risk, increased opacity, and adverse liquidity consequences for banks of borrower

relationships during the crisis, all imply that the value of loans should vary inversely with the Baa rate

on bonds, which captures both a rising physical risk premium and a rising liquidity premium during the

crisis (Schwarz 2010). Panel D of Figure 3 shows that there is a strong negative contemporaneous

correlation between the implied loans’ fair value and the yield on Baa-rated bonds. Unemployment and

industrial production also co-vary with the value of loans, but less robustly.

Core Deposits

Panels A and B of Figure 4 plot the time series of the cross-sectional coefficients and t-statistics,

respectively, for each of the variables used to model value creation per dollar of core deposits. All



                                                    28
variables have the expected signs and are statistically significant (note that consistent cross-sectional

significance, even if marginal, implies strong overall significance, as reflected in the t-statistics of Table

3). Non-interest bearing deposits are more valuable than NOW and savings accounts (the omitted

category), which in turn are more valuable than time deposits. High interest rate deposits are less

valuable than low interest rate ones. Unlike the loans variables, the deposits variables remained

significant during the financial crisis.

                                             [Figure 4 about here]

        Panel C of Figure 4 presents statistics from the cross sectional distribution of the predicted

bank/quarter-specific value creation per dollar of core deposits, calculated as the fitted value from that

portion of the model that explains value creation per dollar of core deposits. As expected, value creation

per dollar of core deposits is quite substantial. As in the case of the loans’ value creation estimate,

however, it is important to bear in mind that the estimate of core deposit’s value creation does not reflect

the costs associated with obtaining and servicing deposits, nor does it reflect the service charges earned

on deposits or the value of cross-selling opportunities that deposits create.

        Similar to the loans’ value creation statistics, the cross-sectional dispersion of value creation per

dollar of core deposits has declined over time. However, unlike the loans-related statistics, the cross-

sectional variation in core deposits’ value creation remained substantial during and after the crisis.

        Panel D of Figure 4 plots the average value creation per dollar of core deposits over time in

relation to relevant macro variables. As one would expect, the time-series pattern of core deposits’ value

creation is consistent with changes in the interest rate environment. Reductions (increases) in interest

rates, primarily long-term ones, lead to declines (increases) in value creation per dollar of core deposits.

That is, core deposits do not save interest cost as much when interest rates on non-core debts are low.

        One interesting fact shown in Panel D of Figure 4 about which we did not have strong priors is

the lead-lag relationships between interest rates and value creation from core deposits. Changes in

                                                      29
interest rates significantly lead (i.e., come before) the change in estimated value creation. It appears that

it takes investors significant time to fully understand the implications of changes in interest rates for the

value of core deposits. The fact that changes in long-term rates have larger effect than changes in short-

term rates is consistent with the “stickiness” of core deposits. But if core deposits are sticky, then the

value consequences of an interest rate decline should be predictable, and thus it is surprising that

investors’ react with a substantial lag to the decline in interest rates.

Noninterest Income and Expense

Panel A of Figure 5 plots the time-series of the cross-sectional coefficients of the noninterest income and

expense variables. As expected, recurring fees have a greater impact on bank value than other sources of

noninterest income. However, the difference is not as large as might have been expected. In particular,

income from trading, securitization, loan sale, and similar activities had a large capitalization coefficient

in the first half of the last decade (about 4). Similar to noninterest income, the magnitude of the

coefficient on the level of noninterest expense is large, suggesting that this variable is highly persistent.

The capitalization rates or “earnings response coefficients” associated with noninterest income and

noninterest expense have monotonically declined during the sample period.

                                               [Figure 5 about here]

        The decline in the capitalization rates (coefficients plotted in Panel A of Figure 5) is not merely

due to increased “noise.” As shown in Panel B of Figure 5, the coefficients remained significant, and the

decline in the t-statistics is smaller than the decline in the coefficients. It appears that since the financial

crisis investors view these sources of income and expense as either less persistent, more risky, or

otherwise less valuable than in the past.

Bank Attributes

Panels A and B of Figure 6 present the time series of the cross-sectional coefficients and t-statistics,

respectively, for the bank attributes. By far, the most significant variable since the financial crisis is the

                                                        30
dividend-to-book ratio. This variable captures much of what is missing from the financial statements –

weak banks, including those with significant off-balance-sheet loss contingencies, pay low (if any)

dividends. If dividends have a signaling role related to unobserved bank quality, then one would expect

the magnitude of the effect of dividends to rise during times of greater uncertainty. That is, indeed, what

we find; the magnitude of the effect of dividends on market values as well as its significance increased

dramatically during the financial crisis.

                                              [Figure 6 about here]

       The value effects of the other bank attributes were even less consistent over the sample period.

The “carry trade” contributed to bank value primarily in periods of upward slopping term structure (note

that the term premium plots presented in Figure 6 measure the difference between the one- and ten-year

Treasury rates, not a coefficient or t-statistic). High leverage increased the market-to-book ratio during

“normal” times, but reduced it during the financial crisis. The shifting market consequences of

leveraging are most consistent with the view that market participants encouraged high leverage of banks

(perhaps to maximize the value of the safety net put option they enjoyed), as argued by Cheng, Hong

and Schenkman (2010), but that once the crisis began, banks with lower leverage experienced less

counterparty risk and were able to maintain their operations better than those that were scrambling to

liquidate assets and shore up their positions more as a consequence of their higher leverage.

Summary of Average Value Creation

We next calculate total value creation for each of the three primary groups of activities – lending, core

deposits, and all other activities. Figure 7 plots the time series of the cross sectional averages of value

creation in each activity. On average, most of the market-to-book premium, and its change over time, is

due to the value associated with traditional lending and deposit taking activities. Of the three sources of

value creation, deposits are the only activity that consistently contributed to value creation, at least on

average. In particular, the persistent value of deposits was a helpful stabilizer during the financial crisis.

                                                      31
However, in the post-crisis, low-interest rate environment, banks apparently lost much of the value

creation associated with this important activity.

                                             [Figure 7 about here]

       Figure 7 also is useful for gauging the extent to which unrecognized expected losses can explain

the decline in the market-to-book ratio during the crisis. Note that the potential effects associated with

the under-valuation of mortgage-backed securities (discussed by Huizinga and Laeven 2011) cannot

contribute to the variation measured in Figure 7, since we removed any potential valuation treatment

effects by valuing all securities at their fair value (see our discussion in Section 2). Of course, any effect

from misevaluation of mortgage-backed securities would be very small compared to the swing in the

market-to-book ratio observed in Figure 7, since non-government guaranteed MBS were less than three

percent of total assets as of June 2007.

       Unrecognized loan losses, however, could be a significant contributor to the swing in the market-

to-book ratio shown in Figure 7. Those unrecognized losses are of two kinds: the failure to properly

recognize incurred losses, and the failure to incorporate expected but not incurred losses into provisions

for loan losses. GAAP requires recognition of the former but disallows recognition of the latter.

       How much of the swing in the market-to-book ratio is due to unrecognized losses? The graph of

the value creation associated with loans reflects three kinds of influences: the value of relationships,

unrecognized losses, and changes in the valuation of loan risk. The variables in our model cannot

reliably decompose those influences. In particular, the effects associated with changes in loan yields

likely reflect a mix of all three influences. The upturn in the loan value creation graph after 2008, we

would conjecture, is driven more by the change in the pricing of risk than by the perceived reduction in

expected loan losses, but in general, the three influences are almost impossible to disentangle.

Nevertheless, we can bound the total potential contribution of unrecognized expected loan losses over

the period 2004 to 2010 by comparing the loan value creation graph with the total value creation graph.

                                                      32
Of the total swing in value creation from about 1.5 in 2004 to 0 in 2010 only about 40 percent of that

change can be attributed to value creation changes associated with lending. Thus, most of the swing in

the market-to-book ratios of banks from 2004 to the present reflects influences other than unrecognized

loan and securities losses.

To What Extent Did Fundamentals Capture Changes in the Average Market-to-Book Ratio During

the Financial Crisis?

Our analysis shows that the marked decline in banks’ market-to-book values during the crisis reflects a

variety of influences. One way to decompose the change in the average market-to-book ratio over time

is to divide it into two components: the portion explained by the changes in fundamentals, and the

portion explained by changes in estimated coefficients. The latter component captures the effects of both

changes in the pricing of the fundamentals (the slope coefficients) and changes in expected losses and

other factors unrelated to the fundamentals (the change in the intercept).

        Figure 8 plots the average change in the market-to-book ratio each quarter (y-axis) against the

predicted change in the market-to-book ratio (x-axis), calculated by applying the prior quarter’s

estimated coefficients to the current quarter changes in the fundamentals. If changes in the fundamentals

fully capture changes in the average market-to-book ratio, all points should lie on the 45o line. If

changes in the fundamentals, within a stable regression model, can only partially explain changes in the

average market-to-book ratio, the relationship should be positive but imperfect, as is indeed the case.

Still, the slope coefficient is close to one and is highly significant (slope = 1.21, t-statistic = 4.2). Thus,

the fundamentals appear not only to explain cross-sectional differences in the market-to-book ratio but

also to account for a significant portion of the time-series variation.20

                                                    [Figure 8 about here]



20
  To evaluate the robustness of these findings, we repeated the analysis using the quarterly median (rather than mean) values
of the actual and predicted changes in the market-to-book ratio. The results are very similar to those reported.

                                                             33
        As expected, Figure 8 indicates that the largest declines in the average market-to-book ratio

occurred during the financial crisis (Y08Q4, Y08Q3, and Y07Q3). In each of these quarters the

fundamentals captured a significant portion of the decline, but in two of the quarters (Y08Q4 and

Y07Q3) most of the decline was due to changes in the coefficients. Interestingly, subsequent quarters

(primarily in 2009) are substantially above the 45o line, suggesting that during 2007 and 2008 market

prices declined in anticipation of losses that materialized and were primarily reflected in the

fundamentals during subsequent quarters. One interpretation of this result (e.g., Huizinga and Laeven

2011) is that banks used accounting discretion to delay the recognition of losses. Of course, under

GAAP, at least a portion of the anticipated losses was not supposed to be recognized. Banks are required

to recognize loan losses when losses are incurred, not when they are expected: “under GAAP, the

purpose of the ALLL [allowance for loan and lease losses] is not to absorb all of the risk in the loan

portfolio, but to cover probable credit losses that have already been incurred.”21

        Figure 9 is identical to Figure 8, but is constructed over longer intervals of time. Rather than

capture the relative importance of changes in fundamentals vs. model coefficients quarter-by-quarter,

Figure 9 considers changes that occurred within four long sub-periods – Q1:2000-Q1:2003, Q1:2003-

Q1:2006, Q1:2006-Q4:2008, and Q4:2008-Q3:2011. These sub-periods correspond to the early pre-

crisis period, the pre-crisis boom, the change from the peak of the boom to the height of the crisis, and

the post-crisis period.

                                                   [Figure 9 about here]

        Figure 9 shows that changes in fundamentals, rather than changes in model parameters, account

for most of the changes in market-to-book values that occur during our sample period. Specifically,

using Q1:2000 parameters, the mean predicted change in the market to book value based on changes in


21
  The Interagency Policy Statement on the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses, issued by the federal financial institution
regulatory agencies in December 2006 (http://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2006/fil06105a.pdf).

                                                            34
the fundamentals from Q1:2000 to Q1:2003 is -0.215, while the actual change is 0.253. Using Q1:2003

parameters, the mean predicted change in the market to book value based on changes in the

fundamentals from Q1:2003 to Q1:2006 is 0.347, while the actual change is 0.328. Using Q1:2006

parameters, the mean predicted change in the market to book value based on changes in the

fundamentals from Q1:2006 to Q4:2008 is -1.225, while the actual change is -1.628. Using Q4:2008

parameters, the mean predicted change in the market to book value based on changes in the

fundamentals from Q4:2008 to Q3:2011 is -0.016. The actual change is -0.010. Thus, for the most part,

the overwhelming majority of changes reflect fundamental changes rather than changes in model

parameters. For the period Q1:2006 to Q4:2008, during which the change in market-to-book values is

the greatest, changes in fundamentals using the pre-crisis model parameters explain roughly three-

fourths of the changes in market-to-book values.



4. CONCLUSION

We examine the market valuation of banking activities and how the market-to-book values of U.S. bank

holding companies have changed over the last decade, focusing on the effects of the financial crisis.

Standard methods for valuing nonfinancial firms do not lend themselves to the valuation of bank holding

companies, due to fundamental differences between the structures and functions of financial

intermediaries and nonfinancial firms. Debt is not just a financing source for banks; when it takes the

form of deposits it is one of the value drivers of the banking franchise. For nonfinancial firms, EBITDA

or some related measure of operating income is used to measure current and prospective cash flows. But

income streams of banks do not lend themselves to this approach, since bank income flows from

differing sources of interest income, noninterest fee income, and trading income, which differ in their

margins of profitability and in their persistence.



                                                     35
        Our valuation model recognizes that (1) banks create value through the types of assets and

liabilities that they create (e.g., lending and deposit relationships), (2) bank income streams are

heterogeneous, differing in their profitability and persistence, and (3) valuation of assets, liabilities or

income streams varies over time depending on changing market conditions. This approach explains

substantial cross-sectional variation in observed market-to-book values, allowing us to identify the

market pricing of various banking activities and changes in market pricing over time.

       We find that the declines in bank stock values since 2007 reflect declining values of various

categories of banking activity (e.g., lending and deposit taking). These valuation consequences were

associated with identifiable changes in market conditions (e.g., interest rate levels and term structure),

suggesting that future changes in market conditions – especially with respect to interest rates – are likely

to have important consequences for bank valuation. Dividend payments matter for market values, too,

and increasingly over time. “Carry-trade” effects from taking on interest rate risk are also apparent.

Finally, the effects of leverage on bank valuation changed sign during the crisis; while the market

rewarded high leverage with higher market values prior to the crisis, leverage become associated with

lower values during and after the crisis.

       Contrary to the view that the decline in market-to-book values for U.S. banks from 2006-2011

mainly reflect unrecognized losses, we find that other factors explain most of the decline in market-to-

book ratios. Furthermore, although model parameters do change over time, more than three-quarters of

the change in market-to-book values that occurred from 2006 to the end of 2008 were predictable based

on changes in fundamental determinants of value using the model coefficients estimated in 2006.




                                                    36
                                             References

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2009. “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability and Monetary
       Policy,” in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of
       Kansas City 2008 Symposium, 287-345.

Barth, M. E., W. H. Beaver and W. R. Landsman. 1996. “Value-Relevance of Banks’ Fair Value
       Disclosures Under SFAS No. 107.” The Accounting Review 71, 513-537.

Beaver, W.H., C. Eger, S. Ryan and M. Wolfson. 1989. Financial reporting, supplemental disclosures,
       and bank share prices. Journal of Accounting Research 27: 157-178.

Berger, A.N., R.S. Demsetz, and P.E. Strahan, 1999. The consolidation of the financial services
       industry: Causes, consequences, and implications for the future. Journal of Banking and Finance
       23(2-4): 135-194.

Blankespoor, Elizabeth, Linsmeier, Thomas J., Petroni, Kathy R. and Shakespeare, Catherine. 2011. Fair
      “Value Accounting for Financial Instruments: Does it Improve the Association Between Bank
      Leverage and Credit Risk?” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1565653

Brewer, Elijah, III. 1995. “The Impact of Deposit Insurance on S&L Shareholders' Risk/Return Trade-
      Offs,” Journal of Financial Services Research, Volume 9, 65-89.

Brown, Craig O., and Serdar Dinc. 2005. The Politics of Bank Failures: Evidence From Emerging
      Markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120 No. 4, pp. 1413-444.

Brown, C., and S. Dinc. 2011. Too many to fail? Evidence of regulatory forbearance when the banking
      sector is weak. Review of Financial Studies 24, 1378-1405.

Calomiris, C.W., and C.M. Kahn. 1991. The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal Banking
      Arrangements. American Economic Review 81: 497-513.

Calomiris, C.W., and Doron Nissim. 2007. Activity-Based Valuation of Bank Holding Companies,
      NBER Working Paper No. 12918.

Calomiris, C. W. and B. Wilson. 2004. Bank capital and portfolio management: The 1930 “ capital
      crunch” and the scramble to shed risk. Journal of Business 77(3): 421-455.

Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison G. Hong, and Jose A. Schenkman, 2010, “Yesterday’s Heroes:
      Compensation and Creative Risk-Taking,” ECGI Finance Working Paper No. 285/2010.

Collins, J. H., D. A. Shackelford, and J. M. Wahlen. 1995. Bank differences in the coordination of
       regulatory capital, earnings, and taxes. Journal of Accounting Research 33 (Autumn): 263-291.

Demsetz, Rebecca S., and Philip E. Strahan. 1997. Diversification, Size and Risk at Bank Holding
      Companies. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29: 300-314.

                                                 37
Diamond, Douglas. 1984. Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring. Review of Economic
      Studies 51 (July): 393-414.

Elliott, J. A., J. D. Hanna and W. H. Shaw. 1991. The evaluation by the financial markets of changes in
         bank loan loss reserve levels. The Accounting Review 66: 847-861.

Goh, Beng Wee, Jeffrey Ng, and Kevin Ow Yong, 2009. Market Pricing of Banks’ Fair Value
      Assets Reported Under SFAS 157 During the 2008 Economic Crisis, Mimeo, MIT.

Griffin, P. A. and S. J. R. Wallach. 1991. Latin American lending by major U.S. banks: The effects of
        disclosures about nonaccrual loans and loan loss provisions.” The Accounting Review 66: 830-
        846.

Hughes, J.P., L.J. Mester, and C.C. Moon. 2001. Are scale economies in banking elusive or illusive?
      Incorporating capital structure and risk-taking into models of bank production. Journal of
      Banking and Finance 25 (December): 2169-2208.

Huizinga, Harry, and Luc Laeven (2009). Accounting discretion of banks during a financial crisis. IMF
       Working Paper, WP/09.207, September.

Huizinga, Harry, and Luc Laeven (2011). Bank valuation and accounting discretion during a financial
       crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Ivanova, Victoria, and David Scharfstein, 2009. Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008.
       Working Paper, Harvard University.

Jayaratne J., and D. P. Morgan. 2000. Capital market frictions and deposits constraints at banks. Journal
       of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(1): 74-92.

Kane, Edward J., 1989. The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen? Washington, D.C.: Urban
      Institute.

Kashyap, Anil, and Jeremy Stein. 1995. “The impact of monetary Policy on bank balance sheets,”
      Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42, 151-195.

Kashyap, Anil, and Jeremy Stein. 2000. “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the
      Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review 90(3), 407-428.

Keeley, M. C. 1990. Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking. American Economic Review
       80(5): 1183-1200.

Knaup, Martin, and Wolf Wagner, 2009. A Market-based Measure of Credit Quality and Banks’
      Performance During the Subprime Crisis, mimeo, Tilburg University.




                                                   38
Kolev, Kalin, 2009. “Do Investors Perceive Marking-to-Model as Marking-to-Myth? Early Evidence
       from FAS 157 Disclosure,” mimeo, NYU Stern School of Business.

Kroszner, R., Strahan, P., 1996. Regulatory incentives and the thrift crisis: dividends, mutual-to-stock
      conversions, and financial distress. Journal of Finance 51, 1285-1319.

Laux, C., Leuz, C., 2010. Did fair-value accounting contribute to the financial crisis? Journal of
      Economic Perspectives 24, 93-118.

Lintner, J. 1956. Distribution of income of corporations among dividends, retained earnings, and taxes.
       American Economic Review 46(2): 97-113.

Nissim, D. “Reliability of Banks’ Fair Value Disclosure for Loans,” Review of Quantitative Finance and
       Accounting 20, 355-384 (2003).

O’Hara, M., and W. Shaw. 1990. Deposit insurance and wealth effects: The value of being ‘Too big to
      fail’. The Journal of Finance 45 (December): 1587-1600.

Penas, M. F., and H. Unal. 2004. Gains in bank mergers: Evidence from the bond markets. Journal of
       Financial Economics 72: 149-179.

Plantin, Guillaume, Haresh Sapra, and Hyun S. Shin, 2008. “Marking-to-Market: Panacea or Pandora’s
        box?” Journal of Accounting Research Vol. 46, pp. 435-60.

Rajan, Raghuram. 1992. “Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm's-Length
       Debt,” Journal of Finance 47(4), 1367-1400.

Reinsch, C. H. (1967), “Smoothing by Spline Functions,” Numerische Mahematik, 10, 177–183.

Schwarz, Krista. 2010. “Mind the Gap: Disentangling Credit and Liquidity in Risk Spreads.” Available
      at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1486240

Stiroh, K. J. 2000. “How Did Bank Holding Companies Prosper in the 1990s?” Journal of Banking and
        Finance 24, 1703-1745.

Stiroh, K. J. 2004. Diversification in banking: Is noninterest income the answer? Journal of Money,
        Credit, and Banking 36(5): 853-882.

Stern, Gary H., and Ron J. Feldman. 2004. Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts. Washington,
        D.C.: Brookings.

Warfield, T. D., and T. J. Linsmeier. 1992. Tax planning, earnings management, and the differential
       information content of bank earnings components. The Accounting Review 67 (July): 546-562.




                                                  39
Figure 1: Cross-sectional Distribution of the Market-to-book Ratio




                               40
Figure 2: Model Statistics




           41
Figure 3: Estimates of the Loans’ Value Creation Equation




                           42
Figure 4: Estimates of the Deposits’ Value Creation Equation




                            43
Figure 5: Noninterest Income and Noninterest Expense




                        44
Figure 6: Bank Attributes




           45
Figure 7: Mean Value Creation by Activity




                   46
Figure 8: Decomposition of the Average Change in the Market-to-Book Ratio Quarter-by-Quarter


                                                               regression line


                                                                           45o line




                                            47
Figure 9: Decomposition of the Average Change in the Market-to-Book Ratio
                         Over Long Sub-Periods




      45o line
                      regression line




                                        48
                                                    Table 1
                                      Summary Statistics for the Full Sample

                                                   Obs.      Mean       SD        5%        25%      Med.       75%       95%
Adjusted market value / adjusted book value       15,846      1.913     1.129     0.408     1.181     1.752     2.433     3.892
Gross loans / adjusted book value                 16,185      9.186     3.340     4.591     7.252     8.918    10.796    14.219
Average tax-equivalent loans’ yield               15,596      0.070     0.013     0.053     0.061     0.069     0.079     0.093
Allowance / gross loans held for investment       16,233      0.015     0.008     0.008     0.011     0.014     0.017     0.030
Nonperforming loans / gross loans                 16,218      0.016     0.023     0.001     0.004     0.008     0.018     0.061
Prov. for loan losses / average gross loans       15,575      0.008     0.011     0.000     0.002     0.004     0.008     0.029
Net charge-offs / average gross loans             15,578      0.006     0.009     0.000     0.001     0.003     0.006     0.023
Core deposits / adjusted book value               16,222      8.249     3.095     4.100     6.682     7.982     9.474    13.066
Noninterest-bearing deposits / core deposits      16,178      0.189     0.106     0.047     0.121     0.171     0.237     0.392
Interest rate on interest-bearing core depo.      15,236      0.024     0.012     0.008     0.015     0.022     0.032     0.045
Small denom. time deposits / core deposits        16,261      0.301     0.150     0.061     0.197     0.302     0.389     0.556
Recurring fees / adjusted book value              15,714      0.166     0.180     0.031     0.076     0.119     0.186     0.467
Other nonint. income / adjusted book value        15,692      0.020     0.066    -0.012     0.000     0.006     0.020     0.090
Noninterest expense / adjusted book value         15,575      0.419     0.240     0.197     0.296     0.369     0.466     0.775
Adjusted book value / total assets                16,211      0.078     0.025     0.045     0.063     0.076     0.090     0.117
Dividend / adjusted book value                    16,116      0.011     0.010     0.000     0.004     0.011     0.016     0.028
Fixed rate gap / adjusted book value              16,136     -0.003     2.915    -4.492    -1.589    -0.053     1.461     4.623

The sample period is Q1:2000 through Q3:2011. Balance sheet items are generally measured at the end of the quarter.
Income statement items are measured using trailing four quarters data. Details on variable definitions are provided in the text.




                                                              49
                                                   Table 2
                                        Summary Statistics by Sub-Sample

                                                 Q1:00-Q3:11         Q1:00-Q2:07         Q3:07-Q4:09          Q1:10-Q3:11
                                                Mean Median         Mean Median         Mean Median          Mean Median
Adjusted market value / adjusted book value      1.913   1.752      2.310    2.099       1.238   1.119        1.016   0.956
Gross loans / adjusted book value                9.186   8.918      8.968    8.799      10.225   9.981        8.638   7.999
Average tax-equivalent loans’ yield              0.070   0.069      0.074    0.072       0.068   0.067        0.058   0.057
Allowance / gross loans held for investment      0.015   0.014      0.013    0.013       0.017   0.014        0.023   0.021
Nonperforming loans / gross loans                0.016   0.008      0.008    0.006       0.027   0.017        0.044   0.036
Prov. for loan losses / average gross loans      0.008   0.004      0.004    0.003       0.013   0.007        0.017   0.013
Net charge-offs / average gross loans            0.006   0.003      0.003    0.002       0.008   0.004        0.016   0.012
Core deposits / adjusted book value              8.249   7.982      8.144    7.953       8.468   8.146        8.427   7.795
Noninterest-bearing deposits / core deposits     0.189   0.171      0.192    0.172       0.175   0.163        0.194   0.180
Interest rate on interest-bearing core depo.     0.024   0.022      0.026    0.024       0.026   0.026        0.011   0.011
Small denom. time deposits / core deposits       0.301   0.302      0.302    0.310       0.330   0.323        0.248   0.239
Recurring fees / adjusted book value             0.166   0.119      0.168    0.121       0.164   0.119        0.159   0.113
Other nonint. income / adjusted book value       0.020   0.006      0.025    0.007       0.013   0.004        0.008   0.003
Noninterest expense / adjusted book value        0.419   0.369      0.416    0.370       0.423   0.373        0.424   0.357
Adjusted book value / total assets               0.078   0.076      0.078    0.076       0.074   0.072        0.083   0.082
Dividend / adjusted book value                   0.011   0.011      0.013    0.012       0.010   0.008        0.005   0.002
Fixed rate gap / adjusted book value            -0.003  -0.053      0.083    0.041       0.124   0.085       -0.627  -0.688

Balance sheet items are generally measured at the end of the quarter. Income statement items are measured using trailing four
quarters data. Details on variable definitions are provided in the text.




                                                             50
                                              Table 3
         Panel Data Regressions of the Market-to-Book Model on Proxies for Value Creation

                                                    Q1:00-Q3:11          Q1:00-Q2:07         Q3:07-Q4:09          Q1:10-Q3:11
                                                   Coef.   t-stat       Coef.   t-stat      Coef.   t-stat       Coef.   t-stat
Loans’ equation intercept                          -0.061     -4.4      -0.131     -8.3     -0.026     -1.4       0.013      1.4
Average tax-equivalent loans’ yield                 1.605        9       2.949    13.3       0.275        1       0.101      0.9
Allowance / gross loans held for investment         0.054      0.3       0.317      1.1      0.419      1.3      -0.143     -1.1
Nonperforming loans / gross loans                   0.015      0.2      -1.668      -13     -0.137     -2.5      -0.137     -3.3
Prov. for loan losses / average gross loans        -0.784     -2.9        0.15      0.4     -1.631     -4.6      -0.052     -0.4
Net charge-offs / average gross loans               0.167      0.6      -4.268     -9.1      1.389      4.1       0.062      0.5
Deposits’ equation intercept                        0.122    14.5        0.144    13.6        0.13    11.4        0.038      4.6
Noninterest-bearing deposits / core deposits        0.089        8       0.082      7.3      0.078      4.4       0.042      3.8
10 * Interest rate on interest-bearing core dep.   -0.143     -3.9      -0.218       -5     -0.092     -2.4      -0.063     -1.9
Small denom. time deposits / core deposits          -0.15      -12      -0.164      -12        -0.1    -6.6      -0.073     -8.5
Recurring fees / adjusted book value                3.839       18       5.188    16.8       2.375    10.9        1.199      8.6
Other nonint. income / adjusted book value          2.681    13.9        3.596    13.6        1.68      6.4       0.366      2.8
Noninterest expense / adjusted book value          -2.592      -15      -3.712      -14     -1.561     -9.9      -0.507     -5.1
Four BOX-Cox transformations of total assets
10 * Adjusted book value / total assets            -0.227       -3.4    -0.686       -10     0.444       4.2      0.427           6.9
10 * Dividend / adjusted book value                 2.637       19.1     2.507        17      2.75      15.5      4.299          25.2
0.01 * Fixed rate gap / adjusted book value          2.22        6.3      1.62       4.4     3.532       7.6      0.986           2.9
R-square                                            0.697                0.632                0.69                0.743
Observations                                       14,470                9,453               3,063                1,924

The regressions include fixed time effect. The t-statistics are calculated using heteroscedasticity-corrected standard errors.




                                                               51
