                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     STIMULATING DEMAND FOR AIDS PREVENTION:
                          LESSONS FROM THE RESPECT TRIAL

                                         Damien de Walque
                                          William H. Dow
                                           Carol Medlin
                                           Rose Nathan

                                        Working Paper 17865
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17865


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




We have benefited greatly from the insights and efforts of the RESPECT Project Team and many others
who contributed to the intellectual development and success of the RESPECT project. We are also
grateful to Adam Wagstaff for useful comments. We acknowledge funding support for this paper
from the NBER Africa Project, and support for the overall RESPECT project from the William and
Flora Hewlett Foundation (through the Population Reference Bureau), the World Bank Research Committee,
and the Spanish Impact Evaluation Fund and the Knowledge for Change Program (KCP) managed
by the World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the authors, and do not represent the views of any of the authors' institutions or funders, nor
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Damien de Walque, William H. Dow, Carol Medlin, and Rose Nathan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Stimulating Demand for AIDS Prevention: Lessons from the RESPECT Trial
Damien de Walque, William H. Dow, Carol Medlin, and Rose Nathan
NBER Working Paper No. 17865
February 2012
JEL No. I12,I15

                                             ABSTRACT

HIV-prevention strategies have yielded only limited success so far in slowing down the AIDS epidemic.
This paper examines novel intervention strategies that use incentives to discourage risky sexual behaviors.
Widely-adopted conditional cash transfer programs that offer payments conditioning on easily monitored
behaviors, such as well-child health care visits have shown positive impact on health outcomes. Similarly,
contingency management approaches have successfully used outcome-based rewards to encourage
behaviors that aren’t easily monitored, such as stopping drug abuse. These strategies have not been
used in the sexual domain, so we assess how incentives can be used to reduce risky sexual behavior.
After discussing theoretical pathways, we discuss the use of sexual-behavior incentives in the Tanzanian
RESPECT trial. There, participants who tested negative for sexually transmitted infections are eligible
for outcome-based cash rewards. The trial was well-received in the communities, with high enrollment
rates and over 90% of participants viewing the incentives favorably. After one year, 57% of enrollees
in the “low-value” reward arm stated that the cash rewards “very much” motivated sexual behavioral
change, rising to 79% in the “high-value” reward arm. Despite its controversial nature, we argue for
further testing of such incentive-based approaches to encouraging reductions in risky sexual behavior.


Damien de Walque                                     Carol Medlin
The World Bank                                       Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
Development Research Group                           Seattle, WA 98102
1818 H Street, NW                                    Carol.Medlin@gatesfoundation.org
Washington, DC 20433
ddewalque@worldbank.org                              Rose Nathan
                                                     Ifakara Health Institute
William H. Dow                                       Dar es Salaam
University of California, Berkeley                   Tanzania
School of Public Health                              rnathan@ihi.or.tz
239 University Hall, #7360
Berkeley, CA 94720-7360
and NBER
wdow@berkeley.edu
Introduction
       Conventional approaches to HIV prevention have been important in educating
populations about HIV risk factors and risk reduction strategies, and many have been
found to be cost-effective, but by themselves they have had limited success in slowing
the AIDS epidemic. Over the past decade the annual number of new infections has
decreased by about one-fifth, but in 2009 there were still an estimated 2.6 million new
HIV infections, and 1.8 million of these were in sub-Saharan Africa (UNAIDS, 2010).
HIV experts have highlighted the need for new combination approaches to complement
existing prevention efforts (Coates et al. 2008; Padian et al. 2011), including efforts to
stimulate individual demand for prevention.
       This paper considers the use of economic incentives to encourage people to
engage in behavioral change strategies that reduce risky sexual behaviors. Incentives
have been widely used in a variety of related domains, but are only recently being
explored as a possible HIV prevention strategy. One type of widely adopted incentive
scheme in the health domain is as part of conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs such
as the well-known Oportunidades program in Mexico, which provides significant cash
welfare support to households that engage in specific positive behaviors including
appropriate prenatal and well-child care. Lagarde, Haines, and Palmer (2007) and
Fiszbein and Schady (2009) survey such programs in detail. Related programs are being
explored in the sub-Saharan African context, but with conditionality focused on non-
health behaviors such as schooling (which can then indirectly yield positive health
consequences), e.g. Baird et al. (2010). There is also a history of providing positive price
incentives for using specific types of preventive health services, most relevant in this
context being the use of cash incentives to promote receipt of HIV test results (Thornton,
2008). The aforementioned incentive programs are all conditioned on observable input
behaviors, which can be controlled by participants. A parallel set of “contingency
management” programs have been designed for situations in which behavior changes are
more complex and/or not easily observed, and in which conditionality is instead based on



                                              3
outcomes. This contingency management approach has been most widely adopted in the
substance abuse field, e.g. providing rewards to substance abuse treatment patients if they
are negative on random drug tests; such programs have been found in developed country
contexts to be feasible, acceptable, and effective (Stitzer, 2006).
        In this paper we discuss a variant of the above incentive programs, using
outcome-based incentives adapted to the sexual domain (possibly within the context of a
larger CCT program). After reviewing traditional HIV prevention strategies as well as
what is known from prior literature on incentives in the types of contexts discussed above
(drawn partly from Medlin and de Walque, 2008), we discuss the theoretical pathways by
which incentive programs could work to reduce risky sexual behavior. We then turn to a
specific example in detail, elaborating on one such project in Tanzania (the RESPECT
Project, of which the authors are the principal investigators) which has implemented a
novel randomized trial of outcome-based incentives to reduce risky sexual behavior.1
RESPECT was a one-year intervention in which participants were tested for curable
sexually transmitted infections (STIs) at four-month intervals, and received cash rewards
if STI negative. The results from the impact evaluation of this intervention are reported
in de Walque et al, 2012. Figure 1 presents the basic randomized design of the
RESPECT study’s 2399 participants across two treatments arms (with different levels of
cash rewards) and a control arm. The balance of the paper focuses on lessons learned
from the RESPECT trial and implications for future such efforts.


Traditional Approaches to HIV Prevention
        The social, economic, and human costs of the AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan
Africa are staggering (Eiss and Glass, 2007), and innovative solutions to stem the tide of
the epidemic are desperately needed. Globally, an estimated 33 million people were
living with HIV in 2009. That same year, an estimated 1.8 million people lost their lives
to AIDS, and an estimated 2.6 million became newly infected. The global epicenter of

1
  We are only aware of one other study that has attempted to similarly incentive outcomes associated with
risky sexual behaviors. Kohler and Thornton (2011) report on a trial in Malawi in which HIV negative
individuals were randomized to cash reward levels to be paid one year later conditional on remaining HIV
negative. In contrast to the RESPECT study which found significant reductions in STIs, the Malawi study
found null results on HIV conversion (the main measured outcome), although there was low power to
detect HIV changes in that study.


                                                    4
the AIDS pandemic is in Africa, where an estimated 22.5 million people were living with
HIV in 2009 including approximately 5% of adults, and an estimated 1.8 million new
infections occurred during that year (UNAIDS, 2010). Young people, aged 15-25, are at
particularly high risk of new infection.
       The tragic reality is that many of these new infections could have been prevented.
At its core, the global AIDS epidemic is fueled by risky sexual behavior. Over 80% of
HIV infections occur through sexual contact with an infected partner (Askew and Berer,
2003), and could have been avoided through the adoption of safer sexual behaviors
including condom use, reduction in the number and concurrency of sexual partners, or
abstinence.
       Since the early years of the epidemic and beyond, billions of dollars have been
invested in prevention programs, and a significant portion of these dollars have gone to
what are known as “Information, Education, and Communications” (IEC) investments.
Unfortunately, IEC by itself has not been shown to have more than a minor impact on
patterns of HIV transmission and the trajectory of the epidemic (Bertrand et al., 2006).
Numerous studies have shown that information alone is typically insufficient to change
risk behavior. Accurate information is indisputably a basic ingredient in informed policy
discourse, and information, education, and communication campaigns in conjunction
with condom promotion and distribution likely results in higher condom use and
significantly lower sexually transmitted infection (STI) incidence (Bertozzi et. al., 2006).
Behavioral change will need to be an important part of prevention strategies going
forward. But the dearth of specific guidance and recommendations from the literature
about what can be done to improve the effectiveness of behavioral change interventions
especially as they relate to risky sexual behavior has been one of the more poignant
failures of global response to the epidemic.
       Certain other key AIDS prevention strategies do not depend on the widespread
adoption of safe sexual practices, but they nevertheless will depend on individual demand
decisions to use available technologies. These include HIV and STI testing and
treatment, male circumcision, and pharmacological prevention including drugs to stop
mother-to-child transmission, vaginal microbicides, prophylactic antivirals, and
potentially a future vaccine (Padian et al., 2011). Such clinical and technologically-based



                                               5
approaches hold a great deal of promise; however, behavioral strategies must also be
pursued. Current levels of investment in the development of new drugs, vaccines, and
technologies have been at least partially fueled by the perception that behaviorally-
focused approaches cannot be made to work, or are politically and socially unviable.
However, biomedical advances such as a cure for AIDS or the development of an
effective AIDS vaccine are, at best, many years away or unattainable. Moreover, even
once a clinic-based intervention, drug, or vaccine has been proven efficacious, changes in
behavior are still needed to ensure access, uptake, and acceptability. Consequently,
greater attention is now being given to a focus on behavioral change as an important
component of prevention strategies and activities.
       In the Tanzanian context in which the RESPECT trial was fielded, Table 1 shows
that knowledge of AIDS and HIV prevention strategies is extremely high and accurate,
with over 99% of respondents familiar with HIV and 85% identifying condom usage as a
strategy to prevent HIV. Table 2 further shows that a large portion of young adults have
been HIV tested (a national testing campaign occurred two years earlier and testing is
standard during prenatal care), and people believe that HIV rates are quite high. The
average respondent estimated an HIV prevalence rate of 17% among people their age in
their village, indicating a high level of perceived risk. Yet table 2 also shows 20% of
men admitting to multiple partners in the past month (we suspect such statistics are
underreported), and close to half of participants failed to use a condom during their last
sexual intercourse with a non-marital partner. These young people appear to understand
their HIV risks and know how to behave to prevent transmission – yet they don’t choose
to act on that knowledge. Next we review prior experience with incentivizing individuals
so as to stimulate demand for prevention.


Literature Review on Incentives for Health Input Behaviors and Health Outcomes


Conditional Cash Transfer Approaches
       CCT programs which provide cash to poor households in exchange for their
active participation in educational and health care services have proven remarkably
popular among developing country governments, sweeping the globe from Mexico to



                                             6
several other Latin American countries, including Columbia, Honduras, Jamaica, and
Nicaragua, and much more recently, to Africa (Kakwani et al., 2005; Nigenda and
Gonzalez-Robledo, 2005; Schuring, 2005). The principle of conditionality – which may
be applied differently in practice, but generally requires families to send their children to
school or to receive a range of health care services, such as nutritional counseling,
childhood vaccination programs, etc. – distinguishes CCT programs from the more
traditional social assistance programs which provide cash or vouchers directly to poor or
otherwise distressed families with no strings attached. The CCT programs emphasize the
use of market-oriented “demand-side” interventions as an instrument for longer-term
human capital investments (Rawlings and Rubio, 2005; Fiszbein and Schady, 2009). In
other words, the cash was intended to function as an incentive on credit-constrained
(poor) families to invest in their children’s future, recognizing the powerful limitations
that short-term financial constraints placed on poor families. Ideally, they are designed to
complement, rather than replace, the more familiar “supply-side” investments which
channel resources directly towards schools, clinics, and service providers.
       The CCT programs that have received the most attention are those having an
explicit orientation toward poverty alleviation, involving both educational and health
components as part of a broader, long-term strategy of human capital investments. Such
programs have been thoroughly evaluated, and overall the results of these programs have
been extremely promising. The evaluations of such programs, some more rigorously
designed than others, have generally shown positive impacts on health and education.
Mexico’s program has been evaluated most thoroughly. Studies have found increases of
25-60% in health care visits among children under 3 years, higher rates of nutritional
monitoring, and higher immunization rates. In addition, caloric intake increased by 7
percent, driven by higher expenditures on fruits, vegetables, and meats. Actual health
impacts have also been observed, with 12 percent lower incidence of illness among
children from 0-5 years old, and a height increase of one centimeter among children aged
6-36 months (with the greatest effects in the poorest households with educated fathers)
(Lagarde, Haines, and Palmer, 2007). However, very little can be surmised about the
relationship between the magnitude of the transfer and the behavioral effect it induces
due to the lack of experimentation with this issue. Fernald et al. (2008a, 2008b) have



                                              7
instead used quasi-experimental variation in the magnitude of Mexico’s Oportunidades
cash transfer to indicate that more cash is associated with better child anthropometric and
cognitive outcomes (though worse adult blood pressure and obesity).
        Beyond the lack of information related to cash dose response, there is also an
intense debate regarding the importance of the conditionality component of such
programs. Some have argued that the conditionality component is inappropriate for the
African context (Schubert and Slater, 2006). Even in the Latin American context, it has
been recognized that it is difficult to attribute health impact to the conditionality, per se,
as the programmatic intervention has many component parts, and is not limited to the
conditionality (Gertler 2004; Lagarde, Haines, and Palmer, 2007). In the absence of
more definitive research, related programs in several countries have been launched
without conditionality, including some in Africa. Several more recent studies are now
analyzing conditionality compared to randomized arms with unconditional cash
payments, yielding sometimes surprising results. For example, Baird, McIntosh, and
Ozler (2011) find that conditionality improves adolescent girl school outcomes in a CCT
program in Malawi, but increased teen pregnancy and marriage rates relative to
unconditional transfers. More will be known to help interpret these complex
relationships as additional studies such as this are released in the near future.
        Overall, the evidence from an impressive collection of evaluations of CCTs as
part of a broader poverty alleviation strategy demonstrates that such programs are
feasible and effective. Such programs have demonstrated positive impacts on uptake
rates of health (and education) services, and, in some cases, marked improvements in
health outcomes (Sridhar and Duffield, 2006, review nutritional outcomes in particular).
However, it is important to note that the evidence on how and whether the conditionality
works remains weak. For STI/HIV prevention, this is the most critical piece of
information that is needed to assess whether similar types of programs can be effective at
reducing risky sexual behavior. To explore the role of conditionality in more detail we
next turn to contingency management approaches, which typically use much smaller
payments that would be unlikely to have income effects on behavior, and thus better
isolate the role of the conditionality incentive per se.




                                               8
Contingency Management Approaches
       Similar to CCTs, contingency management (CM) relies on the mechanism of
conditionality to elicit behaviors that are viewed to be in one’s long-term interests (or,
those of society’s), and to discourage those behaviors that may be ultimately detrimental
to one’s own health and well-being that may not be easily perceived or experienced in the
short term. There are several key differences between CCT and CM though. First, CCT
programs typically have much larger cash rewards for complying with conditionality,
hence exploit both price and income and effects on behavior. Second, CCT programs
have typically conditioned on easily monitored input behaviors (such as health care use),
whereas CM has been used for behaviors that are harder to monitor directly (such as drug
use), and hence CM conditions instead on the desired outcome (negative drug test).
Third, while the CCT incentivized inputs (a prenatal care visit) require a “simple”
behavioral response over which the individual has a high degree of control, CM
incentives often require a “complex” behavioral change (over which the individual may
have imperfect control) (Kane et al., 2004). This complexity may require changing
multiple behaviors, reversing habit formation and addictive behaviors, and judging
uncertainty (such as probability that a behavior will indeed cause a negative test).
       CM applications span many areas of risky behaviors, including substance abuse,
smoking, and over-eating. It has been especially well studied by clinical psychologists as
a therapeutic approach to encourage the practice of healthful behaviors, and to discourage
unhealthy behavioral practices, especially those that may be linked to addiction or other
destructive behaviors that are deeply engrained and/ or habit-forming. CM interventions
provide “reinforcers” (e.g. incentives or rewards) contingent on an individual’s
abstinence from a target drug or behavior. The reinforcement device, often cash
payments, vouchers, or prizes, is contingent upon an objective measure of a
predetermined therapeutic target. An “objective” measure often means a biochemical
measure such as urine toxicology testing or the measurement of breath alcohol or carbon
monoxide levels, instead of self-reported compliance which is not verifiable.
       The essential principles of CM, as outlined by Petry (2000), are to reinforce the
treatment goals by 1) closely monitoring the target behavior; 2) providing tangible,
positive reinforcement of the target behavior; and 3) removing the positive reinforcement



                                              9
when the target behavior does not occur. CM techniques have been developed and tested
in the context of clinical trials and settings, and are a clinically accepted tool in fields
such as substance abuse, but have rarely (if ever) been implemented on a large scale in
the manner of CCT programs.
         As with CCTs, CM interventions have been tied to participation and the uptake of
services in several domains, although risk behaviors are the important determinant for
participant selection, rather than income constraints. CM has been shown to improve
drug abuse outcomes (Rawson et al., 2002) and uptake rates of counseling sessions (Petry
et al., 2001b); attendance at weight loss sessions; attendance at HIV drop-in center
activities (Petry et al., 2001a) and antiviral medication adherence (Rosen et al., 2007);
and attendance in smoking cessation clinics (e.g., see Higgins et al., 1994; Petry, 2000;
and Emont and Cummings, 1992). Of particular interest, however, is the use of CM to
elicit a complex behavioral change – usually, to discourage an unhealthy behavior by
positively reinforcing the cessation of that activity (e.g. drug or alcohol abuse, smoking,
or over-eating). The conceptual basis of CM and CCTs is thus largely similar, although
advocates of CM impose no a priori assumptions about the effectiveness of the use of
cash as the incentive or reinforcement device, and have experimented with a variety of
reward mechanisms, including vouchers and prizes.2 In addition, many CM studies are
designed to explore effect differences due to variations in the value of the conditionality
(known as the “dose-response” curve), the frequency of monitoring and payments, and
the length of time that the elicited behavior change is sustained after the program has
ended.
         The use of CM has been most intensively studied in relation to its efficacy in
treating substance abuse. A landmark study by Higgins et al. (1994) demonstrated that
incentives delivered contingent on submitting cocaine-free urine specimens significantly
improved treatment outcomes in ambulatory cocaine-dependent patients. Over 50
percent in the treatment condition achieved at least two months of cocaine abstinence
versus only 15 percent of the controls. Silverman et. al. (1996) showed that 47 percent of


2
 The findings of studies reviewed for this paper suggested that cash is typically preferred by research
subjects, and in some studies it has been shown to have a greater behavioral effect than the equivalent non-
cash reward (Kamb et al., 1998; Deren et al., 1994; Vandrey et al., 2007), although the findings are hardly
conclusive.


                                                    10
cocaine abusing methadone patients assigned to the CM group achieved more than 7
weeks of continuous abstinence, compared to only 6 percent of patients in the control
group who achieved more than 2 weeks of abstinence. Similar results have been found
for treating opioid dependency (Petry, 2000). While CM has also been shown efficacious
in treating alcohol abuse, the studies are fewer in number due to the difficulties
associated with objectively verifying abstinence. Breath, urine, and blood tests can detect
alcohol use only up to four to eight hours, which means that effective monitoring would
have to take place two or three times a day (Stitzer and Petry, 2006).
       Financial incentives to discourage smoking have also been extensively studied.
Donatelle et al (2000) used social support and financial incentives to induce high risk
pregnant smokers to quit during their pregnancies. They provided in the amount of $50
per month for each month of abstinence (up to a maximum 10 month period, which
included two months of postpartum). Lab-verified abstinence was required, and the
biochemically-confirmed quit rates within the treatment group were higher both at 8
months and 2 months postpartum. Stitzer (1983) experimented with different levels of
cash payment, providing a payment of $1, $5, or $10 per day for 10 days to the three
treatment groups (the control group received no cash). The study found that CO levels
decreased in an orderly fashion as pay increased. However, another study by Windsor et
al. (1988) which provided cash payments of $25 at 6 weeks and 6 months as a reward for
abstinence found no different in cessation rates between the control and treatment groups.
Other earlier studies experimenting with prizes, vouchers, and in-kind gifts of free
nicotine patches showed mixed results, but even positive results disappeared after 6
months. More recently, Volpp et al. (2009) found that while an incentive program’s
effects on smoking cessation also declined after withdrawal of the incentives, significant
effects did still remain 3-6 months later.
       The use of financial incentives to treat obesity has also gained in popularity, but
the evidence regarding efficacy is decidedly more mixed (see e.g. Follick et al., 1984;
Jeffery et al., 1978; and Jeffery et al., 1984. E.g., Volpp et al. (2008) found significant
weight loss from a lottery-based incentive program, but they were not sustained 4-months
after the program’s end; similarly, John et al. (2011) found matched commitment
contracts led to significant weight loss after 36 weeks, but again it was not sustained



                                             11
during a 32-week post-incentive period. A recent systematic review of randomized
controlled trials of treatments for obesity (Paul-Ebhohimhen and Avenell, 2007) showed
no significant effect of the use of financial incentives on weight loss or maintenance at 12
months and 18 months. However, further sub-analysis indicated that large transfers
(greater than 1.2% of personal disposable income) had greater impact, as did rewards for
behavioral change rather than weight loss, per se, and rewards based on group
performance rather than individual results.
        The CM literature, overall, offers useful insights into aspects of the conditionality
that appear to elicit the desired behavior change. This is an important area of inquiry that
has not been sufficiently explored within CCT programs. However, unlike CCT
programs, studies of CM have remained largely experimental and have not been brought
to scale (Petry, 2000; Kane et al., 2004). Furthermore, the small sample sizes of study
groups – most typically involving groups of 20 to 100, and rarely more than 500 – have
made it difficult to detect effects that are statistically significant, much less estimate
effect sizes accurately. Also, factorial designs with several treatment arms are common
which – in combination with already small sample sizes – has led to even more
constraints on power (Kane et al., 2004).


Theoretical Pathways for Incentive Effects on Risky Sexual Behaviors
        As indicated in the above literature review, there are a variety of theoretical
pathways via which incentives could influence risky sexual behaviors. In the STI
domain, such behaviors might include sexual behavior (abstinence, fewer partners, less
risky partners, condom use, pressure spouse/partner to reduce risky behaviors) as well as
testing and treatment behaviors (regular STI testing, STI treatment, and encouraging
partner to do the same). In this section we focus on behavioral changes induced
particularly by incentives such as those employed in the RESPECT study: cash rewards
conditional on testing negative for STIs.


Neoclassical price effect
Neoclassical economics predicts that the incentives will influence behavior in part via a
price effect. Conditioning the reward on STI status increases the implicit “price” of risky



                                              12
sex, since there is now a potential loss of cash associated with risky behaviors. This
theory assumes rational decision-making in the sexual domain (Philipson and Posner,
1995). The idea that individuals make tradeoffs between price and the riskiness of sex is
consistent with Gertler et al. (2005) who find Mexican sex workers charge higher prices
for sex without condoms, and Robinson and Yeh (2011) who find that sex workers
charge more for anal sex. This of course does not indicate that individuals are perfectly
rational in such decisions, but lends credence to the idea that people do respond to sex
prices. However, this price effect may be muted by the fact that not all risky behaviors
will result in a positive STI test, so the expected loss may be lower than the reward value.
In the RESPECT trial, approximately ten percent of individuals tested positive at each
timepoint, thus a person of average risk who mixes with average risk partners could have
an expected loss of only one-tenth of the reward amount. For example, the RESPECT
study’s higher cash reward amount of $20 might yield only a $2 “price” of risky sex
during a four month period, which by itself could be a weak spur to behavioral change.


Neoclassical income effects
To the extent that health is a normal good, the rewards may change behavior through
income effects, particularly with increasing value of cumulative repeated rewards. In
many CM applications though the reward amounts are sufficiently small as to preclude
neoclassical income effects. In the RESPECT study, the rewards over one year can be as
high as 25% of mean annual earnings, which is a substantial amount. For some lower
income women this could indeed ameliorate immediate economic pressures to engage in
transactional sex, although there is mixed evidence on the size and even sign of the
income effect on risky sexual behaviors. For men in particular, it is often hypothesized
that higher income will lead to more transactional sex, which over time would mute the
incentive effects on male sexual behaviors.


Systematic cognitive errors
Some individuals may not be able to accurately perform the expected value calculations
discussed above. Limited numeracy, availability heuristics, and bounded rationality may
make some people particularly prone to systematic over-estimation of small STI



                                              13
probabilities (see e.g. Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). Thus they may behave as if the
expected loss is substantially higher than it truly is.


High discounting
In a society with a generalized AIDS epidemic (Tanzania has an estimated 6% adult
prevalence rate), the expected cost of an AIDS diagnosis might be considered far larger
than the modest cash rewards offered. For individuals who are present-focused and
heavily discount the future though, the prospect of an AIDS diagnosis many years in the
future may not be considered a high cost. But if the price of risky sex would be incurred
within months instead (the RESPECT study tested and offered cash rewards every four
months), then high discounters may perceive an increased (discounted) price of risky sex,
and thus behaviorally respond to this shortening of the time horizon. This of course
depends on the extent of high discounting; studies in this context (including measures in
the RESPECT study) have found extremely high rates of discounting, implying that even
a timeframe of months may result in substantial discounting of the potential reward value.
And a reward in the timeframe of months may have little impact on those risky sexual
behaviors that may be driven by strong hyperbolic discounting (similar to the concept of
compulsive immediate gratification used in developmental psychology) as discussed in
the behavioral economics literature (O’Donoghue and Rabin, 2001).


Other “nudges”
A variety of other behavioral economics and psychological hypotheses have been
proposed regarding the operation of incentives, now sometimes referred to as “nudges”
following the popularization of the term by Thaler and Sunstein (2008). For example,
some argue that introducing explicit monetary incentives into the sexual decision-making
process may alter the frame within which people assess costs and benefits, resulting in
unpredictable deviations from neoclassical theory. Others suggest that the incentives
provide individuals with an excuse for deviating from social norms in order to act on
underlying preferences for less risky behavior. Several such theories would predict a
discontinuity of the dose-response relationship at zero: the first positive reward amount
should have much larger behavioral effects than subsequent amounts. Designing studies



                                               14
with multiple reward amounts (RESPECT used $20, $10, $0) will be particularly
important for testing such hypotheses.


       In addition to the above discussed pathways for behavioral change in response to
the incentives, it is also useful to consider potential long-term effects of time-limited
incentives. Two competing hypotheses are of particular interest:


Learning
For behaviors which individuals may not have tried until encouraged to by the incentives
(e.g., use of condoms), it is possible that the incentives will induce learning (and
reinforcement) that could result in permanent positive behavior changes even after
withdrawal of the incentives.


Reduced intrinsic motivation
Alternatively, psychologists have emphasized the potentially pernicious effects of
extrinsic monetary incentives in destroying the intrinsic desire to engage in positive
behaviors. Cameron et al. (2001) reviews the literature on the possible destruction of
intrinsic incentives and concludes that while this might occur for some high-interest
tasks, in general incentives do not have pervasive adverse effects.


RESPECT Study: Design Considerations and Lessons Learned
       In this section we highlight major considerations in designing a sexual behavior
incentive study, providing rationale for choices made in designing RESPECT, so as assist
others in designing similar studies in the future. Table 3 provides 2009 baseline
summary statistics on key variables discussed below. Further details of the RESPECT
study are described elsewhere (de Walque et al., 2012).


Ethical considerations
       Ethical concerns permeated all aspects of project planning, as referred to in many
of the subsequent sections. The use of incentives in the sexual arena raises many
potential controversial issues, so it is also natural that there will be disagreement



                                              15
regarding ethical considerations, both across individuals and across cultural settings, thus
it is essential to have careful oversight and scrutiny of the research design and protocols.
The project underwent several rounds of ethical review by several different committees
and agencies, including the IRBs of the University of California, Berkeley and San
Francisco, the Ifakara Health Institute, and the National Institute for Medical Research in
Tanzania (NIMR). In addition, the study benefited from a (largely Tanzanian) ethical
advisory group that reviewed the study protocol.


Target population
       A key decision point is whether to target the general population of some region,
or target a particular high risk group. The intervention may be on average more effective
among high risk groups, but potentially have a smaller aggregate impact. The RESPECT
study chose to target a general population. A pilot study by Galarraga (in process) in
Mexico City is alternatively exploring the possibility for targeting a group of male sex
workers. One concern with targeting a group such as sex workers is the political
constraint to scaling up implementation due to stigma and/or the concern about the
rewards attracting people to sex work; however the income value of sex work is likely to
swamp the value of incentive payments, making that concern less salient.
       In order to ease study logistics, RESPECT chose to implement the intervention
within the context of Ifakara Health and Demographic Surveillance Site in rural
southwestern Tanzania. We chose to recruit from ten villages; eight were rural and two
were in Ifakara town. Rural villages are generally lower income, so a given reward level
is likely to be more salient. Due to the limited number of villages, study arm
randomization occurred at the individual level.
       Demographically, we chose to enroll both men and women, as both could
hypothetically respond to the program. A priori, there were concerns that women might
not have sufficient agency to respond to the incentive regimen, while there were concerns
that men’s responses could be dulled if they used cash rewards to pay for new risky
behaviors, thus it was of interest to study both genders. We also chose to enroll both
single and married individuals, and married individuals were issued invitations for their
spouse to join the study as well (in the same intervention arm).



                                             16
       Regarding age group, we initially sought to enroll 15-24 year olds (a particularly
high risk age group), but due to ethical concerns we decided not to enroll minors, thus our
final target range was 18-30 year olds (plus all spouses ages 16 or older).
       For recruitment we chose a random sample of village residents from the
demographic surveillance site computer registry, and went to each of their houses to
explain the study and invite them to participate by reporting to a study station set up in
their village the following week. Of individuals who were reached in their houses for
recruitment, approximately 70% came to the study station and enrolled. Thus the
enrolled sample is highly representative of the general population of 18-30 year olds in
these villages. Table 3 further shows that only 6.5% of enrollees attrited or were lost to
follow-up during the one-year intervention. Attriters were younger and more likely to be
single, but overall means of those choosing to complete the study were quite similar to
attriters, except for the fact that attriters were substantially more likely to be HIV positive
at baseline (with 21% of HIV positives attriting, possibly due to confusion about
continued study eligbility). With this exception, the study sample was highly
representative of the underlying population.


Conditionality design
       A primary goal of the study was to reduce risky sexual behaviors. But because
these were not directly verifiable, we instead opted to link cash payments to objective
measures – STI test results – that could serve as (imperfect) proxies for risky sexual
behavior. Ideally we wished to condition on only STIs which have been incontrovertibly
linked to solely risky sexual activity. We also needed to balance cost considerations with
the imperative to have enough tests so as to sufficiently capture risky behavior. In
addition, we needed to consider local knowledge of STIs, testing capacity, and
availability of appropriate drugs with low rates of treatment failure. Because RESPECT
was designed as a “proof of concept” to detect whether or not individuals appeared to
responded to this type of incentives related to sexual behavior, we chose to conduct an
expansive set of tests. These were: Chlamydia, gonorrhea, trichomonas, Mycoplasma
genitalium, syphilis and HSV2. Each had unique considerations: Chlamydia and
gonorrhea were well known among the target population, thus although they ended up



                                              17
having relatively low prevalence overall, they were useful to include due to their salience
in the target population. Trichomonas has the merit of fairly high prevalence (and
presumed incidence), although additional complications are introduced by the fact that it
is biologically more common among women than men. Mycoplasma genitalium is also a
high prevalence STI, but has the drawbacks that it is not well known (many clinicians in
the this setting are unaware of it), there are no rapid tests for it, and treatment failure rates
are not well understood; for these reasons we opted not to condition rewards on this STI,
but still measured it for the purposes of increasing statistical analysis power.
        For highly reliable measurement of these first four STIs, every four months we
collected urine samples from men and vaginal swabs from women (performed by a local
nurse after careful explanation and consent—acceptability of swabs did not turn out to be
problematic), and conducted assays using nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) at the
Ifakara Health Institute microbiology lab. The NAAT tests were chosen because of their
high sensitivity, but they are also expensive and thus would not normally be possible to
do if scaling up the intervention; a more feasible design for scale would be to focus just
on a subset of STIs with reliable rapid tests. Use of laboratory-based NAAT testing also
required a two to three week period in order to process all of the tests, thus we had to ask
participants to return to their village study station to pick-up the tests. Over 90% of
participants came back to collect their results three weeks later, even in the Control
group; this is likely due to a combination of the fact that this is a population accustomed
to research studies, as well as the high level of interest people had in “knowing their
status” and rechecking it regularly (for both HIV and STIs). This also had the added
benefit that we had another contact with study participants to remind them of the study
and also provide individual post-test counseling (pre-test counseling was provided to all
at the time of specimen collection). Individuals who tested positive were provided
vouchers for themselves and up to five partners for free treatment at the local health
clinic, and a system was put into place to ensure that the first and second line medicines
were always available in those clinics. A critical point is that each of these four urine-
based STIs is curable. Thus enrollees who test positive for an STI can continue to
participate in the intervention after they have been treated and cured of the infection;




                                               18
learning is encouraged through positive reinforcement, and mistakes can be corrected and
overcome.
        In addition to these urine-based NAAT STI tests, we also measured syphilis and
HSV2 using blood-based tests. Because of the low prevalence of syphilis, and because
HSV2 detects whether the individual has ever contracted HSV2, we elected to only
measure these blood-based STI’s at baseline and 12 months, rather than at each 4-month
interval.
        Finally, we also measured HIV at baseline and one-year follow-up. We did not
conditional reward payments on HIV status, in part due to ethical concerns about
“punishing” somebody at the very time when they learn that they have contracted a fatal
disease. We were not powered to look at intervention arm effects on HIV, but for
scientific purposes did want to measure baseline HIV to better characterize our
population. Our HIV rates turned out to be lower (just under 4%) than anticipated based
on regional Demographic and Health Survey data; given the reasonably high rates of HIV
testing in the population it may be that HIV positive individuals selected themselves out
of the sample. We decided to also test HIV at the 12-month endpoint due to the study
population’s strong interest in checking their results again. Although over half of the
population had received a prior HIV test, study enrollees expressed concerns about
confidentiality of testing at local clinics, and strong desire for retesting by RESPECT
study personnel.


Incentive size and frequency
        A major design consideration is the size of the incentive. CCT programs focused
on uptake have typically relied on formulas to compensate participants on the opportunity
costs, or time requirements, of complying with programmatic requirements such as
attending antenatal care visits or taking the child to the clinic for his or her regular check
ups. However, in the case of CCT programs designed to encourage safer sexual practices
and discourage risky ones, the purpose of the incentive is not primarily to compensate the
individual for the opportunity costs of participating in the program, but rather to change
the decision calculus of the individual regarding his or her sexual behavior. The goal
would be to increase the immediate costs associated with risky behavior by increasing the



                                              19
possibility of future reward (cash). Several studies of CM interventions have found a
positive relationship between the magnitude of the reward and the impact on the target
behavior (and laboratory-confirmed health impact) (Sindelar et al., 2007; Stitzer and
Bigelow, 1983), at least during the treatment period; the effect appears to weaken during
follow up (Higgins et al., 2007). However, the magnitude of incentive required for
shaping sexual behavior is unknown. Preliminary assessments can be obtained through
focus group discussions, survey data, and discrete choice experiments, but these are no
substitute for direct measures of impact achieved by randomly assigning different sized
payments to individuals participants.
       In the RESPECT study, we chose an incentive amount of approximately $20 at
each 4-month testing point. Mean earnings in the study population are approximately
$200 per year, thus staying STI negative could increase income by about 30%, which is
in a similar ballpark as Mexico’s Oportunidades program. This amount was discussed
extensively with local populations, some of whom argued for much higher amounts
(which would not be able to be feasibly scaled-up), but others of whom agreed that $20
sounded reasonable. We then chose to include a second incentivized arm with a reward
half that size, in order to test dose-response. One concern about our ability to test this
dose response, however, is that randomization is at the individual-level, thus individuals
in the $10 group may feel “cheated” and respond less robustly than if they were not
aware of the higher group.
       In addition, we also chose to assess the acceptability and feasibility of lottery-
based incentives. All enrollees were eligible for a $100 village and gender-specific
lottery drawing at the 4-month, 8-month, and 12-month testing rounds (thus on average
the chances of winning were approximately one in 100 at each 4 month time point).
However, if individuals in the cash reward arms tested STI positive, they were made
ineligible for the lottery in that round (control enrollees were eligible regardless of their
STI status, as long as they had not attrited from the project). This thus equally reinforced
incentives for both of the incentivized reward arms. The lottery proved popular, as our
ex-ante focus groups had predicted (the national lottery is also popular). Large crowds
attended each drawing, providing yet another opportunity to communicate project
messaging. The lottery had two limitations to consider though. First, some winners were



                                              20
individuals known in the community to engage in risky sexual behavior, which cause
disillusionment among some village members. Second, the incentive structure was
confusing to some enrollees, violating the “KISS” principle (keep it simple stupid); this
could be remedied though in a simpler lottery-only design. At the end of the study we
queried individuals about the role of the cash rewards versus the lottery; in general people
indicated that their behaviors responded to both sets of incentives in roughly equal
proportions, providing promising evidence for the potential of pursuing (lower cost)
lottery designs in future interventions. This needs to be counterbalanced against the
finding in Table 4 that although respondents generally “liked” both the cash rewards and
the lottery, they liked the former somewhat more.
       A separate but related consideration is the frequency and immediacy in which the
cash incentive is paid out. Given the unplanned and spontaneous nature of many sexual
encounters, the incentive needs to be offered frequently enough to keep it ever-present in
the minds of the target group, and as immediately as possible to reinforce the link
between the payment and the target behavior. It seems reasonable to assume, and the CM
literature has confirmed (Stitzer and Petry, 2006), that larger cash payments given
frequently have greater impact than smaller payments given less frequently, but it is
nevertheless unclear how these two dimensions of magnitude and frequency interact. In
the RESPECT study we chose to balance the frequency with budgetary imperatives by
testing each 4 months, although given the lack of guidance in the literature this was
inevitably a somewhat arbitrary decision.
       Of additional interest is whether the cash incentive should be paid directly to
individuals, to a couple, or some other social grouping. CCT programs for poverty
alleviation have tended to target households and communities, but the incentive is
actually paid to the mothers of young children, rather than the fathers or the legal head-
of-household. This design feature has been a nod to a series of findings that women are
more likely to use the money on food for the family rather than on alcohol or other
purchases (Rawlings and Rubio, 2005, Schady and Rosero, 2007). However, some
studies of CM interventions have found that the effect size of incentive was greatest if the
payment was made to a pre-designated group rather than the individual (Jeffery et al.,
1983). This may be due to the social support provided by the group, or peer pressure, or



                                             21
some combination, and the question is whether such a mechanism can or should be
applied to the sexual relationship. In the RESPECT study, we chose the clearest and
most transparent method: paying each individual separately. Data analysis indicates that
many of the individuals shared their rewards by buying household goods, but many
others (both men and women) kept the funds to themselves and did not even share with
their spouse.


Skill-building to aid behavioral change
       In order to ensure that participants had the necessary tools to act on the incentives
for sexual behavior change, we chose to offer monthly (sex segregated) group skill-
building sessions (in addition to individual pre- and post-test counseling each four
months). For this purpose we trained local facilitators to deliver a modified version of
the Stepping Stones curriculum (Jewkes et al., 2008), with sessions on topics such as
sexual health, condom use, relationship skills, decision-making skills, women’s roles and
gender-based violence. The last of these was particularly important due to the concern
that women testing STI positive may be subject to violence; for this purpose we also
carefully monitored for violence events. Fortunately, reported violence rates during the
intervention were consistently lower than pre-intervention levels (Krishnan et al., 2011).
We chose to make these group sessions voluntarily, and 20-30% of enrollees attended
each month.


Self-reported degree of behavioral change motivation from incentives
       To judge the overall perceived effectiveness of the incentive mechanisms used in
RESPECT, table 4 presents enrollees’ responses to direct questions regarding how much
the incentives motivated sexual behavior change. At both 8-month and 12-month time
points the low-value and high-value respondents were asked “how much the cash rewards
motivated sexual behavior change.” After 8-months, 36% of low-value arm (Tsh 10,000)
respondents stated “very much” and 31% stated “none.” In the high-value arm (Tsh
20,000), the percent stating “very much” was substantially higher at 59%, with only 21%
reporting “none.” The control arm respondents were also queried, but as part of this
question each was randomized to a single hypothetical reward amount (Tsh 10,000 /



                                            22
20,000 / 50,000 / 100,000) and asked how much that amount would motivate behavior
change. Table 4 reports again a consistent dose-response relationship, with higher
amounts related to higher self-reported behavioral change motivation. Interestingly,
those actually enrolled in the reward arms reported higher levels of motivation than did
the control respondents when reporting about the hypothetical reward scenario.
       These motivation questions were repeated again at the 12-month intervention
endpoint, as reported in the middle panel of Table 4 (the questions were not asked prior
to the 8-month survey). The above dose-response patterns were replicated. A further
finding is that reported motivation levels are uniformly higher at 12-months than they
were at 8-months, suggesting that there may have been further learning and behavior
change by participants during this interval, which is an argument for repeated rounds of
incentivized behavior over an extended period of time. By this endpoint, 79% of the
high-value arm enrollees reported “very much” motivation, with only 5% reporting no
motivation.
       Finally, the bottom panel of Table 4 reports on parallel questions that were asked
at 12-months in regard to the lottery incentives. We first note that 89% of high-value arm
respondents reported “very much” motivation from the lottery, which is even higher than
for the cash rewards. This is despite the fact that the respondents had already participated
in two rounds of the lottery, after which they should have been aware that the odds of
winning the actual 100,000 lottery were approximately 1%, thus the expected value of the
lottery was far lower than the certain cash rewards. Second, we note that the responses
by control individuals (asked to imagine a single hypothetical lottery amount in which
eligibility was conditioned on negative STI results) were quite similar to those of the
actual high-value and low-value arm respondents; perhaps the fact that the control arm
enrollees had already been actually eligible for the lotteries (but regardless of STI status)
had made them better informed about how the lottery could affect their motivation.
Third, it is evident from Table 4 that there is not a dose-response relationship between the
different hypothetical lottery amounts and the degree of projected behavior change
motivation. This is despite the fact that these control respondents had all been
“anchored” by the actual lottery amount of Tsh 100,000, and thus might be particularly
expected to react negatively to the lower hypothetical amount of 50,000. One potential



                                             23
explanation for this lack of a dose-response relationship is that the lottery amounts tested
were all sufficiently high (Tsh100,000 is equal to approximately 40 percent of mean
annual income in the study population) that virtually all respondents would be motivated
by the prospect of winning. Indeed, in-depth focus group responses suggested that many
individuals in this context failed to calculate the relevant expected value (few have
completed schooling beyond the primary level), and thus were likely making cognitive
errors that led to greater salience of the lottery than would be rationally expected.
Although we must be cautious in not over-interpreting these self-reported “motivation”
questions, and should await publication of further results from the more objective STI
endpoints, this evidence does suggest that a lottery-based incentive system may be
acceptable within this community and possibly be more cost-effective than a system of
certain rewards.


Discussion
       Cash incentives have been shown to be effective at shaping behavior in a variety
of health domains, from improving the uptake of health and educational services among
the poor, to discouraging unhealthy or risky behaviors, such as substance abuse, smoking,
and over-eating. These successes inevitably raise the question of whether they can also
be applied in areas of sexual and reproductive health beyond contraception (Mauldon,
2003; Weeden et al., 1986), and in particular to HIV prevention (Haug and Sorenson,
2006). A review of countries’ experiences with CCT programs for poverty alleviation
and CM provides useful insights into how to design, implement and evaluate a CCT-
based STI/HIV prevention intervention. The particular experience of the RESPECT
study finds that such a program can be designed to be efficacious and acceptable.
       Table 5 reports enrollee responses to questions regarding perceived success of the
trial and which dimensions of the trial they liked and did not like. Although such
responses must be interpreted cautiously in light of possible social desirability bias (not
wanting to offend the interviewer) – indeed there is some variation in responses across
questions – overall the study appears to be highly acceptable and valued by the study
population. This is perhaps not surprising given the substantial amount of cash delivered
by the project, but even control group enrollees (who did not receive cash beyond



                                             24
minimal inconvenience fees) responded quite positively about the trial. But could a trial
such as this be brought to scale effectively, and cost-effectively?
        CCT programs for poverty alleviation have already been brought to scale in
several different settings, and therefore have broken the credibility barrier by proving that
it can be done. Of course, this has not eliminated concerns about whether incentive
programs will be equally effective in other settings, particularly those where initial health
infrastructural investments are very low, as in many countries in sub-Saharan Africa
(Lagarde, Haines, and Palmer, 2007).
        Furthermore, the cost-effectiveness of CCT programs when compared to
traditional supply side investments in health and education has not been sufficiently
explored (Lagarde, Haines, and Palmer, 2007). Cost analyses for STI-based incentive
programs will need to account for not only the cash payments and monitoring
infrastructure, but also STI testing costs. Continued improvements in rapid diagnostic
testing will help to ameliorate the latter costs over time, but they will still be central
considerations. The RESPECT study design was not created for the purposes of scale-up.
It will be important to experiment with alternative designs to test effectiveness of cheaper
approaches. For example, one promising option could be to use a lottery to regularly
choose random “winners” from a defined population (such as a subvillage), who would
then be tested for STIs or HIV, and would only receive their lottery payout if negative.
An ongoing project in Lesotho is further exploring variants of this idea; future studies of
this type would be a high priority.
        However, these cost concerns must be balanced against the benefits of an
effective behavioral intervention, and – again – too little is yet known to draw
generalizable conclusions at this stage. Certainly the epidemiological context is highly
relevant to this discussion, as the costs can be more easily justified in settings where the
rate of disease transmission is very high. De Janvry and Sadoulet (2004) have raised
concerns about inefficiencies in the design of CCT programs, pointing out that large-
scale CCT programs fail to distinguish between those families who would have attended
pre-natal clinics and sent their children to school regardless of the incentive and those
who require the incentive to induce the desired behavior. They conclude that CCT
programs can be made more efficient if they do a better job of targeting the group that



                                               25
needs the incentive to be induced to alter their behaviors. This will pose a continuing
challenge for STI incentive program design. Future cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit
studies of CCTs in different target groups will be needed to inform these types of
implementation decisions.




                                            26
References
Askew I and M Berer. 2003. “The contribution of sexual and reproductive health
services to the fight against HIV/AIDS: a review.” Reproductive Health Matters
11(22):51-73.

Baird S, C McIntosh and B Özler. 2010. “Schooling, income, and HIV risk: experimental
evidence from a cash transfer program.” XVIII International AIDS Conference; Vienna,
Austria.

Baird S, E Chirwa, C McIntosh and B Özler. 2010. “The short-term impacts of a
schooling conditional cash transfer program on the sexual behavior of young women.”
Health Economics 19 (suppl): 55–68.

Baird S, C McIntosh and B Özler. 2011. ‘Cash or condition? Evidence from a cash
transfer experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4): 1709-1753.

Bertozzi S, NS Padian, J Wegbreit, LM DeMaria, B Feldman, H Gayle, J Gold, R Grant
and MT Isbell. 2006. “HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment.” Disease Control Priorities
in Developing Countries. Eds. Jamison, Breman, Meashem, and Mills. New York, NY
and Washington, DC, The World Bank and Oxford University Press.

Bertrand JR K O'Reilly, J Denison, R Anhang and M Sweat. 2006. “Systematic review
of the effectiveness of mass communication programs to change HIV/AIDS-related
behaviors in developing countries.” Health Education and Research 21(4):567-97.

Cameron J, KM Banko and WD Pierce. 2001. “Pervasive negative effects of rewards on
intrinsic motivation: The myth continues.” Behavioral Analyst 24(1): 1–44.

Coates TJ, L Richter and C Caceres. 2008. “Behavioural strategies to reduce HIV
transmission: how to make them work better.” Lancet 372: 669–84.

De Janvry A and E Sadoulet. 2004. “Conditional Cash Transfer Programs: Are They
Really Magic Bullets?” Department of Agriculture and Resource Economics: University
of California, Berkeley.

de Walque D, WH Dow, R Nathan, R Abdul, F Abilahi, E Gong, Z Isdahl, J Jamison, B
Jullu, S Krishnan, A Majura, E Miguel, J Moncada, S Mtenga, MA Mwanyangala, L
Packel, J Schachter, K Shirima and CA Medlin. 2012. “Incentivising safe sex: A
randomised trial of conditional cash transfers for HIV and sexually transmitted infection
prevention in rural Tanzania.” BMJ Open 2012;2:e000747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2011-
000747.

Deren S, R Stephens, WR Davis, TE Feucht and S Tortu. 1994. “The impact of providing
incentives for attendance at AIDS prevention sessions.” Public Health Reports
109(4):548–554.



                                            27
Donatelle RJ, SL Prows, D Champeau and D Hudson. 2000. “Randomised controlled
trial using social support and financial incentives for high risk pregnant smokers:
Significant other Supporter (SOS) program.” Tobacco Control 9: 67-69.

Eiss R and R Glass. 2007. “Bridging the coverage gap in global health.” Journal of the
American Medical Association 298(16):1940-42.

Emont S and K Cummings. 1992. “Using a low-cost, prize-drawing incentive to improve
recruitment rate at a work-site smoking cessation clinic.” Journal of Occupational
Medicine 34:771-4.

Fernald LCH, PJ Gertler and LM Neufeld. 2008. “Role of cash in conditional cash
transfer programmes for child health, growth, and development: an analysis of Mexico’s
Oportunidades.” Lancet 371: 827-37.

Fernald LCH, PJ Gertler and X Hou. 2008. “Cash component of conditional cash transfer
program is associated with higher body mass index and blood pressure in adults.”
Journal of Nutrition 138:2250-2257.

Fiszbein A and NR Schady. 2009. “Conditional Cash Transfers for Attacking Present and
Future Poverty.” Policy Research Report, The World Bank, Washington, DC.

Follick MJ, JI Folwer and RA Brown. 1984. “Attrition in worksite weight-loss
interventions: the effects of an incentive procedure.” Journal of Consultative Clinical
Psychology 52: 139-40.

Gertler PJ. 2004. “Do conditional cash transfers improve child health? Evidence from
PROGRESA’s control randomized experiment.” American Economic Review 94(2): 332-
341.

Gertler PJ, M Shah and SM Bertozzi. 2005. “Risky business: The market for unprotected
commercial sex.” Journal of Political Economy 113:518-550.

Haug N and J Sorensen. 2006. “Contingency management interventions for HIV-related
behaviors.” Current HIV/AIDS Reports 3(4).

Higgins ST, AJ Budney, WK Bickel, FE Foerg, R Donham and GJ Badger. 1994.
“Incentives improve outcomes in outpatient behavioral treatment of cocaine
dependence.” Archives of General Psychiatry 51: 568-76.

Jeffery RW, WM Bjornson-Benson, BS Rosenthal, CL Kurth and MM Dunn. 1984.
“Effectiveness of monetary contracts with two repayment schedules of weight reduction
in men and women from self-referred and population samples.” Behavioral Therapy
15:273-9.




                                            28
Jeffery RW, WM Gerber, BS Rosenthal and RA Lindquist. 1983. “Monetary contracts in
weight control: The effectiveness of group and individual contracts of varying size.”
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 51:242–248.

Jeffery RW, PD Thompson, and RR Wing. 1978. “Effects on weight reduction of strong
monetary contracts for calorie restriction or weight loss.” Behavioral Res Therapy
16(5):363-9.

Jewkes R, M Nduna and J Levin, N Jama, K Dunkle, A Puren and N Duwury. 2008.
“Impact of stepping stones on incidence of HIV and HSV-2 and sexual behaviour in rural
South Africa: cluster randomised controlled trial.” BMJ 7:337a506.

John LK, G Loewenstein, AB Troxel, L Norton, JE Fassbender, and K Volpp. 2011.
“Financial incentives for extended weight loss: A randomized, controlled trial.” Journal
of General Internal Medicine 26(6):621–6.

Kahneman D and A Tversky. 1979. “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
risk.” Econometrica 47: 263–91.

Kakwani N, F Soares and H Son. 2005. “Conditional cash transfers in African
countries.” UNDP International Poverty Centre Working Paper No. 9.

Kamb ML, F Rhodes, T Hoxworth, J Rogers, A Lentz, C Kent, R MacGowen and TA
Peterman. 1998. “What about money? Effect of small monetary incentives on
enrollment, retention, and motivation to change behavior in an HIV/STD prevention
counseling intervention. The Project RESPECT Study Group.” Sexually Transmitted
Infections 74:253-55.

Kane RL, PE Johnson, RJ Town and M Butler. 2004. “A structured review of the effect
of economic incentives on consumers’ preventive behavior.” American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 27(4):327-52.

Kohler HP and RL Thornton. 2011. “Conditional cash transfers and HIV/AIDS
prevention: Unconditionally promising?” World Bank Economic Review, doi:
10.1093/wber/lhr041.

Krishnan-Sarin S, AM Duhig, SA McKee, TJ McMahon, T Liss, A McFetridge and DA
Cavallo. 2006. “Contingency management for smoking cessation in adolescent
smokers.” Experimental Clinica Psychopharmacology 14(3):306-10.

Lagarde M, A Haines and N Palmer. 2007. “Conditional cash transfers for improving
uptake of health interventions in low- and middle-income countries: A systematic
review.” Journal of American Medicine (JAMA) 298(16):1900-10.




                                           29
Mauldon JG. 2003. “Providing subsidies and incentives for norplant, sterilization and
other contraception: Allowing economic theory to inform ethical analysis.” Journal of
Law, Medicine, and Ethics 31:351-64.

Medlin C and D de Walque. 2008. Potential applications of conditional cash transfers for
prevention of sexually transmitted infections and HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa. Policy
Research Working Paper 4673, The World Bank.

Nigenda G and LM Gonzalez-Robledo. 2005. “Lessons offered by Latin American cash
transfer programmes, Mexico’s Oportunidades and Nicaragua’s SPN: Implications for
African Countries.” DFID Health Systems Resource Centre.

O’Donoghue T and M Rabin. 2001. “Risky behavior among youths: Some issues from
behavioral economics” in Risky Behavior Among Youths, J. Gruber, ed. Chicago,
University of Chicago Press: 29-68.

Padian NS, SI McCoy, SS Karim, N Hasen, J Kim, M Bartos, K Katabira, SM Bertozzi,
B Schwartländer and MS Cohen. 2011. “HIV prevention transformed: the new
prevention research agenda.” Lancet. 2011 Jul 16;378(9787):269-78.

Paul-Ebhohimhen V and A Avenell. 2007. “Systematic review of the use of financial
incentive in treatments for obesity and overweight.” Obesity Reviews 1-13.

Petry NM, B Martin, and C Finocche. 2001. “Contingency management in group
treatment: a demonstration project in an HIV drop-in center.” Journal of Substance
Abuse Treatment21:89-96.

Petry NM, I Petrakis, L Trevisan, G Wiredu, NN Boutros, B Martin and TR Kosten.
2001. “Contingency management interventions: From research to practice.” American
Journal of Psychiatry 158(5):694-702.

Petry NM. 2000. “A comprehensive guide to the application of contingency management
procedures in clinical settings.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 58:9-25.

Philipson T and RA.Posner. 1995. “The Microeconomics of the AIDS epidemic in
Africa.” Population and Development Review 21(4):835-848.

Rawlings L and G Rubio. 2005. “Evaluating the impact of conditional cash transfer
programs.” The World Bank Research Observer 20(1): 29-55.

Rawson RA, A Huber, M McCann, S Shoptaw, D Farabee, C Reiber, and W Ling. 2002.
“A comparison of contingency management and cognitive-behavioral approaches during
methadone maintenance treatment for cocaine dependence.” Archives of General
Psychiatry 59(9):817-24.




                                          30
Robinson J and E Yeh. 2011. “Transactional sex as a response to risk in western Kenya.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1): 35–64.

Rosen MI, K Dieckhaus, TJ McMahon, B Valdes, NM Petry, J Cramer and B
Rounsaville. 2007. “Improved adherence with contingency management.” AIDS Patient
Care STDS 21(1):30-40.

Schady N and J Rosero. 2007. “Are cash transfers made to women spent like other
sources of income?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4282, The World
Bank, Washington, DC.

Schubert B and R Slater. 2006. “Social cash transfers in low income African countries:
Conditional or unconditional?” Development Policy Review 24:5.

Schuring E. 2005. “Conditional Cash Transfers: A New Perspective for Madagascar?”
A World Bank Report.

Silverman K, ST Higgins, RK Brooner, ID Montoya, EJ Cone, CR Schuster and KL
Preston. 1996. “Sustained cocaine abstinence in methodone-maintenance patients
through voucher-based reinforcement therapy.” Archives of General Psychiatry 53:409-
15.

Sindelar J, B Elbel and NM Petry. 2007. “What do we get for our money? Cost
effectiveness of adding contingency management.” Addiction 102(2):309-16.

Sridhar D and A Duffield. 2006. “A review of the impact of cash transfer programmes
on child nutritional status and some implications for Save the Children UK programmes.”
Save the Children.

Stitzer M. 2006. “Contingency management and the addictions.” Addiction, 101:1536–
1537.

Stitzer M and N Petry. 2006. “Contingency management for treatment of substance
abuse.” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 2:411-34.

Stitzer M and GE Bigelow. 1983. “Contingent payment for carbon monoxide reduction:
Effects of pay amount.” Behavioral Therapy 14:647-56.

Thaler R and C Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. Yale University Press.

Thornton R. 2008. “The demand for and impact of learning HIV status.” American
Economic Review 98: 1829–63.

UNAIDS. 2010. Global report: UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic 2010.
Geneva, UNAIDS.



                                          31
Vandrey R, GE Bigelow, and ML Stitzer. 2007. “Contingency management in cocaine
abusers: A dose-effect comparison of goods-based versus cash-based incentives.”
Experimental Clinical Psychopharmacology 15(4):338-43.

Volpp K, L John, AB Troxel, L Norton, J Fassbender and G Lowenstein. 2008.
“Financial incentive-based approaches for weight loss: A randomized trial.” JAMA,
300(22):2631-2637.

Volpp K, AB Troxel, MV Pauly, H Glick, A Puig, D Asch, R Galvin, J Zhu, F Wan, J
DeGuzman, E Corbett, J Weiner and J Audrain-McGovern. 2009. “A randomized
controlled trial of financial incentives for smoking cessation.” The New England Journal
of Medicine 360:699-709.

Weeden D, A Bennett, D Lauro and M Viravaidya. 1986. “An incentives program to
increase contraceptive prevalence in rural Thailand.” International Family Planning
Perspectives 12(1):11-16.

Windsor RA, JB Lowe and EE Bartlett. 1988. “The effectiveness of a worksite self-help
smoking cessation program: A randomized trial.” Journal of Behavioral Medicine
11:407-21.




                                           32
Table 1: RESPECT baseline knowledge of HIV and prevention methods


                               Males ( N = 1175)   Females (N =1191)
Heard of AIDS or HIV?          99.8%               99.9%
Can die from AIDS              94.3%               92.5%

Knowledge of prevention methods (ABC)
AIDS can be prevented by:
Just one partner               97.0%               97.4%
Regular condom use             85.6%               84.2%
Abstaining                     91.3%               90.9%
Witchcraft                     1.9%                4.1%

Other facts about HIV
Healthy looking person can be 97.2%                95.6%
HIV infected
Not being infected after having 50.2%              42.7%
sex with HIV positive
Child can be infected during    81.6%              88.9%
pregnancy

Source: RESPECT project baseline survey, conducted in 2009 after project recruitment
and informed consent but prior to receiving project counseling.




                                          33
Table 2: RESPECT baseline HIV test history, status beliefs, and risky behaviors


                               Males ( N = 1175)   Females (N =1191)
Ever tested for HIV?           34.8%               71.9%
If yes, when last test?        Males ( N = 409)    Females (N =856)
     < 12 months ago           45.7%               45.0%
    12-23 months ago           27.4%               28.6%
     >= 2 years ago            26.9%               26.4%

Received the HIV test results? 90.9%               92.3%

Perceived HIV prevalence for 16.0%                  18.4%
same age group in community (N =1166)              (N = 1175)

On scale 0-10 what is your risk 2.12               2.2
of being HIV positive           (N = 1175)         (N = 1191)


Number of partners in last 4 months
   0                           12.2%               10.4%
    1                         68.1%                86.2%
    2                         15.6%                2.7%
    More than 2               4.2%                 0.7%

Condom use during last sexual intercourse
With spouse or union           15.1%               13.8%
With other partner            61.3%                49.5%

Source: RESPECT project baseline survey, conducted in 2009 after project recruitment
and informed consent but prior to receiving project counseling.




                                             34
Table 3: RESPECT baseline summary statistics, among full-year panel sample and
those attriting by 1-year endpoint


                Mean     Mean
                Among    Among Proportion
Variables       Followed Attrited Attrited
Arm
 Control             0.46      0.54        0.076 *
 Low-value           0.28      0.19        0.064
 High-value          0.26      0.27        0.049 *

Female               0.51      0.43        0.056 *
Age                 27.49     25.85              ***
Education
 None                0.12      0.11        0.063
 Primary             0.78      0.75        0.063
 Secondary           0.10      0.13        0.084
Married              0.76      0.61        0.053 ***
Low SES              0.55      0.51        0.061
Income             258.25    223.06
Chlamydia            0.02      0.02        0.058
Gonorrhea            0.01      0.02        0.136
Trichomonas          0.12      0.15        0.077
HSV2                 0.35      0.33        0.063
Syphilis             0.02      0.02        0.075
HIV                  0.03      0.12        0.212 ***
N                    2242       157        0.065

Source: RESPECT project baseline survey, 2009.

Notes: *, **, *** indicate significant differential attrition at 10%, 5%, and 1% level.
Low SES is an indicator for response<=3 on a 1-7 ladder of subjective social status in the
community. Income is an individual’s annual earnings in thousands of TSh (in 2009 the
exchange rate for dollars was US $1 ~= Tsh 1100-1300, yielding average earnings of
about $200/year).




                                            35
Table 4: Stated effects of incentives on motivation to change behavior

Rewards: 8-month survey                                    How much does/would motivate behavior change?
                                                              Very much       Somewhat        A little   None
Arm           Award type      Value          N                       (%)             (%)         (%)      (%)
Low-value     Actual          10000        486                        36              21           12      31
High-value    Actual          20000        518                        59              13             7     21
Control       Hypothetical    10000        172                        24              21           12      43
Control       Hypothetical    20000        264                        47              11           10      32
Control       Hypothetical    50000        232                        57              13             8     23
Control       Hypothetical   100000        195                        57               7             5     31


Rewards: 12-month survey                                   How much does/would motivate behavior change?
                                                              Very much       Somewhat        A little   None
Arm           Award type      Value          N                       (%)             (%)         (%)      (%)
Low-value     Actual          10000        150                        57              27             7      9
High-value    Actual          20000        160                        79              13             4      5
Control       Hypothetical    10000        254                        51              20             9     19
Control       Hypothetical    20000        239                        65              19             4     12
Control       Hypothetical    50000        279                        70              19             3      9
Control       Hypothetical   100000        258                        77              14             2      8


Lottery: 12-month survey                                   How much does/would motivate behavior change?
                                                              Very much       Somewhat        A little   None
Arm           Award type      Value          N                       (%)             (%)         (%)      (%)
Low-value     Actual         100000        209                        87               6             2      5
High-value    Actual         100000        175                        89               4             0      7
Control       Hypothetical    50000        345                        78              13             2      7
Control       Hypothetical   100000        349                        83               7             2      7
Control       Hypothetical   200000        336                        80              10             1      9
__________
Notes:
Control arm respondents were randomly assigned a single hypothetical reward value and a single lottery value, about which the behavior
change motivation question was asked. Respondents in the Low-value and High-value arms were asked about their actual reward amounts.
Low-value and high-value sample sizes are reduced at 12-months because a portion of these respondents were instead randomized to
questions about other hypothetical arms (not shown).
Table 5a: Enrollees’ attitudes towards elements of RESPECT, after 1-year trial

                                                High-value    Low-value     Control
What aspects of RESPECT did you like:
   HIV testing            Very much                   96.2           95.3        92.4
                          Somewhat                     2.7            3.6         5.1
                          A little                     1.0            1.0         2.4
                          None                         0.0            0.0         0.0

     STI testing             Very much                98.5           97.2        96.8
                             Somewhat                  1.4            2.1         3.0
                             A little                  0.2            0.3         0.2
                             None                      0.0            0.3         0.0

     Cash rewards            Very much                93.2           87.7        60.1
                             Somewhat                  5.6            8.9        24.8
                             A little                  1.2            2.8        13.0
                             None                      0.0            0.7         2.0

     Lottery                 Very much                74.5           69.9        54.4
                             Somewhat                 18.6           20.6        27.4
                             A little                  5.8            8.1        14.8
                             None                      1.0            1.5         3.5

     Free STI treatment      Very much                96.4           96.8        95.0
                             Somewhat                  3.1            2.1         3.6
                             A little                  0.5            0.8         1.2
                             None                      0.0            0.3         0.2

     Individual counseling   Very much                88.0           83.6        82.4
                             Somewhat                  9.1           12.8        13.7
                             A little                  2.6            3.1         3.8
                             None                      0.3            0.5         0.1

     Group counseling        Very much                58.6           54.3        50.0
                             Somewhat                 21.0           21.1        20.4
                             A little                 17.1           20.9        23.1
                             None                      3.3            3.7         6.7
Table 5b: Enrollees’ perceptions of success of RESPECT, after 1-year trial

                                                   High-value      Low-value     Control
At end of 1-year study did RESPECT:
    Reduce STIs in village Very much                      91.6           90.3        86.2
                             Somewhat                      7.2            7.3        10.9
                             A little                      0.7            1.6         2.0
                             None                          0.5            0.8         0.9

How did RESPECT study affect:
   Your life              Greatly improved                74.8           74.8        76.2
                          Somewhat
                          improved                        25.2           24.2        22.8
                          Not much or
                          worse                             0.0            1.0           1.0

     Well-being of
     community                Greatly improved            82.1           85.0        83.3
                              Somewhat
                              improved                    17.4           14.5        16.0
                              Not much or
                              worse                         0.5            1.0           1.0

Notes: All items were drawn from the 12-month RESPECT survey (at endpoint of trial),
except the final two questions were drawn from the 24-month survey (one year after end
of the trial).




                                          38
                                         Participants
                                           2,399


               Intervention group                                   Control
               (Conditional cash)                                   group
                    N=1,275                                        N= 1,124


  High-value                        Low-value
    N=615                            N=660


                     Counseling and relationship-skills training




Figure 1: RESPECT randomized study design




                                        39
