                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CULTURE AND THE HISTORICAL PROCESS

                                           Nathan Nunn

                                       Working Paper 17869
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17869


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2012




Prepared for the Economic History of Developing Regions. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Nathan Nunn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Culture and the Historical Process
Nathan Nunn
NBER Working Paper No. 17869
February 2012
JEL No. B52,N00

                                               ABSTRACT

This article discusses the importance of accounting for cultural values and beliefs when studying the
process of historical economic development. A notion of culture as heuristics or rules-of-thumb that
aid in decision making is described. Because cultural traits evolve based upon relative fitness, historical
shocks can have persistent impacts if they alter the costs and benefits of different traits. A number
of empirical studies confirm that culture is an important mechanism that helps explain why historical
shocks can have persistent impacts; these are reviewed here. As an example, I discuss the colonial
origins hypothesis (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001), and show that our understanding of
the transplantation of European legal and political institutions during the colonial period remains incomplete
unless the values and beliefs brought by European settlers are taken into account. It is these cultural
beliefs that formed the foundation of the initial institutions that in turn were key for long-term economic
development.


Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, Ma 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
1. Introduction and a Definition of Culture

Recent research has put forth statistical evidence showing that historical events can have long-

term impacts that continue to be felt today (Nunn, 2009). Increasingly, attention has turned

to better understanding the specific mechanisms underlying historical persistence. Although

a number of mechanisms have been considered, one mechanism which, in my view, has not

yet received sufficient attention is culture. Perhaps one reason for this is that the concept is

often batted around, without a precise definition, and as a result void of any concrete meaning.

Therefore, at the outset, it is important to specify exactly what I mean by culture in this context.

   The notion of culture that I employ is that of decision making heuristics or ‘rules-of-thumb’

that have evolved given our need to make decisions in complex and uncertain environments.

Using theoretical models, Boyd and Richerson (1985, 2005) show that if information acquisition

is either costly or imperfect, the use of heuristics or rules-of-thumb in decision-making can

arise optimally. By relying on general beliefs, values or gut feelings about the “right” thing

to do in different situations, individuals may not behave in a manner that is optimal in every

instance, but they do save on the costs of obtaining the information necessary to always behave

optimally. The benefit of these heuristics is that they are “fast-and-frugal”, a benefit which

in many environments outweighs the costs of imprecision (Gigerenzer and Goldstein, 1996).

Therefore, culture, as defined in this paper, refers to these decision-making heuristics, which

typically manifest themselves as values, beliefs, or social norms.

   In the models of Boyd and Richerson (1985, 2005), different behavioral rules evolve through

a process of natural selection determined by the relative payoffs of the different cultural traits.

Although the adoption of the different cultural beliefs or rules-of-thumb does evolve based on

relative costs and benefits, these processes are typically slow moving.1

   Although decision-making heuristics may manifest themselves in a number of ways, they often

take the form of emotions or gut feelings about what the ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ action is in a particular

situation (Gigerenzer, 2007). As we will see, these emotions may range from deeply-held beliefs

about the extent to which others can be trusted, whether it is right to behave in an honest manner,

whether women should work outside the home, whether it is important to punish those that have

cheated on others in the community, the importance of hard work, etc.
   1 One can also model the speed of cultural change. Boyd and Richerson (2005) show that, from one generation to

the next, culture is less likely to change when the environment is more stable and learning more costly.



                                                       1
  The central role played by emotions in decision-making is most famously illustrated by the

experience of Phineas Gage, a 19th century U.S. railway construction foreman who suffered severe

brain damage when an iron tamping rod was driven through his head, severely damaging his

ventromedial prefrontal cortex (Damasio, Grabowski, Frank, Galaburda, and Damasio, 1994). In

many ways, Gage made a full recovery. His ability to tackle logic and abstract problems and his

memory were completely well-functioning. However, his ability to make decisions was severely

compromised, as was his ability to process emotion.

  This phenomenon has been similarly observed in other patients (Damasio et al., 1994, p. 1104).

For example, Damasio (1994) details the case of a patient, Elliot, who also suffered damage to

his ventromedial prefrontal cortex, but due to a brain tumor. Extensive testing showed that

Elliot possessed all of the instruments of rationality and cognition typically viewed as important

for decision-making: reasoning skills, a working memory, ability to process factual knowledge,

possession of social knowledge, etc. Elliot’s only recognizable cognitive defect was a lack of

emotion and feeling, which somehow caused his inability to make decisions. Pure reasoning,

as demonstrated by the peculiar pathologies of Phineas, Elliot, and other like them, was not

sufficient for decision-making; emotion plays a key role.

  The use of reason alone requires one to gather all relevant information, map actions to all

possible outcomes, while accounting for different states of the world, how they impact outcomes,

and the likelihood of each.      Undertaking this task for all decisions in life can incapacitate

the decision-maker, rendering him unable to make the simplest and most mundane decisions.

Antonio Damasio famously describes the decision-making process of one of his patients trying to

set up their next appointment:

     I suggested two alternative dates, both in the coming month and just a few days apart

     from each other. The patient pulled out his appointment book and began consulting

     the calendar. The behavior that ensued, which was witnessed by several investigators,

     was remarkable. For the better part of a half hour, the patient enumerated reasons

     for and against each of the two dates: previous engagements, proximity to other

     engagements, possible meteorological conditions, virtually anything that one could

     reasonably think about concerning a simple date. . . He was now walking through a

     tiresome cost-benefit analysis, an endless outlining and fruitless comparison of options

     and possible consequences. (Damasio, 1994, pp. 193–194)

                                                 2
   Gut-feelings or other short-cuts to decision making – e.g., choosing something because it

‘looks good’ on the menu – can serve as a useful tool that saves on cognitive cost. Interestingly,

evidence suggests that a significant part of decision-making heuristics may actually work at the

subconscious level. The most well-known evidence for this is from the experiments of Bechara,

Damasio, Tranel, and Damasio (1997), in which individuals are given a high-stakes gambling

task where they were asked to choose cards from four decks. The cards were associated with a

monetary value, either positive or negative (i.e., they could win or lose). Two of the four decks

delivered average positive payoffs and two of the decks delivered average negative payoffs. The

study found that very early, after about 10 cards, individuals developed a non-conscious adverse

response to the losing decks, measured by anticipatory skin conductance, even though they had

no conscious awareness of which decks were better. After about 50 cards, participants began to

express a feeling or “hunch” about the nature of the decks, and by about 80 cards, participants

were able to clearly articulate why they felt one set of decks was better. Interestingly, the authors

found that when the same exercise was undertaken by individuals who had suffered ventromedial

prefrontal cortex damage – of the same form as Phineas Gage and Elliot discussed above – none

of them experienced a non-conscious response, and by the end of the experiment (after 100 card

selections) this group had not learned to choose the winning decks more often than the losing

decks.

   Although we are far from a complete understanding of the exact mechanics underlying our

reliance on emotions, gut-feelings, values, hunches, non-conscious cues, or other short-cuts to

decision making, there is ample evidence that these short-cuts do exist and pivotally influence

decisions (de Sousa, 1987; Damasio, 1994; Elster, 1999; Gigerenzer, 2007). It is these heuristics,

which vary across individuals and societies, and are potentially shaped by history, that I refer to

as culture and examine here.

   In thinking about the sources of historical persistence, culture plays a potentially important

role because it is a slow moving variable whose evolution can be affected by historical events.

A number of existing studies provide evidence consistent with this possibility, showing that

historical shocks have a long-term impact on the distribution of cultural traits today.2

   In addition, culture is potentially important because of its interaction with other factors that

are themselves an important source of historical persistence. For example, a source of persistence,
  2 This   evidence is summarized in Section 3.



                                                  3
which has received a great deal of attention, is domestic institutions. A number of studies

have put forth evidence that through the formation and persistence of domestic institutions, the

colonial experience had long-term impacts on much of the world outside of Europe (Engerman

and Sokoloff, 1997; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1997; Acemoglu et al.,

2001). However, what is less clearly recognized is that culture plays an important role even

in our understanding of this channel of persistence. As discussed in Section 4, one cannot

fully understand the historic transplantation of European institutions around the globe without

recognizing the important role played by culture and the endogeneity of institutions to the values

and beliefs of the first European migrants.


2. Evidence for Cultural Differences across Societies

A natural question when assessing the ability of culture to explain historical persistence is

whether there is even evidence that culture exists. Empirical evidence for this takes the form

of studies that show that different societies make systematically different decisions when faced

with the same decision with exactly the same available actions and same payoffs. A natural

interpretation of these systematic differences is that specific decision-making heuristics evolved

in different societies due to the particular environments or histories of the groups. (We discuss

the evidence for these determinants in the following section.)

   In the studies, three types of empirical strategies have been employed. The first is to bring the

same (artificial) environment to people of different backgrounds. This is the strategy undertaken,

for example, in the studies by Henrich, Boyd, Bowles, Camerer, Gintis, McElreath, and Fehr (2001),

Henrich, Boyd, Bowles, Gintis, Fehr, Camerer, McElreath, Gurven, Hill, Barr, Ensminger, Tracer,

Marlow, Patton, Alvard, Gil-White, and Henrich (2005), and Henrich, Ensminger, McElreath,

Barr, Barrett, Bolyanatz, Cardenas, Gurven, Gwako, Henrich, Lesorogol, Marlowe, Tracer, and

Ziker (2010), where the ultimatum game was conducted in remote small-scale societies across the

world. A number of other studies also identify systematically different behavior across cultures

in identical, artificially constructed settings. See for example, Nisbett and Cohen (1996), Jakiela

(2009) and Jakiela (2011).

   The second strategy is similar to the first, but undertakes analysis at a more ‘micro-level’,

and through a variety of methods, tests for systematic differences in specific cognitive processes

between individuals from different cultures. For example, in his book The Geography of Thought,

                                                 4
Nisbett (2003) documents psychological differences (in the past and present) between individuals

from Eastern cultures (China, Japan and South Korea) and those from Western cultures (Europe

and the European offshoots). Nisbett (2003) shows that the cognitive mechanisms involved in

decision making (i.e., the thought process) are systematically different across the two groups.

While Westerners tend to reason in analytic and abstract ways, viewing objects in isolation from

their environment, East Asians tend to reason in a holistic manner, understanding objects as

being fundamentally connected with each other and their environment.3 Nosek, Smyth, Sriram,

Lindner, Devos, Ayala, Bar-Anan, Bergh, Cai, Gonsalkorale, Kesebir, Maliszewski, Neto, Olli,

Park, Schnabel, Shiomura, Tulbure, Wiers, Somogyi, Akrami, Ekehammar, Vianello, Banaji, and

Greenwald (2009), relying on implicit association tests, identify systematic variation across 34

countries in unconscious attitudes against women in science, and show that this gender bias

strongly correlates with nation-wide male-to-female achievement gaps in 8th grade science and

math scores.

   The third strategy is to examine situations where individuals from different backgrounds

have been brought into the same environment. Fisman and Miguel (2007) look for a culture

of corruption using the accumulation of unpaid parking violations among foreign diplomats

stationed in Manhattan. They find that individuals from more corrupt societies are more likely

to accumulate unpaid parking violations. Fernandez and Fogli (2009) examine the behavior

of American-born citizens with parents that were born outside of the U.S.. They find that the

labor force participation and fertility of second generation females are positively correlated with

the historical labor force participation and fertility of the individual’s country of ancestry (i.e.,

parent’s country of birth).

   Although using very different methodologies, the studies all provide evidence leading to the

same general conclusion: individuals from different cultural backgrounds make systematically

different choices even when faced with the same decision in the same environment.


3. Culture as a Source of Historical Persistence

The natural second step when assessing the importance of culture for historical persistence

is to ask whether there is evidence that culture and its evolution can be shaped by history.
  3 There is an extensive literature in psychology documenting cultural and cognitive differences between Westerners

and East Asians. See chapter 8 of Heine (2012) for a summary.



                                                         5
Conceptually, historical events could have persistent impacts if they alter the relative costs and

benefits of different cultural traits, affecting their prevalence in a society. In turn, if cultural traits

are transmitted vertically from parents to children, then the impacts will persist through time.

   An example of vertical transmission can be seen by returning to cultural differences between

Westerners and Asians: Asians tend to view the world as interconnected and dynamic while

Westerners tend to view the world in more static terms and are more likely to conceptualize

objects in isolation of their environment (Nisbett, 2003). One reason for the persistence of these

differences is that they arise through the (often unintended) socialization of children by their

parents. When playing with children Western parents typically focus on objects (i.e., nouns) and

tend to interact with the child by asking questions about the object and pointing out its attributes

to their children. By contrast, Asians are more likely to focus on feelings, social relations, and to

use toys as tools to teach lessons about interpersonal relations: “Here is a car. I give it to you.

Now give it to me. Yes. Thank you.” (Nisbett, 2003, p. 150). One observable consequence of

these differences is that Western children are able to learn nouns much more quickly than verbs.

On the other hand, Asian children learn the two at approximately the same rate (Gentner, 1982,

Tardif, 1996).


Evidence from historical U.S. migration

Evidence that historical shocks can shape cultural evolution come from a variety of settings and

disciplines. A number of studies examine historical migration episodes within the U.S. and

show that the identity of the early migrants was important for the subsequent development of

a particular location. The most well-known evidence for this comes from lab-based experiments

from the field of psychology. Cohen, Nisbett, Bowdle, and Schwarz (1996) attempt to explain why

today in the U.S. South (but not the U.S. North) there is a ‘culture of honor’, where particular

importance is placed in defending one’s reputation and honor, even if this requires aggression

and violence. Their explanation for why this culture exists in the South but not the North is

rooted in the different histories of settlement in the two areas. The North was primarily settled

by groups with a farming background, while the South was settled primarily by the Celts which

had been herders since prehistoric times and had never engaged in large-scale agriculture. They

argue that historically in herding cultures, characterized by low population densities and weak




                                                    6
states, protection of one’s property was left to the individual. Therefore, a culture of aggressive

behavior arose and continues to persist even today.

   To test the culture of honor hypothesis, Cohen et al. (1996) conducted a series of experiments

involving white males from the U.S. North and U.S. South. In the experiments, each individual

was bumped by an accomplice and called an “asshole”. (The participants did not know this was

part of the experiment.) Using a number of methods, including direct observation, psychological

tests, and saliva samples, Cohen et al. compare the effects of this incident on Southerners relative

to Northerners. They find the Southerners became more upset, were more likely to feel that their

masculinity was threatened, became more physiologically and cognitively primed for aggression

(measured by a rise in testosterone and cortisol levels), and were more likely to engage in

aggressive behavior subsequently.

   Recognizing that the Cohen et al. (1996) experiments, in effect, only have two observations

(those from the U.S. North and those from the U.S. South), Pauline Grosjean (2011) undertook

a non-experimental study that examines variation across counties using historical U.S. census

data. The study finds that counties in the U.S. South with more Scotch-Irish immigration prior

to 1790 have higher homicide rates today. Interestingly, the relationship between the Scotch-Irish

immigration and homicide only exists in the U.S. South. This is potentially explained by the

greater prevalence of lawlessness and weaker formal institutions in the South. These characteris-

tics created an environment where the cultural traits remained beneficial and therefore persisted.

In the North, with better-functioning formal institutions, a culture of honor was not beneficial

and therefore the trait did not persist. Grosjean’s findings suggest that historical persistence

may depend on the interaction between culture and institutions. Culture persists in certain

institutional environments and not others. It is also important to recognize that the institutions

that arose in the South vs. the North may have been endogenous to original cultural differences.

This dynamic, which we discuss in section 5, creates the potential for interesting interactions

between culture, institutions and historical persistence.

   Another early study tracing differences today back to historical settlement in the U.S. is

Salaman’s (1980) comparison of two towns located in the same county in Eastern Illinois. Both

towns were settled about 100 years ago, but one by German immigrants from East Frisia and

the other by Irish immigrants. Using survey data, Salaman documents the persistence of norms

relating to land inheritance, which reflect the ethnic heritage of the two communities.


                                                 7
Evidence from traditional farming practices

Like Cohen et al. (1996) and Grosjean (2011), Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2011) also show

that the form of traditional subsistence impacts the long-term evolution of culture. Rather than

examining the distinction between herding and agricultural societies, Alesina et al. (2011) test for

the cultural impacts of farming technology traditionally used by a society. Their analysis tests the

well-known hypothesis, originally proposed by Boserup (1970), that the use of the plough, which

requires significant upper body strength relative to other farming implements like the hoe and

digging stick, resulted in male specialization in agriculture and female specialization in domestic

activities. This gender-based division of labor then generated the deeply-held and persisting

belief that the natural role of women was to work within the home. Combining contemporary

survey data on gender norms and ethnographic data on societies’ traditional plough use, and

examining variation across countries, subnational districts, ethnic groups and individuals, the

study shows that contemporary societies with ancestors that traditionally engaged in plough

agriculture are more likely to report attitudes that reflect the belief that men and women are

less equal, and they tend to have less participation of women in the workplace, in management

positions, and in politics.


Evidence from Africa’s slave trades

There is also ample evidence of historic shocks affecting cultural evolution in other environments.

For example, Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) examine the long-term impacts the trans-Atlantic and

Indian Ocean slave trades had on subsequent distrust. Using estimates of the number of slaves

taken from each ethnic group during the two slave trades combined with data from the 2005

Afrobarometer surveys, the authors identify a negative relationship between an individual’s trust

in others and the intensity of the slave trades among their ethnic group in the past. The authors

undertake a number of identification strategies and find evidence that the relationship is causal

and not due to omitted factors.

   The study then attempts to distinguish between the two most plausible channels through

which the slave trade may have affected trust. One is that the slave trade altered the cultural

norms of the descendants of those exposed to the trade, making them inherently less trusting. A

second is that the slave trade resulted in a long-term deterioration of domestic institutions, which



                                                 8
causes individuals to be less trusting of others today. Using a number of different strategies, the

total impact is decomposed into the two channels. According to their estimates, the slave trades

adversely affected trust through both cultural norms and institutions, but the culture channel is

about twice the magnitude of the institutions channel.

   Studies also examine other cultural impacts of the Africa’s slave trades. Dalton and Leung

(2011) and Edlund and Ku (2011) examine the hypothesis that the severe imbalance in sex ratio,

due to the fact that males were disproportionately taken during the trans-Atlantic slave trade,

altered the beliefs and values about the acceptability of polygyny. Examining variation across

ethnicities (Dalton and Leung, 2011) and countries (Edlund and Ku, 2011), the studies show that

a history of the trans-Atlantic slave trade is associated with a greater prevalence of polygyny

today.


Evidence from European history

Examining cultural evolution within Europe, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008a) empirically

examine the well-known hypothesis put forth by Putnam, Leonardi, and Nanetti (1993) that Italian

city states that became independent during the 1000–1300 period developed higher level of social

capital that persist until today. The authors show that looking across 400 Italian cities, there is

a positive relationship between their measures of social capital and whether the city was free

during the medieval period.

   Also in the Medieval European context, Avner Greif (1994), examines the historical origins

of the divergent evolution of collectivist and individualist cultures among the Genoese and

Maghribis, respectively. Carefully combining insights from game theory and archival evidence,

Greif shows that the differences between the two groups have their origins in the different strate-

gies undertaken by medieval merchants to prevent overseas agents from behaving opportunis-

tically during long-distance trade. The Maghribi merchants relied on a collective enforcement

strategy, where all merchants collectively punish any agent who had cheated. By contrast,

among the Genoese merchants enforcement was achieved through an individual punishment

strategy (Greif, 1993). Greif carefully models the strategic trade environment and shows that

both situations are Nash equilibria of the underlying game, the key difference being the cultural

beliefs (or expectations) of the merchant and agent in the game. The different trading relations

impacted the societies more broadly, resulting in two distinct cultural trajectories (Greif, 1994).


                                                  9
Evidence from religion

The last body of evidence that I describe has its origins in one of the oldest and most well-known

hypotheses about the relationship between history, culture, and long-term development. This is

Max Weber’s (1930) argument that Protestantism, in contrast to Catholicism, approved the virtues

of hard work and the accumulation of wealth, and that these values, referred to as the “Protestant

work ethic”, provided the moral foundation that spurred the transition to a modern market-based

industrial economy.

   A number of scholars have taken Weber’s hypothesis to the data, finding broad empirical

support. The studies examine the persistent impacts of either the Protestant Reformation or

historical overseas Protestant missionary activities on contemporary religious beliefs, education,

or economic development (e.g., Woodberry, 2004, Becker and Woessmann, 2009, Bai and Kung,

2011, Nunn, 2010, 2011). All studies find evidence of a long-term impact of the Protestant religion.


Evidence of shorter-term persistence

The studies discussed so far, examining the impact of historical event on culture, all take a very

long-run perspective. However, short-term evidence from a very micro-level also exists. An

example is the recent, innovative study by Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott (2011) that provides

evidence that, among adult Americans, values related to politics and nationalism are affected

by whether it happened to rain on the fourth of July during the individual’s childhood. They

find that rain on the fourth of July shifts adult values away from the Republican position and

decreases political participation. Their explanation is that childhood activities experienced on

the fourth of July – like parades, barbecues, and fireworks displays – through socialization and

group experiences, shape an individual’s patriotism and his or her political values. Because these

activities all occur outdoors, rainfall impacts the likelihood that they occur or are attended, and

therefore affects the extent to which the socialization takes place.

   Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2009) also consider the impact of childhood experience on adult

beliefs, but focus on beliefs about whether good outcomes are primarily determined by luck

rather than by hard work. They find that growing up in a recession increases the likelihood that




                                                 10
an individual believes that good outcomes are primarily determined by luck and not by effort.4

   Clingingsmith, Khwaja, and Kremer (2009) study the impacts of participating in the Hajj pil-

grimage to Mecca. They find that participation increases beliefs in peace, equality, and harmony

between ethnic groups (including those from different religions). The authors provide evidence

that the change in values arises because of interactions with Hajjis from different parts of the

world during the pilgrimage. In a very different setting, Botton and Perez-Truglia (2011) show

that in the United States, Catholic religiosity is strongly adversely impacted by reports of sexual

abuse among local Catholic clergy. Rohner, Thoenig, and Zilibotti (2012) put forth evidence

that civil conflict in Uganda decreases individuals’ trust in others and increases the salience of

ethnicity.

   Overall, mounting evidence suggests that history can play an important role in shaping culture

and its evolution. Given the importance of culture in individual decision making, this suggests

the real possibility that cultural change and its persistence is an important channel through which

historical persistence operates.

   Admittedly, this literature still falls far short of understanding the specific mechanisms and

channels through which history and culture persist. One possibility is that since culture is slow

moving, historical events that affect the costs and benefits of different cultural traits will have

lasting impacts. However, although we have examples of cultural traits persisting for centuries

(Voigtlander and Voth, 2011), we also have examples of culture changing within a few short

decades (Alesina and Fuchs-Schundeln, 2007). The natural question which then arises is when

does culture persist and when does it change. In other words, when do historical shocks to culture

have persistent impacts and when do they not? A potential answer to this question, which is the

focus of the next section, is that cultural beliefs generate formal institutions that in turn act to

reinforce the initial cultural trait. We now turn to this important interdependency.
  4 An  interesting contrast between the findings of Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott (2011) and Giuliano and Spilim-
bergo (2009) are the years in which the events being examined are found to have the greatest impacts. Giuliano and
Spilimbergo find 18–25 to be the most important years, while Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott find 7–10 to be the
most important for political views and 15–18 for political participation.




                                                       11
4. Culture, Institutions, and the Colonial Origins Hypothesis

A. Culture affecting formal institutions

Historically, there are many examples of culture impacting the evolution of domestic institutions.

The most striking examples are the European migrant communities established around the globe

after the Age of Exploration. At a macro-level, the impact that culture has on domestic institutions

is illustrated by Acemoglu et al.’s (2001) colonial origins hypothesis. As they argue, and document

empirically, the types of institutions that were established were affected by the potential mortality

rates among settlers. In areas in which settlement was possible, secure property rights tended to

be established and where settlement was not possible, extractive institutions developed.

   An important point that has been overlooked is the presumption that better institutions would

naturally arise in areas where European settlement was possible. Examining this process at

the micro level reveals a subtle but important point. The institutions that were established by

European migrants arose from the values and beliefs that the first migrants brought with them

from the Old World. In other words, the institutions first established were endogenous to the

cultural beliefs of the early migrants.

   The details of this process is described in detail in David Hackett Fischer’s (1989) book

Albion’s Seed. Fisher documents four waves of early migration to North America. The first

migrants were the Puritans (1629–1641) who settled in Massachusetts. These migrants, who were

primarily middle class from East Anglia, migrated for religious reasons and because of intolerable

conditions at home. The second wave of migrants (1642–1675) were the Cavaliers and with them

indentured servants, who migrated from the South and Southwest of England to the Chesapeake

Bay. The primary motivation for this group was what Fischer calls the younger son syndrome.

Men who were not the oldest son, and therefore did not inherit the family estate, set sail to the

New World to create estates of their own. The third wave (1675–1725) were the Quakers, who

migrated to escape persecution in England. The Quakers, who tended to be lower middle class

from England’s North Midlands, settled in the Delaware Valley. The final wave (1717–1775) were

the Scotch-Irish who migrated primarily for material reasons. They were from the borderlands

of Northern England, Scotland and Ireland and settled in the backcountry of the U.S. South.

Although they were a mixed group, the majority were lower class.

   Fischer documents how differences in the values of each immigrant wave generated differences


                                                 12
in the institutions that were established in the new colonies. The Puritans, in addition to their

well-known belief in the importance of universal education, were also obsessed with maintaining

proper order. The institutions they established – laws requiring universal education, high tax

rates, sizable government intervention, and swift and brutal justice – clearly reflected this. In

addition, a number of institutional structures, like the town meeting and town covenants, were

transplanted directly from East Anglia.

   In contrast to the Puritans, the Virginia Cavaliers believed that inequality was natural. For

them the ideal society was less about equality, but about maintaining order and the existing

hierarchy. These values resulted in limited education, lower taxes, less government spending,

and an informal system of justice based on hierarchical violence.

   The Quakers, although a religious group like the Puritans, had a very different notion of

freedom. They believe in personal freedom, including freedom of choice and even freedom to

make the wrong choice. This is very different from the Puritans who were obsessed with limiting

individual freedom to maintain social order. The Quaker’s emphasis on personal freedoms

strongly influenced the institutions that were established in the Delaware Valley. All citizens were

granted equal access and rights to courts, the laws established emphasized personal rights and

limited government intervention in personal and religious affairs, and punishments were much

less brutal than in New England with a greater emphasis on rehabilitation. As well, taxation

was much more limited than in New England. Tax laws required the consent of the people and

expired every 12 months.

   The fourth group, the Scotch-Irish, believed in natural liberty: freedom from the constraints

of the law, order and justice, and in minimal government, light taxes, and the right to armed

resistance of authority. The institutions that arose in the Southern Backcountry were an outgrowth

of these values. The emphasis on minimal government and freedom from the law resulted in a

very limited justice system. Societies relied primarily on self-policing by ad-hoc vigilante groups

(i.e., the 18th century ‘regulators’); sheriffs were used only to patrol the public roads. Formal

laws emphasized the importance of personal property and punished crimes against these rights

much more severely than violent crimes against people. Like the legal institutions, the political

institutions were also very informal, with no town meetings, and no local courts or commissions.

   As Fischer’s analysis clearly shows, once one examines at the micro-level the origins of colonial

institutions, it becomes clear that they were determined by the cultural values of the first settlers.


                                                 13
Particularly important were their values and beliefs on liberty, equality, and the appropriate role

of government.

   The importance of culture in shaping colonial institutions provides an interesting insight into

a recent debate within economics related to Acemoglu et al.’s colonial origins hypothesis. The

empirical results provided in Acemoglu et al. (2001) derive from IV estimates of the impact of

institutions on long-term economic development, using historical European settler mortality rates

in overseas colonies as an instrument for current institutions. They argue that in areas where

Europeans could settle, growth-promoting institutions that provided a rule of law and protection

of private property rights were established. However, Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and

Shleifer (2004) make the point that European settlers not only brought European institutions to

the newly settled lands, but also brought “themselves, and therefore their know-how and human

capital” (Glaeser et al., 2004, p. 289). They argue that this violates the exclusion restriction from

the IV estimates from Acemoglu et al. (2001). The crucial point is that European settlers not only

established growth-promoting institutions, but they also brought their know-how with them,

which also matters for long-term development.

   The analysis of Fischer (1989) shows that the view of “know-how” and institutions as compet-

ing factors of development somewhat misses the mark. Glaeser et al. (2004) are certainly correct

that the primary thing that migrants brought with them is themselves and this had important

consequences. Along with the settlers also came their beliefs and values regarding freedom,

liberty, equality, and the appropriate role of government. These were the crucial factors that

determined the nature of the initial institutions that were established. Although it is true that

the settlers brought themselves, this is part of the mechanism of Acemoglu et al. (2001). The

domestic institutions that were established by Europeans were endogenous to the culture the

settlers brought with them. Rather than being two competing explanations for long-term growth,

they are both part of the same evolutionary process. The confusion arises from the fact that

neither paper acknowledges the role culture plays in shaping domestic institutions.

   European colonization is one historical episode that illustrates the endogeneity of institutions

to cultures. Other micro-historical studies also provide similar evidence. For example, Zerbe

and Anderson (2001) document that the initial property rights institutions established during

the 1848 California Gold Rush reflected the values and beliefs that miners brought with them

Westward. The beliefs – which included individualism, respect for property, and the view that


                                                 14
rewards should be commensurate with effort – first developed into collectively practiced norms

of behavior (i.e., informal institutions) before being formalized as written laws.

   The well-known work by Greif (1994) on the cultural differences between the Maghribi and

Genoese medieval traders also illustrates the role of culture in shaping the formation of formal

institutions. The Genoese developed institutions that arose from their individualist cultural

beliefs, including a formal legal system as well as other formal organizations that helped to

facilitate exchange. By contrast, the institutional structures of the Maghribis grew out of their

collectivist cultural beliefs. Because the Maghribis continued to rely on informal enforcement

mechanisms, organizations remained limited in size and scope.

   Although, these examples provide clear evidence that institutions can be affected by beliefs

about what is right and just, it is important to keep in mind that institutions are not always

dependent on cultural values. An example is the pirate institutions that evolved in the late 17th

and early 18th century. These institutions, which included checks on authority, separation of

power, and written constitutions, were established to constrain predation by the captain, as well

as shirking and free-riding of crew-members (Leeson, 2007). In this case, institutions were not

shaped by cultural beliefs, but by efficiency considerations and material payoffs rather than by

deeply held values.


B. Institutions affecting culture

There is also the possibility of feedback effects, with formal institutions affecting culture. Empiri-

cally, a number of recent studies have documented evidence for this. For example, Guido Tabellini

(2008a) examines differences in trust in others, respect for others, and confidence in the benefit

of individual effort across regions within Europe. The first-stage of the IV strategy employed in

his analysis identifies a strong relationship between the prevalence of these cultural traits and

measures of the average quality of domestic institutions between 1600 and 1850. The estimates

show that European regions with less well-developed institutions today have less trust in others,

less respect for others, and less belief in the value of individual effort.

   Becker, Boeckh, Hainz, and Woessmann (2011) examine Eastern European communities within

the same contemporary country, but on either side of the historical Habsburg border. They show

that communities that were formerly part of the Habsburg Empire, with its greatly respected

and well-functioning bureaucracy, today have greater trust in their local government. In a more


                                                  15
contemporary setting, Chen and Yeh (2011) find evidence that the legal enforcement of obscenity

laws affects sexual attitudes. The authors find that more permissive precedent regarding obscen-

ity leads to more sexually permissive attitudes.5


C. Historical persistence and the interplay between culture and institutions

Tabellini (2008b) provides a formal model of the interplay between culture and institutions, in an

environment in which both are endogenous and co-evolve. In the model, there are two potential

cultural traits with one valuing cooperation (or believing cooperation is the right thing to do)

more than the other. Vertical transmission of these values is modeled explicitly with parents

exerting costly effort to instill values of cooperation. One of the primary innovations of the paper

is to also model the endogenous formation of institutions (that enforce cooperation) through ma-

jority voting. Tabellini shows that the co-evolution of culture and institutions generates strategic

complementarity and multiple equilibria. A culture that values cooperation prefers institutions

that strongly enforce cooperation, which in turn increases the returns to cooperation, reinforcing

this cultural trait. Conversely, a culture that does not value cooperation prefers institutions that

weakly enforce cooperation, which in turn decreases the returns to cooperation, reinforcing a

culture that does not value cooperation.

   Explaining the persistence of historical shocks to cultural traits is also the focus of Guiso,

Sapienza, and Zingales (2008b), who develop a model of the evolution of trust. Values are

transmitted from parents to children, but learning also occurs through market transactions. In this

setting, multiple equilibria are possible. In one equilibrium, beliefs of mistrust are transmitted

from parents to children. Because of these beliefs there is little economic activity and therefore

individuals do not learn about the true trustworthiness of the population. The authors call this

a “no-trust-no-trade” equilibrium. In another equilibrium, beliefs of trust are transmitted from

parents to children and as a result, economic activity and learning take place. In this case, there

is high trust and trade. In this environment, a temporary shock to trust can permanently move

a society from one equilibrium to the other. Due to the dynamics and learning process for the

cultural trait, a temporary shock can have permanent impacts.
   5 The notion that domestic institutions affect cultural norms is not surprising in light of the overwhelming evidence

that material payoffs affect preferences and values (since institutions are an important determinant of material payoffs).
Bowles and Polania-Reyes (2012) summarize the mounting evidence for this effect.




                                                           16
5. Conclusion

The goal of this article was to illustrate the benefit of understanding cultural values and be-

liefs as part of the process of historical economic development. Using a working definition

of culture as ‘fast-and-frugal’ decision-making heuristics or ‘short-cuts’, I argued that cultural

change and persistence are important channels through which history continues to matter today.

In an overview of the existing empirical studies testing for this channel, I provided illustrative

evidence that numerous historical shocks – including Africa’s slave trades, medieval long-distance

trading relations, waves of European migration, the adoption of plough agriculture, and foreign

missionary activity – have had long-term impacts on culture.

   I argued that there is an important interplay between culture and domestic institutions, the

channel underlying historical persistence that has received the most attention in the literature.

I argued that one cannot fully understand the transplantation of European legal and political

institutions during the colonial period without understanding the cultural values and beliefs that

were brought by the first European explorers and settlers. It is from these beliefs about justice,

liberty and the appropriate role of government that determined the nature of the institutions that

were first established.



References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. The colonial origins of compar-
 ative development: An empirical investigation. American Economic Review 91:1369–1401.

Alesina, Alberto and Nicola Fuchs-Schundeln. 2007. Good bye Lenin (or not?): The effect of
  Communism on people’s preferences. American Economic Review 97(4):1507–1528.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn. 2011. On the origins of gender roles: Women
  and the plough. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Bai, Ying and James Kai-sing Kung. 2011. Diffusing knowledge while spreading God’s message:
  Protestantism and economic prosperity in China, 1840–1920. Mimeo, Hong Kong University of
  Science and Technology.

Bechara, Antoine, Hanna Damasio, Daniel Tranel, and Antonio R. Damasio. 1997. Deciding
  advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science 275:1293–1295.

Becker, Sascha O., Katrin Boeckh, Christa Hainz, and Ludger Woessmann. 2011. The empire is
  dead, long live the empire! Long-run persistence of trust and corruption in the bureaucracy.
  Mimeo, Warwick University.

Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann. 2009. Was Weber wrong? A human capital theory of
  Protestant economic history. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2):531–596.

                                               17
Boserup, Ester. 1970. Woman’s Role in Economic Development. London: Allen and Unwin.

Botton, Nicolas and Ricard Perez-Truglia. 2011. Does religion foster pro-social behavior? Mimeo,
  Harvard University.

Bowles, Samuel and Sandra Polania-Reyes. 2012. Economic incentives and social preferences:
  Substitutes or complements? Journal of Economic Literature :forthcoming.

Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. London: University
  of Chicago Press.

Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson. 2005. The Origin and Evolution of Cultures. Oxford: Oxford
  University Press.

Chen, Daniel L. and Susan Yeh. 2011. Does obscenity law corrode moral values and does it
 matter? Evidence from 1958–2008. Mimeo, Duke University.

Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael Kremer. 2009. Estimating the impact of
  the Hajj: Religion and tolerance in Islam’s global gathering. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  124(3):1133–1170.

Cohen, Dov, Richard E. Nisbett, Brian F. Bowdle, and Norbert Schwarz. 1996. Insult, aggression,
  and the southern culture of honor: An “experimental ethnography”. Journal of Personality and
  Social Psychology 70(5):945–960.

Dalton, John T. and Tin Cheuk Leung. 2011. Why is polygyny more prevalent in western Africa?
 An African slave trade perspective. Mimeo, Wake Forest University.

Damasio, Antonio R. 1994. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain. New York: G.P.
 Putnam’s Sons.

Damasio, Hanna, Thomas Grabowski, Randall Frank, Albert M. Galaburda, and Antonio R.
 Damasio. 1994. The return of Phineas Gage: Clues about the brain from the skull of a famous
 patient. Science 264(5162):1102–1105.

de Sousa, Ronald. 1987. The Rationality of Emotion. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Edlund, Lena and Hyejin Ku. 2011. The slave trade and polygyny in Africa. Mimeo, Columbia
  University.

Elster, Jon. 1999. Alchemies of the Mind: Rationality and the Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.

Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1997. Factor endowments, institutions, and
  differential paths of growth among New World economies: A view from economic historians
  of the United States. In Stephen Harber (ed.) How Latin America Fell Behind. Stanford: Stanford
  University Press, 260–304.

Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. Culture: An empirical investigation of beliefs,
  work, and fertility. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1):146–177.

Fischer, David Hackett. 1989. Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America. New York: Oxford
  University Press.

Fisman, Ray and Edward Miguel. 2007. Corruption, norms and legal enforcement: Evidence from
  diplomatic parking tickets. Journal of Political Economy 115(6):1020–1048.

                                                18
Gentner, Dedre. 1982. Why nouns are learned before verbs: Linguistic relativity vs. natural
 partitioning. In S.A. Kaczaj (ed.) Language Development: Volume 2. Language, Thought and Culture.
 New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum, 301–334.

Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2007. Gut Feelings: The Intelligence of the Unconscious. New York: Penguin Books.

Gigerenzer, Gerd and Daniel G. Goldstein. 1996. Reasoning the fast and frugal way: Models of
  bounded rationality. Psychological Review 103(4):650–669.

Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo. 2009. Growing up in a recession: Beliefs and the
  macroeconomy. NBER Working Paper 15321.

Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. Do
  institutions cause growth? Journal of Economic Growth 9:271–303.

Greif, Avner. 1993. Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade: The Maghribi
  traders’ coalition. American Economic Review 83(3):525–548.

Greif, Avner. 1994. Cultural beliefs and the organization of society: A historical and theoretical
  reflection on collectivist and individualist societies. Journal of Political Economy 102(5):912–950.

Grosjean, Pauline. 2011. A history of violence: The culture of honor as a determinant of homicide
  in the US South. Mimeo, University of New South Wales.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008a. Long-term persistence. Mimeo.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008b. Social capital as good culture. Journal of
 the European Economic Association 6(2-3):295–320.

Heine, Steven J. 2012. Cultural Psychology. New York: W.W. Norton.

Henrich, Joseph, R. Boyd, S. Bowles, H. Gintis, E. Fehr, C. Camerer, R. McElreath, M. Gurven,
 K. Hill, A. Barr, J. Ensminger, D. Tracer, F. Marlow, J. Patton, M. Alvard, F. Gil-White, and
 N. Henrich. 2005. ‘Economic man’ in cross-cultural perspective: Ethnography and experiments
 from 15 small-scale societies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28:795–855.

Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Sam Bowles, Colin Camerer, Herbert Gintis, Richard McElreath,
 and Ernst Fehr. 2001. In search of homo economicus: Experiments in 15 small-scale societies.
 American Economic Review 91(2):73–79.

Henrich, Joseph, Jean Ensminger, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett, Alexander
 Bolyanatz, Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako, Natalie Henrich, Carolyn
 Lesorogol, Frank Marlowe, David Tracer, and John Ziker. 2010. Markets, religion, community
 size, and the evolution of fairness and punishment. Science 327(5972):1480–1484.

Jakiela, Pamela. 2009. How fair shares compare: Experimental evidence from two cultures.
  Mimeo, Washington University of St. Louis.

Jakiela, Pamela. 2011. Social preferences and fairness norms as informal institutions: Experimen-
  tal evidence. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 101(3):509–513.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997. Legal
  determinants of external finance. Journal of Finance 52:1131–1150.

Leeson, Peter T. 2007. An-arrgh-chy: The law and economics of pirate organization. Journal of
  Political Economy 115(6):1049–1094.

                                                 19
Madestam, Andreas and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2011. Shaping the nation: Estimating the
 impact of Fourth of July using a natural experiment. Mimeo, Harvard University.
Nisbett, Richard E. 2003. The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differ-
  ently. . . and Why. Toronto: Free Press.
Nisbett, Richard E. and Dov Cohen. 1996. Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South.
  Boulder: Westview Press.
Nosek, Brian A., Frederick L. Smyth, N. Sriram, Nicole M. Lindner, Thierry Devos, Alfonso
 Ayala, Yoav Bar-Anan, Robin Bergh, Huajian Cai, Karen Gonsalkorale, Selin Kesebir, Nor-
 bert Maliszewski, Felix Neto, Eero Olli, Jaihyun Park, Konrad Schnabel, Kimihiro Shiomura,
 Bogdan Tudor Tulbure, Reinout W. Wiers, Monika Somogyi, Nazar Akrami, Bo Ekehammar,
 Michelangelo Vianello, Mahzarin R. Banaji, and Anthony G. Greenwald. 2009. National dif-
 ferences in gender – science stereotypes predict national sex differences in science and math
 achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(26):10593–10597.
Nunn, Nathan. 2009. The importance of history for economic development. Annual Review of
 Economics 1(1):65–92.
Nunn, Nathan. 2010. Religious conversion in colonial Africa. American Economic Review Papers
 and Proceedings 100(2):147–152.
Nunn, Nathan. 2011. Gender and missionary influence in colonial Africa. Mimeo, Harvard
 University.
Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon. 2011. The slave trade and the origins of mistrust in
 Africa. American Economic Review 101(7):3221–3252.
Putnam, Robert, Robert Leonardi, and Raffaella Nanetti. 1993. Making Democracy Work. New
  York: Simon & Schuster.
Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2012. Seeds of distrust: Conflict in
  Uganda. Mimeo, University of Zurich.
Salaman, Sonya. 1980. Ethnic differences in farm family land transfers. Rural Sociology 45(2):290–
  308.
Tabellini, Guido. 2008a. Culture and institutions: Economic development in the regions of Europe.
  Journal of the European Economic Association 8(4):677–716.
Tabellini, Guido. 2008b. The scope of cooperation: Values and incentives. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 123(3):905–950.
Tardif, Twila. 1996. Nouns are not always learned before verbs: Evidence from Mandarin-speakers
  early vocabularies. Developmental Psychology 32:492–504.
Voigtlander, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2011. Persecution perpetuated: The medieval origins
  of anti-semitic violence in Nazi Germany. NBER Working Paper 17113.
Weber, Max. 1930. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Routledge.
Woodberry, Robert D. 2004. The shadow of empire: Christian missions, colonial policy, and
 democracy in postcolonial societies. PhD dissertation in sociology, University of North Carolina
 at Chapel Hill.
Zerbe, Richard O. and C. Leigh Anderson. 2001. Culture and fairness in the development of
  institutions in the California gold fields. Journal of Economic History 61(1):114–143.


                                                20
