                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE ALLOCATION OF CREDIT
                      AND FINANCIAL COLLAPSE




                        N. Gregory Mankiw




                     Working Paper No. 1786




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1986




I am grateful to Andy Abel, Robert Barsky, Olivier Blanchard, John
Earle, Avery Katz, Mervyn King, Deborah Mankiw, David Romer,
Matthew Shapiro, Lawrence Summers, and the referees for helpful
comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #1786
                                                       January 1986



             The Allocation of   Credit and   Financial Collapse



                                  ABSThAC




     This paper examines the allocation of credit in a market in which
borrowers have greater information concerning their own riskiness than do
lenders. it illustrates (1) the allocation of credit is inefficient and at
times can be improved by government intervention, and (2) small changes in
the exogenous risk-free interest rate can cause large (discontinuous) changes
in the allocation of credit and the efficiency of the market equilibrium.
These conclusions suggest a role for government as the lender of last
resort.                                                                           -




                                                       Professor Grery I'ankiw
                                                       Harvard University
                                                       123   Littauer Center
                                                       Caithridge,   W1   02138
                               I. INTRODUCTION

     In this paper I examine the allocation of credit in a market in which

borrowers have greater information on the probability of default than do

lenders. My purpose is to illustrate two propositions. First, the

equilibrium resulting in an unfettered market is inefficient; government

intervention of a sort often observed may at times be able to enhance market

efficiency, even if the government has no informational advantage over

lenders. Second, the unfettered market equilibrium is precarious: small

changes in the exogenous risk-free interest rate can cause large and

inefficient changes in the allocation of credit.

     Many recent studies note the importance of asymmetric information for

credit markets.1 The two results emphasized here, while natural consequences

of asymmetric information, often escape unnoticed. Understanding these

conclusions, however, is critical to evaluating the impact of various

government policies.

     Government intervention into the allocation of credit is substantial.

Federal loan guarantees to the Chrysler Corporation and to New York City are

among the most publicized examples. On a continuing basis, the government

plays a central role in the markets for loans to students, farmers, and

homeowners. Economists often criticize this role on the grounds that the

market can best allocate credit.2 The model presented here shows that this

conclusion is not generally correct. While credit programs are frequently

justified on distributional grounds, I show that a social planner concerned

solely with economic efficiency may often endorse the type of policy
                                        —2—

currently effective in many credit markets.

     The model presented here is close in spirit to those of Stiglitz and

Weiss (1981) and Ordover and Weiss [1981).    The common theme is that changes

in the interest rate alter the riskiness of the pool of borrowers. While

these previous two papers note the possibility that the equilibrium is

socially inefficient, the policy interventions they propose do not correct

the market failure discussed here. Stiglitz and Weiss suggest a usury law

(an interest rate ceiling) as one solution. In the model of this paper, a

usury law does not improve on the market allocation; instead, it causes the

market for these loans to disappear.3    Ordover and Weiss propose the policy

of forcing banks to lend to all borrowers at some interest rate. The

equilibrium in this model, however, can be inefficient even if no borrower is

credit rationed in the sense of being excluded at any interest rate; even

when such credit rationing does occur, the Ordover-Weiss policy merely

induces banks to charge a prohibitively high interest rate. In neither case

is this policy effective. Nonetheless, a credit subsidy, such as a loan

guarantee, can at times improve on the market allocation.

     The model also has macroeconomic implications. As noted above, in the

absence of government intervention, an increase in the exogenous risk-free

interest rate can cause the collapse of the credit market. A market that was

efficient at the initial interest rate can disappear, driving out socially

profitable investments. In other words, the total surplus derived for a

particular credit market can be a discontinuous function of the interest

rate. In models without asymmetric information, restrictive monetary policy

moves the economy smoothly along the marginal efficiency of capital schedule;
                                      —3-.


in this model, restictive policy is potentially more costly, as it can

precipitate a financial crisis.

     While the model in this paper is general, I present it in the context of

a specific credit market. In particular, I discuss loans from banks to

students. There are two reasons that student loans are a useful prototype

for studying credit market imperfections. First, only a limited number of

financial instruments are available to students. A corporation can fund

investments with either debt or equity. It has, in addition, more complex

options: preferred stock, convertable bonds, callable bonds. Imperfections

in the market for one instrument may be less important if there exist other

financing methods. In contrast, a student faces a much simpler problem. He

must borrow if he is to invest; he cannot issue equity on his human capital.

In principle, we could attempt to explain the paucity of financial

instruments available to the student. For this paper, though, it is both

reasonable and realistic to assume that his only option is debt finance.

     The second reason for discussing the market for student loans is that it

has evoked substantial government intervention. The OECD reported in 1978

that Canada, France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the

United States all provide assistance to students in the form of loans or loan

guarantees. Of course, there are many reasons for public support of

education. Nonetheless, it is instructive that this support so often takes

the form of credit market intervention. The pervasiveness of public student

loan programs suggests at least the perception of imperfections in the market

for credit.
                                      —4-

                                II. THE MODEL

     This section presents a simple model of a market for loans to a

particular group of students. To the banks, who provide the loans, the

students are indistinguishable. The students, though, differ by the expected

return on their education and by their probability of repaying the loan.

Each student knows his own expected return and repayment probability, even

though they are not observable by the banks or by the government.

     Both students and banks are risk neutral. I make this assumption to

simplify the analysis. There is no reason to suppose that the market failure

discussed here would disappear if some agents were risk averse. A major

advantage of the risk neutrality assumption is that it makes clear that the

market failure is not attributable to the underprovision of insurance to risk

averse agents.

     Each potential student is considering investing in some human capital,

say, a college degree. The project is discrete, has unit cost, and has

expected future payment R. (All return variables I use are expressed as the

return factor. That is, if the expected return is 5 percent, then R =   1.05)
The other characteristic of each student is the probability P that he will

repay the loan. The values of R and P vary across students. Each student

knows his own R and P, but these characteristics are not observable by banks.

These two characteristics are distributed throughout the population with the

density function f(P,R), which is public knowledge.

     The model takes each student's parameters P and R as primitive. One

could construct a more complete model in which the student's default

behaviour is endogenous. For example, one could model the students as having
                                        —5—

varying degrees of honesty; certain students get greater disutility from

dishonest acts. Default probabilities vary because a less honest student is

more likely to avoid repayment illegitimately. Alternatively, one could

model all the students as well-meaning. A student then defaults when his

return leaves him unable to repay his loan ex post; the probability of this

state occuring is then private information.4 Either such model might suggest

that each student's repayment probabilty depends on the market interest rate.

I maintain the assumption that P is exogenous for each student to simplify

the exposition.

     A bank can invest in a safe asset, such as a Treasury bill, and obtain

the certain future payment p. Alternatively, a bank can lend to one of the

above group of students. Let r be the interest rate the bank charges these

students. It is the same for all students, since they are indistinguishable

to the bank.

     If a student defaults, the bank receives no payment on the loan.

Including a default payment of A (A <   p),   such as collateral, is certainly

possible. In particular, in such a world, one could consider the student as

taking out a loan of A/p that is repaid with certainty and a loan of 1 - A/p

that is repaid with probability P and and fully defaulted with probability

1 - P.   It is straightforward to carry the extra terms throughout the

analysis and show that the existence of the risk-free loan does not

substantially affect the market for the risky loan. Thus, I set the default

payment to zero without loss of generality.5

     Let II be the average probability of repayment; that is, II is the average

of P for those potential students who in fact borrow. The expected payment
                                       -6-

to the bank on a student loan is fir. This expected payment must equal the

safe payment p if the bank is to make any student loans. Hence, the first

equilibrium condition is


(1)     fir =   p.

This equation describes the locus of market loan rates and repayment

probabilities that provide the lenders the required rate of return.

      Each potential student must decide whether to borrow at the market rate

r and invest in additional human capital. The expected return on his

investment is R, while the expected cost of borrowing is Pr. Hence,

he borrows and invests if and only if R >    Pr.   It is useful to

examine this investment condition graphically. Figure I shows the area in

(R,P) space for which the investment is made. Those students in areas A and

B borrow and invest. Those in areas C and D do not. Ar, increase in the

loan rate from r0 to r1 unambiguously reduces the areas A and B, and thus

reduces the number of loans and investments. Given any expected return R,

the students driven out by the increase in the interest rate are those with

relatively high repayment probabilities.

      Even at this early stage, we can show the market allocation is not fully

efficient. An investment should be made, from the viewpoint of the social

planner, if and only if the expected return R exceeds the opportunity cost p.

Those investments in area B are socially efficient and are undertaken, while

those in C are socially inefficient and are not undertaken. Vet those

investments in area D are socially efficient but not undertaken, and those

in area A are socially inefficient and are undertaken. No loan rate r can
                                             —7—

make both areas A and D disappear. Thus, no loan rate, including the market

equilibrium rate, can in general reach the first best allocation.

      The assumption of asymmetic information plays a key role here. As

already mentioned, a student invests if R >        Pr.     Using the equilibrium

condition (1), the investment condition is R >           (P/fl)p.   If there is no

information asymmetry regarding the default probability, then P =            if   and the

student invests if and only if his return is socially profitable (R >              p).      In

this case, the market reaches the fully efficient allocation even though R is

not publicly observable. If there is information asymmetry regarding P, then

low P investments are overly encouraged and high P investments are overly

discouraged.

      The repayment probability 11 as seen by banks is the average of P for

those students who invest, that is, for those in areas A and B. Thus, the

function relating r to 11 is


(2)     fl(r) =   E[   P R > Pr].

For any density f(P,R), the function 11(r) is a well-defined conditional

expectation.


                                 III. MARKET EQUILIBRIUM

      Equations (1) and (2) are the equilibrium two conditions. They

simultaneously determine the market loan rate r, from which we can infer the

decision of each potential student and, thereby, the average repayment

probability 11.        It is useful to illustrate the equilibrium conditions

graphically. Equation (1) defines a rectangular hyperbola, which is labelled
                                       —8-

LL in Figure II since it is determined by the required return of lenders.

     Equation (2) is labelled BB, since it is determined by the

optimizing reaction of borrowers. The shape of the BB curve is more

ambiguous. As r goes to zero, 11 approaches the unconditional expectation

E(P) <   1, since everyone borrows. As r goes to infinity, fl goes to zero as
long as R is bounded from above and f(P,R) is non-zero everywhere else. If R

were constant across borrowers, the BB curve would be monotonic; as r rises,

high P borrowers drop out of the market. In general both R and P vary and

the BB curve need not be monotonic.6

     The IL curve and the BB curve might not intersect, as in Figure III.

In this case, there is no equilibrium in which loans are made. At any

interest rate, the pool of students who seek loans is too risky to give the

banks their required return. I call this a "collapsed" credit market.

     The two curves may intersect more than once, as they do in Figure II.

If they do cross more than once, it seems reasonable to restrict attention

to the first intersection and to rule out any additional equilibrium as

not stable. To see why, consider point y in Figure II. If the economy

were at this point, both equilibrium conditions would be satisfied. But a

bank would have an incentive to lower its interest rate, say to r1. At r1,

the BB curve lies above the LL curve. The repayment probability II is thus

greater than necessary to give the bank its required return p. A bank can

therefore make a higher expected return by charging r1, which is below the

"market" rate ry. Similar reasoning shows that point x is a stable

equilibrium. At interest rates just above r, lenders earn a rate of return

above p, which causes a capital inflow and lowers the interest rate.
                                         -9-

Conversely, at interest rates below r, the repayment probability is too low

to give banks a return of p, which causes a capital outflow and raises the

interest rate. For these reasons, only the first crossing appears to be an

interesting equilibrium.

     It is possible that there are more than two crossing of the two curves.

If so, at the third (and every odd) crossing the BB curve cuts the LL curve

from below. Thus, the intersection is locally stable; that is, a bank could

not make a profit by a small reduction in its interest rate. The further

intersections, however, are not globally stable, since a bank could make a

large reduction in its interest rate and make positive profits. Hence, even

if there are multiple crossings, we should expect the economy to locate at

the first one.

     Strong unequivocal statements regarding the welfare properties of the

market equilibrium are impossible. As discussed above, if there is no

information asymmetry regarding P, the market reaches the first best

allocation. At other times, however, the market is grossly inefficient and

government intervention can enhance efficiency. To illustrate this

possibility, I examine a special case.


Example: Uniform Expected Return

     Suppose that the expected return R is constant across students. The

only unobserved heterogeneity is the repayment probability P.   In this case,

the market fails to reach the first best allocation.

    Since R is constant, either all the investments are socially efficient

or all are socially inefficient. If an equilibrium exists, then the invest-
                                           -10-

ments are socially efficient. That is, if the SB curve and the LL curve

interesect, then the expected return R exceeds the opportunity cost of capi-

tal p. This proposition is easy to prove. As discussed earlier, a student

borrows if and only if R >   Pr.   Averaging this inequality over the

investments undertaken shows R >   fir.    Since fir =   p,   we know R >   p.   Thus, if

R is an observable characteristic, then the unfettered market equilibrium

allows only socially productive investments.

     On the other hand, investments may be socially productive but not

undertaken in equilibrium. That is, it is possible the projects are

productive in the sense that R >   p,     but not all investments are undertaken.

An example most easily shows this proposition. Suppose P is uniformly

distributed from zero to one. Then equilibrium condition (2) becomes: Ii

for r<R, fl =   R/2r for r>R. The LL curve lies above the BB curve at all r,
unless R > 2p.     In this example, no equilibrium exists unless the expected

payment is twice the required payment. The unfettered market equilibrium may

leave profitable investment opportunities unrealized.



                          IV. GOVERNMENT CREDIT POLICY

     I now discuss the potential for efficient government intervention.

Imagine the market begin in the unregulated equilibrium. Let us consider the

effects of a small credit subsidy, which would reduce the market interest

rate r and shift leftward the upward sloping line in Figure I.

     This reduction in the interest rate has two effects. First, it reduces

the area D; some of those students with high returns and high repayment

probabilities who were previously not investing are now induced to invest.
                                          —11—

Second, it increases area A; some more students with low returns and low

repayment probabilities are induced to invest. The first effect is socially

beneficial while the second is socially harmful.

     A government loan guarantee is a special case of a subsidy. In

particular, under a guarantee program, the market rate becomes the risk-free

rate (r =   p);   that is, a loan guarantee is equivalent to a government loan at

the risk-free interest rate. At r =     p,   area 0 disappears, implying that all

socially productive investments are undertaken.

     To evaluate the net social impact of such a subsidy, one only needs to

know the distribution of attributes, f(P,R). It is not necessary for the

government to be able to distinguish the high return students from the low

return students. As the example below illustrates, it is possible that the

extra investment generated is on net socially optimal but is not undertaken

in the market equilibrium because it requires that fir <     p.
     Of course a government credit subsidy has a budgetary cost. While the

return from students to banks is fir, banks still require return p. The

difference is made up by the government. If the government must raise money

using distortionary taxes, then the deadweight losses are an additional cost

of the credit program. As with all expenditure programs, the marginal

benefit must exceed the marginal deadweight losses if the program is to be

socially efficient.

     Before turning to the example, a few general propositions regarding the

optimal interest rate r* can be established.       First, r* is never below the

risk-free return p; charging a lower rate would only induce inefficient

investment. Second, r* is generally strictly above the risk-free rate. To

see this, note that social welfare (ignoring the cost of raising revenue) is:
                                                       —12—


(3)     Social Welfare =          I 0 IPr    (R -    p) f(P,R) dR dP

The derivative of social welfare with respect to the interest rate r is:

                           1
(4)     d SW       =   I       —P(Pr   —
                                           p) f(P,Pr) dP
        dr
Evaluated at r = p, this derivative is non-negative and is strictly positive

as long as f(P,R) is everywhere non-zero. Thus, an efficient loan program

generally charges a loan rate greater than the risk-free rate.

      Third, depending on the density f(P,R), it is possible that the optimal

interest rate r* exceeds the unregulated equilibrium interest rate re. In

this case, the government would tax student loans to drive out borrowers with

low R and low P.7 While it is difficult to derive general conditions under

which r* >   re,       it is possible to examine the effect on social welfare of

small changes in the interest rate around re. In particular, at re the sign

of the dSW/dr is the same as the sign of dfl/dr.8 Hence, if the BB curve is

upward sloping at the equilibrium, then a small increase in the interest rate

is welfare-enhancing; conversely, if the BB curve is downward sloping at the

equilibrium, then a small decrease in the interest rate is welfare-enhancing.

In other words, if a small subsidy or tax is to increase social welfare, it

must increase the average repayment probability.


Example, continued

      Consider again the example of uniform expected returns. Suppose the

government provides a loan guarantee. The vertical line r = p replaces the

LL curve, as in Figure IV. This program clearly changes the nature of the

equilibrium. In particular, it is                   possible   that the guarantee program
                                                    —13-

creates a market, whereas without the program, no market existed, as in

Figure III.

      As already noted, under a guarantee program, all socially profitable

investments are undertaken. It is possible, though, that socially

unproductive investments are undertaken once the guarantee is provided. That

is, even if R <        p, those students for whom P < Rip choose to borrow and

invest. Of course, since R is known in this example, the government can

avoid this inefficiency by providing guarantees only if R >       p.
      The reason the government can so effectively correct the market failure

is that the government requires a different information set than private

lenders. To make a socially profitable loan, we only need to know that the

expected return R exceeds the required return p. The probability of

repayment P pj se is irrelevant to a social planner. (Remember that the

government program is not required to be revenue neutral.) Yet to private

lenders, the expected return on a project R j se is irrelevant, and the

repayment probability P is critically important. Hence, this example of

constant R may be the case in which the government can most easily improve on

the private allocation of credit.

      Under what conditions is the unfettered market least efficient? To

answer this question, I specialize the example further by supposing P is

uniformly distributed from P0 to P1. From (2) and straightforward

calculation, we can compute the equation f or the BB curve. It is


(5)   11 =   (P0   +   P1)/2    for 0 <   r   < R/P1


        =
             (P0 +     R/r)/2   for R/P1 <    r   < R/P0.
                                               -14-

The intersection of (1) and (5) determines the interest rate in an unfettered

equilibrium. When the solution is interior, the number of loans made is



        Loans —
              —   2—2(p/R)   .        1
(6)               2(p/R)-1         (P1/P0)—1


Note that the level of risk--P0 and P1-—is not relevant to the number of

loans made in equilibrium. Instead, the ratio Pj/P0 is the crucial

determinant. As P1/P0 increases, the number of loans made decreases. The

more heterogeneous are the borrowers in terms of their repayment

probabilities, the more severe is the market failure and the greater is the

benefit of government intervention.


                                 V. FINANCIAL COLLAPSE

      Let us now return to the unfettered market equilibrium and consider the

effects of an increase in the required rate of return p. This change shifts

the LL curve upward and to the right, as in Figure V. Not surprisingly, the

interest rate charged to these borrowers increases. As shown in Section II,

the number of students taking out loans declines. The effect on fl is in

general ambiguous, as the BB curve need not be downward sloping.

      An increase in the interest rate can have far more serious effects. It

is possible that a shift in the LL curve can make the equilibrium disappear.

Whereas at the lower interest rate, the economy is modeled as in Figure II,

at the higher interest rate, Figure III is the more appropriate

representation. Remember that the investment projects may still be socially

profitable at the new higher interest rate. Nonetheless, none of the

investors is able to raise the necessary capital.
                                         —15—

     An inward shift in the BB curve has the same effects as an increase in

the interest rate. A small increase in the riskiness of some of the

potential borrowers can cause the credit market for all of them to collapse,

even though there may be no change in the expected return of investment

projects R. Hence, small changes in risk perception can have large effects

upon the allocation of credit.

     One of the previous examples can usefully illustrate the model's

potential for financial collapse. Let R be constant and let P be uniformly

distributed from zero to one. Section III showed that no equilibrium exists

when p > R12.   At p <   R/2, all students borrow in the equilibrium. Figure VI
displays the surplus received from this market as a function of the safe

interest rate. At p < R/2, the surplus received is R -    p,   while at p > R/2,

no surplus is received, as no loans are made. Thus, at p = R/2, there is a

severe discontinuity. A small increase in the interest rate can cause the

disappearance of market for loans to these borrowers. The social cost of

this sudden financial collapse is potentially great and could reasonably

motivate the government to act as the lender of last resort.

     This potential for financial collapse has important macroeconomic

implications. In the textbook IS-UI model, restrictive monetary policy (or

any contractionary shift in the LII curve) reduces aggregate demand by

increasing the real interest rate. At this greater required rate of return,

some investments are no longer profitable. Thus, in the textbook model, a

monetary contraction precludes marginally productive investments. In this

alternative model of the allocation of credit, however, restictive monetary

policy can have more dramatic effects. The higher interest rate can cause
                                      —16—

 the collapse of the market to some borrowers, even though their projects may

 remain socially productive at the higher interest rate. A monetary

contraction can therefore have a large impact on the efficiency of the market

allocation of credit. It is possible that when the monetary authority induces

or allows a "credit crisis," government intervention on behalf of certain

borrowers is efficiency enhancing, even though these borrowers may require no

assistance under normal credit market conditions.


                               VI. CONCLUSIONS

     The Federal government has played a central role in the allocation of

credit among competing uses. This paper illustrates that this sort of

government program can under plausible conditions improve on the unfettered

market allocation. A necessary condition for efficient government

intervention is unobservable heterogeneity among would-be borrowers regarding

the probability of default. The greater is such heterogeneity, the greater

is the potential for efficient intervention.

      Historical examinations of financial markets (e.g., Kindleberger

[1978]) emphasize their propensity for instability and collapse. Our models

should therefore reflect this instability. If we are to understand the

effects of alternative monetary policies, for example, we must appreciate the

potential for financial crisis. At times, it may be efficient for the

government to remove some risk from the private sector by guaranteeing

certain financial arrangements or, equivalently, by acting as a lender of

last resort.


Harvard University

and National Bureau of Economic Research
                                      —17—

                                 REFERENCES


Akerlof, George, "The Market for 'Lemons': Qualitative Uncertainty and

     the Market Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics XXCIV (1970),

     488-500.

Bernanke, Ben, "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the

     Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review LXXIII

     (1983), 257—276.

Blinder, Alan S. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Money, Credit Constraints, and

     Economic Activity," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings

     LXXIII (1983), 297-302.

Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Report of the President 1982.

Jaf fee, Dwight and T. Russell, "Imperfect Information and Credit

     Rationing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, XC (1976), 651-656.

Kindleberger, Charles P., Manias, Panics, and Crashes, (New York: Basic

     Books, 1978).

Ordover, Janusz and Andrew Weiss, "Information and the Law: Evaluating

     Legal Restrictions on Competitive Contracts," American Economic

    Review Papers and Proceedings LXXI (1981), 399—404.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Review of

    Student Support Schemes in Selected OECD Countries, (Paris: OECD, 1978).

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with

     Imperfect Information," American Economic Review LXXI (1981), 393-410.
                                      -18-




NOTES


1.   See, for example, Akerloff (1970], Jaffee and Russell [1976],

Stiglitz and Weiss (1981], Ordover and Weiss (1981], Bernanke (1983], and

Blinder and Stiglitz [1983].


2.   For example, the 1982 Economic Report of the President (p. 94], after

noting that the Federal Government was involved in 21.4 percent of all funds

advanced in U.S. credit markets in fiscal year 1982, presents the standard

evaluation of this credit activity:


         Increasingly, therefore, political judgements, rather than

         marketplace judgements, have been responsible for allocating

         the supply of credit. As the discipline of the marketplace

         is replaced by the political process, less efficient economic

         activities are financed, and productivity in the economy

         declines.


3.   I assume that lenders can freely enter from and exit into a risk-free

asset, such as Treasury bills.



4.   In such a model, R is the expected payout while 1-P is the probability

that the payout is in the tail of the distribution in which default occurs.

Without further structure, there is no necessary connection between the two

variables.
                                         —19-

5.   The discussion in the text assumes A is the same for all students. If A

varies and is not observable by the bank, then this uncertainty would enter

the analysis as does uncertainty regarding P.     If A varies, is observable,

and is potentially informative regarding P and R, then we could consider a

continuum of credit markets indexed by A; the analysis of each would proceed

as in the text.


6.   Even if P and R are independently distributed, the BB curve can be

upward sloping in parts. For example, suppose R takes on the values 1.0 and

3.0 each with probability i, and P takes on the values 0.5 and 1.0 each with

probability        Then the equation for the BB curve is:

         11   =   3/4   for   0<r<1
                  2/3   for   1<r<2
                  3/4   for   2<r<3
                  1/2   for   3<r<6
When r increases from just below 2 to just above 2, 1! increases as well.


7.   Suppose f(P,R) is (1, 2p) with probability      and (1/3, 2p/3) with

probability       The equilibrium interest rate is r = 3p/2, in which case both

types borrow. An increase in the interest rate would drive out the low

return students before the high return students.


8.   This result is established by evaluating (4) at r =    p/fl   and comparing to

the derivative of fl(r). The intuition is that TI'(r) conveys the P for the

marginal borrowers relative to IT and therefore whether they have too little

or too great an incentive to borrow.
             Figure I


    Area of Investment




P




1                        'I



        -I




    p                    r        R
               r0             1
                      Figure II



             Market Equilibrium


TI




             L
 1


                 x
     B




         I
                                               L




                 r                r       r    r
                  x                   1    y
                Figure III



         A Collapsed Credit Market

II




         L




     B


                                     L




                                         r
                       Figure IV




     Equilibrium with Government Loan at Risk—free Rate



TI




                                                     r
                 Figure V


     An Increase in the Interest Rate




II




                               B




                                        r
                      Figure VI


      Surplus as a Function of the Interest Rate




., t.A.LjJ.L I.4




                                  I
                                  I
           0
                              R/2                  p
