                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 EFFECTS OF MEDICARE PAYMENT REFORM:
EVIDENCE FROM THE HOME HEALTH INTERIM AND PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEMS

                                           Peter J. Huckfeldt
                                              Neeraj Sood
                                             José J Escarce
                                          David C. Grabowski
                                          Joseph P. Newhouse

                                         Working Paper 17870
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17870


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2012




 The authors wish to acknowledge the role of Melinda Beeuwkes Buntin at the outset of this project.
 This study was funded in part by National Institute of Aging (NIA) Grant R01-AG031260 and a grant
 (No. R01-HS018541) from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The authors thank Mark
 Totten for his excellent programming support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
 and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
 Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17870.ack

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2012 by Peter J. Huckfeldt, Neeraj Sood, José J Escarce, David C. Grabowski, and Joseph P. Newhouse.
 All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
 permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Medicare Payment Reform: ¸˛Evidence from the Home Health Interim and Prospective
Payment Systems
Peter J. Huckfeldt, Neeraj Sood, José J Escarce, David C. Grabowski, and Joseph P. Newhouse
NBER Working Paper No. 17870
February 2012
JEL No. H42,I1

                                           ABSTRACT

Medicare continues to implement payment reforms that shift reimbursement from fee-for-service towards
episode-based payment, affecting average and marginal reimbursement. We contrast the effects of
two reforms for home health agencies. The Home Health Interim Payment System in 1997 lowered
both types of reimbursement; our conceptual model predicts a decline in the likelihood of use and
costs, both of which we find. The Home Health Prospective Payment System in 2000 raised average
but lowered marginal reimbursement with theoretically ambiguous effects; we find a modest increase
in use and costs. We find little substantive effect of either policy on readmissions or mortality.


Peter J. Huckfeldt                                David C. Grabowski
RAND Corporation                                  Harvard University
Santa Monica, California                          Department of Health Care Policy
Peter_Huckfeldt@rand.org                          Harvard Medical School
                                                  180 Longwood Avenue
Neeraj Sood                                       Boston, MA 02115
Department of Clinical Pharmacy                   grabowski@med.harvard.edu
USC School of Pharmacy
1985 Zonal Avenue                                 Joseph P. Newhouse
Los Angeles, CA 90033                             Division of Health Policy Research and Education
and NBER                                          Harvard University
nsood@usc.edu                                     180 Longwood Avenue
                                                  Boston, MA 02115-5899
José J Escarce                                    and NBER
UCLA Med-GIM-HSR                                  newhouse@hcp.med.harvard.edu
911 Broxton Avenue
Box 951736
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
jescarce@mednet.ucla.edu
1. Introduction
         With the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(ACA), policymakers face the challenge of minimizing health care costs while
maintaining or improving quality of care. One prominent approach shifts provider
reimbursement from fee-for-service to episode-based payments to improve
efficiency and accountability. For example, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare
Services is currently piloting programs that provide a fixed payment for an acute
hospital stay and any subsequent post-acute care (CMS 2011). However, these
reforms require an appropriate definition of a treatment "episode" and
understanding the effects of alternate reimbursement rules.
         How can prior experience with payment change inform the current efforts
to reform Medicare reimbursement? The Medicare home health benefit has
transitioned through multiple reimbursement regimes and thus provides an
excellent laboratory to study the influence of marginal and average
reimbursement changes on home health admissions, provider costs, and Medicare
costs.
         In 1983, in an attempt to curtail rapidly increasing inpatient hospital costs,
Medicare instituted the Inpatient Prospective Payment System, which provides a
single payment for the inpatient stay, based on principal diagnosis, complications
and comorbidities, procedure use, and local wages. However, post-acute services
including home health care were still reimbursed on a cost basis subject to upper
limits. As a result, admissions, patient visits, and resource use skyrocketed in
home health agencies, resulting in Medicare home health expenditures increasing
from $2 billion in 1987 to $17 billion in 1997 (MedPAC 2002).
         In the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (BBA 1997), Congress responded to
spiraling post-acute care use by mandating prospective payment systems for post-
acute care. Because a workable system for home health agencies was not
available, the Congress mandated the almost immediate adoption of an "Interim




                                           2
Payment System" (IPS) in October 1997. The IPS imposed substantially lower
limits on Medicare reimbursement to home health agencies. It reduced average
payments per visit and effectively eliminated marginal reimbursement past the
limits. Subsequently, Medicare devised a home health agency prospective
payment system (PPS) that provided reimbursement for each 60-day home health
episode as a function of patients' clinical status, functional status, and service use
(MedPAC 2010a). The PPS, implemented in October 2000, increased average
payments to home health agencies, but, by some metrics, marginal reimbursement
within a 60-day home health episode was further reduced1.
          A number of papers examine the impacts of the Home Health IPS and PPS
on payments, costs, and patient outcomes. Previous research has shown that the
IPS reduced both the probability of using home health and the number of visits
per patient (McCall et al. 2001, 2003b, McKnight 2006, MedPAC 2010a). This
decrease in utilization was concentrated in less healthy Medicare patients but had
little to no effect on adverse health outcomes (McKnight 2006). Additionally,
over 30 percent of home health agencies exited after the IPS (MedPAC 2010b).
Exiting facilities had a higher intensity of visits per patient, while newer and
smaller providers in more competitive markets were able to expand their market
share (Porel et al. 2006). Research on the PPS is more limited, but finds a greater
use of therapy relative to home health aide visits, with little overall effect on
patient outcomes or quality of care (Schlenker et al. 2005, MedPAC 2010b).
          In this paper, we contribute to the previous literature by contrasting the
Home Health IPS and PPS in a single unified framework, contrasting their
differing effects on marginal and average reimbursement. We describe a
conceptual framework that models home health agencies’ admission and
treatment policies as a function of Medicare reimbursement policy and provides

!"There are outlier payments for exceptionally costly patients, per visit payments for "short stay" outliers, and
until 2008 agencies received additional payment for providing 10 or more rehabilitation visits.




                                                       3
separate predictions for the IPS and the PPS. We develop an empirical strategy
that simulates changes in admissions and resource use after each policy shift for a
constant cohort of patients, thereby controlling for patient selection or changes in
the composition of patients over time. Additionally, we estimate admission and
treatment functions for a single cohort of patients, and use the estimates to
simulate admission probabilities and resource use for successive patient cohorts to
isolate selection effects. We also investigate the impacts of each policy on patient
outcomes including mortality and hospital readmission. Finally, we estimate
heterogeneous effects on admissions and costs based on differential changes in
Medicare payments to further gauge the relative importance of average and
marginal reimbursement. Throughout our empirical analysis, we use a rich dataset
comprised of 100 percent Medicare acute and post-acute claims, denominator
files, and provider data over the period 1996 through 2002.
       Our conceptual model predicts that home health agencies’ admissions and
resource use will decrease with the IPS, but shows that the PPS has ambiguous
effects due to offsetting changes in marginal and average reimbursement. Our
estimates confirm that the IPS substantially decreased Medicare payments. We
show that this decline in average and marginal reimbursement led to a sharp
decline in home health admissions and resource use conditional on admission. In
contrast, while the PPS increased average payments to providers above pre-IPS
levels (in nominal terms), admissions and resource use conditional on admission
increased only marginally. In both cases, we find little evidence of an effect on
mortality or readmissions. We find heterogeneous effects on costs that vary with
differential changes in average payments. Overall our results suggest that
providers are responsive to both marginal and average reimbursement in
determining treatment intensity and admissions, however changes in resource use
and admissions induced by these payment changes had little impact on the patient
health outcomes.




                                          4
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on home
health agencies and changes in reimbursement policy. Section 3 discusses our
conceptual framework. Section 4 describes the data, section 5 discusses the
empirical strategy, section 6 describes the results, and section 7 concludes.


2. The Home Health IPS and PPS
       Home health agencies provide skilled nursing, physical therapy, nurse
aide, and medical social work services to Medicare beneficiaries who are unable
to leave their homes without difficulty. In 2008, 3.2 million fee-for-service
patients received the home-health benefit, resulting in $17 billion in Medicare
home health expenditures (MedPAC 2010b).
       In 1983, the Medicare inpatient prospective payment system was
implemented, providing a single payment to providers for an acute care episode as
a function of patients' principal diagnosis, procedures used, complications and
comorbidities, and adjustments based on local labor market conditions. At the
same time, Medicare home health reimbursement was still cost-based (as were
other post-acute settings), with limits based on the lower of an average cost per
visit or total "reasonable costs" (Grimaldi 2002). Acute care length-of-stay
steadily decreased in the years immediately following the acute PPS, with little
immediate change in post-acute use. Court decisions in the late 1980s, however,
held certain regulations governing eligibility for post-acute services to be illegal.
Subsequently acute providers "unbundled" the marginal day from the acute
inpatient episode and moved it to a post-acute setting, thereby receiving marginal
reimbursement from Medicare. Indeed, the early 1990s saw explosive growth in
hospital-based post-acute units and post-acute care use more generally (Newhouse
2002). Between 1987 and 1997, the number of Medicare patients using home
health services doubled, the number of visits per patient increased from 23 to 78,




                                          5
and, as mentioned above, Medicare spending on home health services grew from
$2 billion to $17 billion (Grimaldi 2002, MedPAC 2002).
       Congress and Medicare responded to ballooning post-acute expenditures
by mandating prospective payment systems for all types of post-acute care in the
Balanced Budget Act of 1997, but also immediately imposed the Home Health
Interim Payment System (IPS). For home health agencies that had entered the
market after 1994 the IPS imposed a per-patient cap on visits equal to national
median per-patient costs. For older facilities, the limit was a weighted average of
census division per-patient costs (25%) and agency specific per-patient costs
(75%) in 1994 (McKnight 2006). Additionally, services previously contracted out
were subject to these limits (Grimaldi 2002). Finally, the IPS also targeted
fraudulent practices by home health providers.
       The Home Health IPS was meant to be a temporary measure to contain
home health costs, and, as called for in the law, a prospective payment system for
home health was implemented October 1, 2000. The Home Health PPS provided
prospective rates for a 60-day episode based on patients' home health resource
group. The home health resource group was defined by clinical, functional, and
service utilization attributes, based on nurse assessments (Grimaldi 2002).
       Figure 1 shows average Medicare reimbursement per-home health patient
separately for patients discharged from the hospital with a primary diagnosis of
stroke, hip fracture, and joint replacement. The first vertical line indicates the
quarter prior to the Home Health IPS and the second vertical line indicates the
quarter prior to the Home Health PPS. This figure shows that the IPS
considerably decreased average Medicare reimbursement for home health
patients, while the PPS increased average reimbursement to above pre-IPS levels
(in nominal terms). Marginal reimbursement, however, was further reduced
under the PPS. The independent trajectories of average and marginal payments




                                          6
under the IPS and PPS allow us to investigate the separate effects of marginal
versus average reimbursement on admissions and resource use.


3. Conceptual Framework
       In this paper, we are interested in providers' decisions to admit patients
and the level of treatment given to patients conditional on admission as a function
of both average and marginal reimbursement. We use a conceptual model,
developed by Sood et al. (2011), drawing on previous models by Hodgkin and
McGuire (1994) and Ellis and McGuire (1996). Hodgkin and McGuire model
providers' treatment policy as a function of marginal and average payments,
where providers increase treatment intensity to attract new patients when they
become more profitable. Ellis and McGuire explicitly model providers' admission
and treatment policies as a function of reimbursement, although they do not
distinguish between average or marginal reimbursement changes. In contrast, we
explicitly model providers' admissions and treatment policies as a function of both
marginal and average reimbursement.
       Consider a non-profit home health agency that has to choose between
j=1... N patients to admit for home health services. The provider chooses an
admissions policy that determines the probability of admitting patient j (p) and a
treatment policy that determines treatment intensity (c) for patient j, as a function
of a fixed payment per patient (a) and marginal reimbursement (m) for additional
services.
       The provider maximizes the utility function, as in (1):
               !"#!"#!!!! !!!! ! !!!!!! ! !! !                        (1)
with expected profits as in (2),
                          !
               ! ! !      !!! !!   !!! ! !! ! ! !! !!!                (2)
The first order condition for the admissions decision is given in (3):




                                           7
                  !! !!!!! ! !!! !!! ! !! ! ! !! !                     (3)
Equation (3) implies that providers choose an admission policy such that the
marginal utility of an increase in admission probability for a patient j equals the
change in profits from admitting the patient times the marginal utility of profits.
Equation (3) also implies that any patient j that is profitable (taking c as fixed)
will be admitted, assuming no capacity constraints. Any reduction in marginal
reimbursement (m) or the fixed payment (a) will decrease the profitability of
patient j and lower j’s probability of home health admission. This condition
predicts that the Home Health IPS, characterized by a reduction in both a and m,
would reduce admissions.
        A for-profit agency is assumed to take all patients for whom E(!) is
positive if there are no capacity constraints. If there are such constraints, the
provider takes the most profitable patients until the constraint is binding. Like the
nonprofit case, decreases in a or m will render some marginal patients
unprofitable.
        The Home Health PPS, however, was characterized by an increase in a
fixed payment per 60-day episode, which increased average reimbursement, and a
decrease in marginal reimbursement (for 5 or more visits in an episode m =0).
Thus, the model offers ambiguous general predictions on the impact of the PPS on
patient volume.
        Equation (4) shows the first order condition determining the nonprofit
provider's treatment. We assume that an increase in c attracts more patients and
that the added patients are drawn at random from the same distribution as existing
patients.
                        !! !!!! ! !!! !! ! !! ! ! ! !" !" !                    (4)
This condition implies that providers choose intensity for patient j such that the
marginal utility of intensity is equal to the change in profits times the marginal




                                           8
utility of profits. Profits change for two reasons. First, increasing intensity
reduces profits as long as marginal reimbursement is less than one. Second,
increasing intensity increases profits due to an increase in demand or admissions
as long as the marginal patient is profitable. A for-profit agency will choose c to
attract profitable patients subject to a capacity constraint (or a population
constraint on profitable patients). Equation (4) shows that marginal
reimbursement and treatment intensity are positively related. An increase in
average reimbursement increases profits, decreasing the marginal utility of
profits; as a result, average reimbursement and treatment intensity are also
positively related. Any competition from other post-acute providers strengthens
this relationship. Thus, this condition predicts that the IPS would lead to lower
treatment intensity, as marginal and average reimbursement decreased. Again, this
condition offers ambiguous predictions for the PPS. The increase in average
reimbursement offsets the decrease in marginal reimbursement, leading to
ambiguous effects on treatment intensity.


4. Data
       We use two separate samples of patients for analyses of the Home Health
IPS and PPS. The sample for the IPS includes patients discharged from acute care
between January 1996 and June 1999. The IPS was implemented in October 1997,
so this provides seven quarters of discharges before and after the IPS. The sample
for the PPS includes patients discharged from acute care between January 1999
and June 2002. The PPS was implemented in October 2000, so this again provides
seven quarters of acute discharges before and after the PPS.




                                          9
          The sample consists of patients whose principal diagnosis at acute
admission was stroke, lower extremity joint replacement, or hip fracture2. The
units of analysis are individual acute discharges, where outcomes are measured
over the initial acute stay plus a fixed episode period following the acute
discharge. Our main analysis uses a post-acute episode length of 90 days; thus,
any acute admission occurring during the 90 days following the acute discharge is
labeled an acute readmission. 3 We link a number of data sources to construct the
covariates and outcomes variables used in our analysis. In this section we
describe the construction of the measures used in the analysis.
a. Medicare Payment and Costs
          We use the Medicare FFS claims data linked to data from Medicare cost
reports to construct the key payment (i.e. Medicare reimbursement) and cost
measures. The Medicare claims data include 100 percent Medicare standard
analytic files (SAF) for home health agency claims linked with 100 percent
MEDPAR data for acute hospital, inpatient rehabilitation facility, and long term
care hospital claims from January 1996 to June 2002. We define home health
reimbursement for each observation as total Medicare payments to home health
agencies occurring within a 90-day post-acute episode following an initial acute
care discharge. To measure costs, we multiply the number of visits during a 90-
day post-acute episode by a facility's cost per visit (for a given calendar year)
obtained from Medicare cost reports.

2
   Stroke patients are defined as those with a principal diagnosis in the acute hospital stay of intracerebral
hemorrhage (diagnosis code 431.xx), occlusion and stenosis of precerebral arteries with infarction (433.x1),
occlusion of cerebral arteries with infarction (434.x1), or acute but ill-de!ned cerebrovascular disease
(436.xx). Hip fracture patients are defined as patients with a primary diagnosis of fractures of the neck or the
femur (820.xx). Lower extremity joint replacement patients were defined as patients with a primary diagnosis
for joint replacement, excluding hip fracture patients and patients with reattachment procedures.
"
3
  Longer post-acute episodes may capture later unrelated readmissions and subsequent costs, whereas shorter
episodes may miss related costs, readmissions, and patient outcome. In analyses not reported, we examine the
sensitivity of the results to differing post-acute episode lengths and find similar results.




                                                      10
b. Patient Characteristics
          We use information from the acute claims files and enrollment files to
measure patient characteristics. For each patient, we collect (and control for) the
list of comorbidities developed by Elixhauser et al. (1998)4. We use information
from Medicare enrollment files to describe patient demographics including
gender, age (indicators for five-year bands), race, and whether the patient lives in
a MSA, adjacent to a MSA, or in a rural area. We also control for whether
patients are dual eligibles (i.e. receive Medicaid due to low-income).
c. Health Outcomes
          Our primary health outcome is mortality at the end of a 90-day episode,
measured from the Medicare denominator or enrollment file. We also measure
readmissions to acute care within the 90-day post-acute episode using the claims
data.
d. Provider characteristics
          Our analysis also controls for the characteristics of discharging acute
providers (i.e., hospitals), as these may influence post-acute care. We derive
information on the Medicare percentage of patient days in the previous year from
providers’ cost reports to CMS. We use the Medicare Provider of Services file (a
provider level database maintained by CMS) to determine the ownership status of
a particular facility (government, non-profit, or for profit) and the size of a facility
(average daily census and number of beds). We use information from the Acute
Impact file on average daily census, teaching status (acute resident to average
daily census ratio), and low-income (Disproportionate Share-DSH) patient
percentage as additional controls.

4
  Comorbidities include AIDS, alcoholism, deficiency anemias, rheumatoid arthritis/ collagen vascular
diseases, blood loss anemia, congestive heart failure, chronic pulmonary disease, coagulopathy, depression,
diabetes with chronic complications, diabetes without chronic complications, drug abuse, hypothyroidism,
liver disease, lymphoma, fluid and electrolyte disorders, metastatic cancer, other neurologic disorders,
obesity, paralysis, peripheral vascular disease, psychoses, pulmonary circulation disease, renal failure, solid
tumor without metastasis, peptic ulcer disease excluding bleeding, valvular disease, and weight loss. "




                                                      11
          Our IPS base sample consists of 980,905, 727,941, and 864,664 episodes
of care for stroke, hip fracture, and joint replacement. We dropped one percent of
stroke episodes, two percent of hip fracture episodes, and one percent of joint
replacement episodes due to missing cost information and other missing data.
Our PPS base sample includes 908,706, 702,137, and 948,938 episodes of care for
stroke, hip fracture, and joint replacement. We dropped one percent of
observations for each condition due to missing data. Summary statistics spanning
the entire sample period (from 1996 q1 through 2002 q2) are displayed in Table 1.


5. Empirical Approach
          Within a home health agency unconditional costs (i.e., across all acute
discharges whether or not admitted to an home health agency) can change after a
reimbursement change either because of changes in the probability of being
admitted (p) or changes in costs conditional on being admitted (c). In addition, the
probability of being admitted and conditional costs are both functions of
individual characteristics (x).
          After payment reform, changes in admission probabilities originate from
the admission policies of home health agencies for a given patient (the shift from
p pre to p post in equation 7) and from changes in the composition of individuals
discharged from acute care hospitals (the shift from x pre to x post in equation 7) 5.
                   !"#$           !"#
          !!!!! ! !!!!  ! !"#$ ! !!!! ! !"#                                    (7)
          The goal of our empirical strategy is to disentangle admission policy
changes from shifts in the composition of acute discharges. Equation (7) can be
rewritten as in (8):
         !"#$          !"#                            !"#$           !"#$
!!!!! ! !!!!  ! !"# ! !!!! ! !"#                   ! !!!!  ! !"#$ ! !!!!  ! !"#                    (8)


#"Cost sharing for patients did not change so changes in admission probabilities are unlikely to change from
the patient side.




                                                     12
The first term in equation (8) represents the admission policy effect - changes in
the probability of admission holding the acute discharge cohort constant. The
second term in (8) represents the composition effect - changes in the probability
of admission from changes in the characteristics of individuals discharged from
acute care hospitals, holding admission policies constant.
       We separately estimate the "admission policy" and "composition" effects
in equation (8). First, we model home health admissions in each quarter of the
data as a function of health, demographic, provider, and geographic
characteristics described in the data section above using a probit model, for each
quarter q of our data in the pre and post policy change periods, as in (9).
       !"#$ ! !"#$$% ! !! !! ! ! !!! ! ! ! ! !! !                 (9)
The separate estimates of " and # for each quarter are then used to construct an
"admission simulator." We apply the coefficient estimates from each quarter to a
constant cohort of acute-care discharges: for the IPS this quarter is the first
quarter of 1996, for the PPS this cohort is from the first quarter of 1999. We
create a synthetic panel of simulated admission probabilities, such that the sample
is held constant and only the policy rules (as a function of observable
characteristics) change.
       We then estimate interrupted time-series models as in (10), regressing
projected home health probabilities on a linear quarterly trend and indicator
variables for the seven quarters following each policy change.
               !!"! ! ! ! !"#$%&'% !       !
                                           !!! !! !"#$!   ! !!"         (10)
The estimates of " represent average differences (relative to the counterfactual
quarterly time trend) in simulated admissions in each quarter after the policy
change for the base cohort.
      !
       To estimate the "composition" effect, we apply the "admissions simulator"
from the last quarter of each sample (representing the post-IPS/PPS admissions
policy) to each successive cohort of acute discharges. We then estimate equation




                                          13
(10), but this time the estimates of " represent changes in admissions stemming
from changes in the composition of patients discharged from acute hospitals.
       Next, we examine changes in costs of patients seen in home health
                        !
agencies. Changes in costs can change based on home health agencies’ treatment
policies (the shift from c pre to c post to in equation 11), and from changes in the
composition of patients in home health agencies (the shift from x pre to x post in
equation 11).
                         !"#$ !"#$    !"#
                !!!!! ! !!!! !     ! !!!! ! !"#                                (11)
        Our goal is to disentangle treatment policy changes from shifts in the
composition of patients seen in home health agencies. Equation (11) can be
equivalently rewritten as in (12):
         !"#$          !"#                 !"#$           !"#$
!!!!! ! !!!!  ! !"# ! !!!! ! !"#        ! !!!!  ! !"#$ ! !!!!  ! !"#           (12)
The first portion of equation (12) represents changes in costs in home health
agencies due to changes in treatment policy, and the second portion represents
changes in costs due to changes in the composition of patients seen in home
health agencies (i.e. the selection effect).
        We separately estimate treatment and selection effects. First, we model
costs incurred by home health agencies as a function of individual, provider, and
geographic characteristics (the same as those used for modeling admission
policies) for home health agencies patients separately for each quarter using OLS,
as in (13).
                                !"#$#!! ! ! ! ! ! ! !!                         (13)
The separate estimates of " and " for each quarter are then used to create a
"treatment simulator," projecting costs in each quarter of the sample (pre and
post- reimbursement policy change) for a fixed cohort of home health patients.
               !      !
We then estimate an interrupted time series model, as in (14). The subsequent "
estimates can then be used to trace out changes in conditional costs due solely to

                                                                       !



                                           14
changes in treatment policy, isolated from changes in home health agencies’
patient composition from selection.
                       !!"! ! ! ! !"#$%&'% !     !
                                                 !!! !! !"#$!   ! !!"         (14)
To estimate the "selection" effect, we apply a treatment simulator from a single
and constant quarter to each successive cohort of home health patients. These
projected costs only demonstrate changes due to selection, as the treatment
simulator is held constant. We estimate models like that in (14), but this time the
coefficient estimates indicate changes in costs coming from selection.
       Changes in admission and treatment policies in home health agencies
could potentially impact acute readmissions and patient health outcomes. We use
a similar empirical strategy to examine effects on readmission probabilities and
patient health outcomes. In a sensitivity analysis, we examine differences in
home health admissions, costs, and outcomes between hospital service areas
experiencing larger and smaller payment changes after the IPS, similar to that in
McKnight (2006).
       Finally, we investigate heterogeneous changes in costs and admission
probabilities across patients with heterogeneous changes in payments. For this,
we again create a synthetic panel and regress changes in projected home health
costs or admissions (as a function of observable characteristics) on changes in
home health payments before and after each payment reform.


6. Results
       Our results section proceeds as follows. First we examine the effects of
payment reforms on Medicare payments to home health agencies, home health
agency costs, and admissions. Next, we examine effects on acute readmissions
and health outcomes. We perform sensitivity analyses comparing changes in
outcomes in hospital service areas with larger and smaller changes in payment
after the IPS. Finally, we investigate the presence of heterogeneous effects of the




                                         15
IPS and the PPS on home health agency costs and admissions by patients with
differential changes in average payments.
6.1. Effects of IPS and PPS on home health payments, costs, and admissions
       We begin by graphically examining the effects of reimbursement policy
changes. Figure 2 shows treatment and admission policy effects of the IPS and
PPS for stroke patients. In each case, the solid line represents the mean
"simulated" value for each quarter in the synthetic panel, where the patient cohort
includes patients from the first quarter of 1996 (for the IPS) or the first quarter of
1999 (for the PPS) and outcomes are simulated for each subsequent quarter, using
quarter-specific probit estimates for admission probabilities or OLS estimates for
payments and costs. This approach allows us to focus on change due solely to
changes in treatment and admissions policies (as a function of patients' observable
characteristics), as opposed to changes in the composition of patients in home
health agencies or composition of patients discharged from acute care. The
dashed line represents a quarterly linear time trend estimated in the pre-policy
change period, representing the counterfactual trend in the post-policy change
period. Finally, the dotted line represents actual average outcomes in each quarter.
Payments
       Figure 2a traces out home health payments before and after the IPS
implementation. After remaining constant over the pre-IPS period, average home
health payments fell substantially after the IPS, from over $2,800 to under $2,200
for stroke patients. In contrast, after the Home Health PPS average Medicare
payments to home health agencies for stroke patients increased considerably
relative to the pre-reform trend (Figure 2b). Table 2a, Panel 1 displays estimates
from regressing simulated payments on indicators for the first seven quarters after
the IPS and the PPS, controlling for a quarterly trend. By the second year after the
IPS, payments were reduced by approximately $750; after the PPS, payments had
increased by a similar amount. Tables 2b and c present IPS and PPS payment




                                          16
effects for hip fracture and joint patients and exhibit larger PPS effects relative to
the IPS effects.
Costs
Figures 2c and 2d show costs simulated in each quarter for a constant cross-
section of home health patients before and after the IPS and PPS. Figure 2c shows
a reduction in costs after the IPS, from over $3,000 in the first quarter of 1997 to
under $2,600 at the end of 1999, mirroring the decline in average payments to
home health providers in Figure 2a. However, while average payments increased
after the PPS, costs increased only a marginal amount relative to the
counterfactual trend (in Figure 2d). Table 2a, Section 2 shows this in greater
detail. Although the decrease in costs after the IPS was comparable to the
decrease in average payment, the increase in costs after the PPS was only around
1/3 of the increase in payments for stroke patients. Table 2b exhibits similar
patterns for hip fracture. In Table 2c, increases in resource use for joint
replacement placement after the PPS are larger in magnitude than post-IPS
decreases, but still small in proportion to the increase in home health payments.
Admissions
        Figures 2e and 2f show admissions over the simulated panel. The
probability of using home health services decreased by over 6 percentage points
after the IPS, again coinciding with the decrease in Medicare reimbursement.
However, home health admissions actually decreased further after the PPS for
stroke patients, despite the increased average generosity towards home health
agencies. Similar patterns are exhibited for hip fracture and joint replacement
patients in Tables 2 b and c, Section 3.
        Figure 2 and Table 2 show that the IPS and PPS had similar magnitude
effects on Medicare payments to home health agencies (with the IPS reducing and
the PPS increasing payments); however, while the IPS substantially decreased
home health costs and probability of use, the PPS led to smaller increases in costs




                                           17
and actually decreased use of home health (for the tracer conditions in our
sample). These asymmetries may be due to the change in marginal reimbursement
under these systems. The IPS decreased both average and marginal
reimbursement, while the PPS increased average reimbursement but further
decreased marginal reimbursement. These results show the relative importance of
average and marginal reimbursement in determining providers' admissions and
treatment policies. Although we do not quantify the reduction in marginal
reimbursement after the PPS, it may have offset the increased Medicare
generosity in determining costs and visits per patient, and more than offset
increased payments in the determination of home health agencies’ admission
policies for stroke, hip fracture, and joint replacement patients.
Selection
       Home health costs could also change due to selection; that is, the
composition of patients using home health services could change with
reimbursement policy. Similarly, the probability of home health use could change
with the composition of patients discharged from acute care hospitals. As
explained above, we examine selection by estimating OLS and probit regressions
expressing costs and probability of home health use as a function of patient,
provider, and geographical characteristics in the last quarter of each sample (1999
q2 for the IPS, 2002 q2 for the PPS), and then applying these coefficient estimates
to each home health patient cohort and acute hospital discharge cohort to simulate
home health costs and admissions (respectively). In this case, treatment and
admission policies are held constant, but the cohorts differ. Thus, changes in costs
and admissions are attributable to changes in patient composition. However,
Figure 3 (and the similarity between actual and simulated outcomes in Figure 2)
implies that changes in patient composition had small effects on Medicare
reimbursement, home health costs, and home health admissions for stroke patients




                                          18
after both the IPS and the PPS. Table 3 shows similarly small effects across
stroke, hip fracture, and joint replacement patients.
        These results imply that little “cream skimming” based on observable
characteristics occurred in home health agencies. However, if there were
changing unobservable characteristics, then our treatment and admission policy
estimates may also reflect such selection. However, given the fact that we observe
little selection occurring based on observable characteristics suggests that
unobservable characteristics, which are likely correlated with observable
characteristics, also stay constant over this period.
        In Appendix Figure 1, we examine changes in patient composition more
directly by plotting the fraction of home health patients with three or more
comorbidities versus no comorbidities, and two or more complications versus
zero complications6. We find smooth trends (with some seasonality) in these
outcomes in each quarter over the sample period, with little obvious change after
either reform.
        The estimates thus far have examined changes in composition occurring
within tracer conditions. Next, we investigate the changes in composition
occurring across tracer conditions. Appendix Figure 2 plots the relative fractions
of hip fracture, stroke, and joint replacement patients in home health agencies and
implies increases in joint replacement patients relative to hip and stroke patients.
We present selection estimates in Figure 4 and Table 3d that pool acute
discharges and home health patients across the three tracer conditions, and thus

6
  Complications are from the preceding acute stay and may include post-operative
pulmonary compromise; post-operative gastrointestinal hemorrhage; cellulitis or
decubitus ulcer; septicemia; pneumonia; mechanical complications due to a device,
implant, or graft; shock or arrest in the hospital; post-operative myocardial infarction;
post-operative cardiac abnormalities other than AMI; procedure-related perforation or
laceration; venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism; acute renal failure;
miscellaneous complications; delirium; and dementia (a selection of complications
pertinent to post-acute care utilization selected from Iezzoni (1994)).




                                             19
exhibit changes in costs and admissions reflecting changes in composition both
within and across tracer conditions. These estimates show only small changes in
costs and admissions (of mixed direction and statistical significance), implying
minimal changes in costs or admissions from changes in composition across
tracer conditions among acute discharges and home health patients.
6.2. Effects of IPS and PPS on acute readmissions and mortality
         Reductions in home health costs and admissions may have impacts on
patient health outcomes. To examine this, we estimate the impact of the IPS and
PPS on acute readmissions within 90 days following acute discharge. Because we
found little evidence of changes in costs or admissions stemming from patient
composition, we only simulate changes in outcomes for a constant cohort of
patients. Specifically, we estimate the probability of death or readmission in each
quarter as a function of observable characteristics, and project the coefficient
estimates from each quarter to a constant patient cohort. Figure 5 plots simulated
acute readmissions and mortality (within a 90 day post-acute episode in each
case) for stroke patients before and after the IPS and PPS. In Tables 4 and 5,
reflecting the seasonality of these measures, we regress simulated outcomes on
indicators for calendar quarter, calendar quarter interacted with “POST” reform
indicators, and a linear time trend. The figures show little change in patient
outcomes after each reform. While the POST-quarter interactions are often
statistically significant, they are small in magnitude and in conflicting directions.
While these estimates suggest that there was little effect of either home health
payment reform on mortality and readmissions, we cannot rule out effects on
more intermediate outcomes such as functional status that we are unable to
measure in our data. However, large effects on functional status may be unlikely
given the strong association between functional status and mortality (Scott et al.
1997).




                                         20
6.3. Geographic variation in Home Health IPS
          Our main analyses estimate the impacts of payment reform on Medicare
payments, costs, admissions, and other outcomes by comparing post-reform
changes to a pre-reform linear time trend. For example, following the Home
Health IPS, we find sharp breaks in the pre-reform time trend for payments,
admissions, and costs, but no break in trends for mortality and readmissions.
However, to definitively distinguish the effects of policy impacts from other
contemporaneous trends, we require exogenous treatment and control groups.
While such a control group does not exist (as far as we know) for the Home
Health Prospective Payment System, per-patient visit limits for Medicare
reimbursement after the Interim Payment System were based in part on an
agency's historical average (75%), and in part on the average visits per patient
across an agency's census division. Thus, facilities with average per-patient visits
above the division average will experience greater reduction in Medicare
reimbursement than facilities below the division average7. Similarly, patients in
geographical areas with facilities that provided, on average, higher than their
division’s average number of visits will be exposed to a greater reduction in
reimbursement than patients in geographic areas with facilities below their
division’s average number of visits. We plot simulated payments, costs, and
admissions separately for stroke patients in hospital service areas (defined by
Dartmouth (1996)) that are above and below their respective census division
means in Figure 6. In this case, we simulate payments, costs, home health
admissions, and outcomes in each quarter separately for two base cohorts of
patients (acute discharges in 1996 q1) living in hospital service areas with average
numbers of visits above and below their census division average8. Thus, within

7
    McKnight (2006) exploits this variation to examine intensity of care after the IPS.
$ "Asmall number of hospital service areas have no home health agencies, as a result
approximately 8 percent of observations are dropped for these analyses.




                                               21
each cohort over time variation comes in admission and treatment policies (as a
function of patients’ observable characteristics), and changes in admission and
treatment policies may vary between above and below-division mean hospital
service areas.
       Figure 6a shows a narrowing of home health payments after the IPS in the
above and below division mean hospital service areas (for stroke patients),
although the common payment reduction is larger than the differential change.
Figures 6b-f shows that this narrowing also occurs for home health costs, but not
for the probability of home health use, acute readmission or mortality. Estimates
from the regression analog of Figure 6 are displayed in Table 6. These
specifications are similar to those in equations (10) and (14), except that the post
indicators are interacted with an "above division mean" indicator variable and we
include time (year-quarter) fixed effects instead of a quarterly trend.
       Table 6, Columns 1-3, show that the decrease in payments and costs
ranges between $50 and $125 larger for patients in above-division-mean hospital
service areas (where the total average reduction was $750 for stroke patients). As
in Figure 8, there is a differential reduction in costs for above-division health
service areas, but small and mixed effects on home health admissions, acute
readmissions, and mortality during the 90-day episode. Appendix Tables 1a and b
show similar patterns for hip fracture and joint replacement patients. These
estimates imply that reductions in treatment intensity, in particular, did not
increase readmission rates or mortality.
6.4. Heterogeneous effects
       To investigate the relative importance of average versus marginal
reimbursement, we investigate heterogeneity in the effects of reform by average
payment change. While changes in overall payments after reforms may vary
across patients, changes in marginal payments are more homogenous across
patients. Thus, to the extent that changes in average payments are related to




                                           22
changes in admissions or costs, this may reflect the effects of average, as opposed
to marginal, reimbursement on provider behavior. If changes in costs and
admissions are not related to the changes in average payment, this may signal
uniform changes in intensity and volume related to changes in marginal
reimbursement.
       In Table 7, we again create a synthetic patient panel and regress per-
patient simulated changes in home health costs and admissions as a function of
changes in simulated home health payments, in each case between 1996 quarter 1
and 1999 quarter 2 (for the IPS) and between 1999 quarter 1 and 2002 quarter 2
(for the PPS). In Table 7a, we find mixed effects of payment changes on
probability of home health use across tracer conditions after the IPS. However,
we show that changes in payments are positively related to changes in conditional
costs, as well as unconditional costs. In Table 7b, we show similarly mixed
effects on probability of admission after the PPS, again with strong positive
relationships between payments and costs. This result implies that patients
exhibiting the largest increases in payments after the PPS received the largest
increase in treatment intensity (costs). Thus, these estimates imply that average
payments are also an important determinant of treatment intensity, but are less
strongly associated with admissions.


7. Conclusion
       In this paper we examine the effects of changes in Medicare
reimbursement for home health agencies, including the Interim Payment System
(IPS) in 1997 and the Prospective Payment System (PPS) in 2000. We build upon
previous research by creating a unified framework to contrast these two unique
changes in payment policy: one reducing both marginal and average
reimbursement, the other increasing average reimbursement while reducing
marginal reimbursement. We develop a conceptual model that predicts the




                                        23
decreases in both marginal and average reimbursement characterizing the IPS will
lower both the volume of patients in home health agencies and intensity of
treatment, but that offers ambiguous predictions for the PPS due to offsetting
positive changes in average reimbursement but further reductions in marginal
reimbursement. We employ an empirical approach that separates changes in costs
and admissions due to home health agencies’ admissions and treatment policies,
and those due to the composition of patients discharged from acute care hospitals
and admitted to home health agencies. We examine the impacts of the IPS and the
PPS on acute readmissions and mortality. Finally, we investigate the presence of
heterogeneous effects based on differential changes in average reimbursement, to
further gauge the relative importance of marginal and average reimbursement.
       Consistent with our conceptual model, our estimates show that the IPS
decreased home health costs and admissions. However, despite the substantial
increase in reimbursement offered by the PPS, costs (resource use) increased only
slightly and admissions actually decreased for the tracer conditions in our sample.
For both the IPS and the PPS, we find little evidence of “cream skimming” based
on the observable characteristics in our data. Both payment reforms had limited
effects on acute readmissions and mortality. However, it may be the case that
more intermediate outcomes such as functional gain not present in our data were
affected by changes in treatment intensity and admission policies. Changes in
per-patient average reimbursement did predict resource use, and to a lesser extent
probability of admissions. However, in the PPS, increases in average
reimbursement were almost totally offset by reductions in marginal
reimbursement with respect to treatment intensity, and changes in marginal
reimbursement completely offset increased average reimbursement with respect to
admissions, implying that provider behavior may be more responsive to
reimbursement at the margin.




                                        24
       Our results suggest that reforms such as bundled payments and
accountable care organizations that further reduce marginal reimbursement are
likely to impact provider behavior. However, the level of payment is also
important; if increased, reductions in resource use will translate to higher margins
for providers (as in the PPS) rather than savings to Medicare (as in the IPS).




                                         25
References
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Bundled Payments for Care
Improvement Initiative: Fact Sheet. August 23, 2011.
http://innovations.cms.gov/documents/pdf/Fact-Sheet-Bundled-Payment-
FINAL82311.pdf (last accessed 1/26/12)

Dartmouth Medical School. The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care, 1996. Chicago,
AHA Press.

Elixhauser A, Steiner C, Harris DR, Coffrey RM. Comorbidity measures for use
with administrative data. Medical Care, 1998; 36(1): 8-27.

Ellis RP, McGuire, TG. Hospital response to prospective payment: moral hazard,
selection, and practice-style effects. Journal of Health Economics. 1996; 15: 257-
277.

Grimaldi PL. Prospective rates for episodes of home health care. Journal of
Health Care Finance. 2002; 28(3):63-75.

Hodgkin, D and McGuire TG. Payment levels and hospital response to
prospective payment. Journal of Health Economics, 1994; 13: 1-30

Iezzoni, L.I., Daley, J., Heeren, T., et al. Identifying complications of care using
administrative data. Medical Care. 1994; 32(7): 700-715.

McCall N, Komisar H, Petersons A, and Moore S. Medicare home health before
and after
the BBA. Health Affairs, May/June 2001, Vol. 20, No. 3, p. 189–198.

McCall N, et al. Utilization of home health services before and after the Balanced
Budget Act of 1997: what were the initial effects? Health Services Research.
2003b: 38(1): 85-106.

McKnight R. Home care reimbursement, long-term care utilization, and health
outcomes. Journal of Public Economics. 2006; 90: 293-323.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. Home health services. Report to the
Congress: Medicare Payment Policy. March 2002

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. Home health care services payment
system. Payment Basics, October 2010 (a).




                                         26
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. Home health services. Report to the
Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, March 2010 (b).

Newhouse J. Pricing the priceless: a health care conundrum. Cambridge (MA):
The MIT Press; 2002.

Porel FW, Liu K, Brungo DB. Agency and market area factors affecting home
health agency supply changes. Health Services Research. 2006; 41(5): 1847-1875.

Schlenker RE, Powell MC, and Goodrich GK. Initial home health outcomes under
prospective payment. Health Services Research. 2005; 40(1): 177-194.

Scott WK, Macera CA, Cornman CB, Sharpe PA. Functional health status as a
predictor of mortality in men and women over 65. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology. 1997; 50(3): 291-296.

Sood N, Huckfeldt P, Escarce J, Grabowski DC, Newhouse JP. The effect of
prospective payment on admission and treatment policy: evidence from inpatient
rehabilitation facilities. NBER Working Paper 17125; 2011.




                                      27
Figure 1. Average Medicare home health payments conditional on use
         3500
         3000
           2500
     dollars
  2000   1500
         1000




                  96q1 96q3 97q1 97q3 98q1 98q3 99q1 99q3 00q1 00q3 01q1 01q3 02q1
                                         quarter of acute discharge

                                     Stroke                    Hip fracture
                                     Joint replacement


Note: Figure shows average Medicare Fee-For-Service payments across 90-day post-acute episodes starting in each
quarter between 1996q1 and 2002 q2 for stroke, hip fracture, and joint replacement patients. The first vertical line
indicates quarter before Home Health IPS (10/1997). The second vertical line indicates the quarter prior to the Home
Health PPS (10/2002).




                                                                28
Figure 2. Treatment and admission effects of Home Health Interim Payment System (IPS) and Prospective
Payment System (PPS) on home health payments, costs, and admissions (stroke patients)

a. IPS: home health payments                                                                                        b. PPS: home health payments
 2000 2200 2400 2600 2800 3000 3200 3400




                                                                                                                     2000 2200 2400 2600 2800 3000 3200 3400
                  dollars




                                                                                                                                      dollars
                                           96q1   96q3      97q1        97q3         98q1   98q3       99q1                                                    99q1   99q3      00q1        00q3         01q1   01q3       02q1

                                                   simulated payments, base cohort            counterfactual                                                           simulated payments, base cohort            counterfactual
                                                   actual payments                                                                                                     actual payments



c. IPS: home health costs                                                                                           d. PPS: home health costs
 2000 2200 2400 2600 2800 3000 3200 3400




                                                                                                                     2000 2200 2400 2600 2800 3000 3200 3400
                  dollars




                                                                                                                                      dollars



                                           96q1   96q3      97q1        97q3         98q1   98q3       99q1                                                    99q1   99q3      00q1        00q3         01q1   01q3       02q1

                                                     simulated costs, base cohort           counterfactual                                                               simulated costs, base cohort           counterfactual
                                                     actual costs                                                                                                        actual costs




                                                                                                               29
e. IPS: home health admissions for 96q1 acute discharges f. PPS: home health admissions for 99q1 acute discharges
 .5




                                                                                  .5
 .45




                                                                                  .45
 .4




                                                                                  .4
 .35




                                                                                  .35
 .3




                                                                                  .3
       96q1   96q3         97q1          97q3      98q1   98q3        99q1              99q1   99q3         00q1          00q3      01q1   01q3        02q1

                     simulated prob, base cohort          counterfactual                              simulated prob, base cohort          counterfactual
                     actual admissions                                                                actual admissions




Note: Measures calculated from 100% Medicare Home Health claims data. Solid line indicates average simulated
measures for each quarter. Dashed line indicates pre-IPS or PPS trend. Dotted line indicates actual means. Base cohort
for IPS simulated values includes home health patients discharged from acute care for stroke in the first quarter of 1996
(for payments and costs) and all acute discharges for stroke (for admissions). Base cohort for PPS simulated values
includes home health patients discharged from acute care in the first quarter of 1999 (for payments and costs) and all
acute discharges for stroke (for admissions). Vertical line in IPS graphs indicates quarter prior to Interim Payment
System implementation, for PPS graphs quarter prior to Prospective Payment System implementation.




                                                                             30
Figure 3. Selection effects for treatment and admissions for Home Health (HH) Interim Payment System (IPS)
and Prospective Payment System (PPS) (stroke patients)

a. IPS: 99q2 payments simulated for each HH cohort                                b. PPS: 02q2 payments simulated for each HH cohort
     3400




                                                                                          3400
     3200




                                                                                          3200
     3000




                                                                                          3000
 2600 2800




                                                                                      2600 2800
   dollars




                                                                                        dollars
     2400




                                                                                          2400
     2200




                                                                                          2200
     2000




                                                                                          2000
             96q1   96q3     97q1        97q3   98q1         98q3         99q1                    99q1   99q3     00q1        00q3   01q1         01q3         02q1

                           simulated payments            counterfactual                                         simulated payments            counterfactual



c. IPS: 99q2 costs simulated for each HH cohort                                   d. PPS: 02q2 costs simulated for each HH cohort
     3400




                                                                                          3400
     3200




                                                                                          3200
     3000




                                                                                          3000
 2600 2800




                                                                                      2600 2800
   dollars




                                                                                        dollars
     2400




                                                                                          2400
     2200




                                                                                          2200
     2000




                                                                                          2000




             96q1   96q3     97q1        97q3   98q1         98q3         99q1                    99q1   99q3     00q1        00q3   01q1         01q3         02q1

                             simulated costs           counterfactual                                             simulated costs           counterfactual




                                                                                 31
e. IPS: 99q2 admits simulated each discharge cohort                    f. PPS: 02q2 admits simulated for each discharge cohort
 .5




                                                                           .5
 .45




                                                                           .45
 .4




                                                                           .4
 .35




                                                                           .35
 .3




                                                                           .3
       96q1   96q3   97q1       97q3   98q1          98q3      99q1              99q1   99q3   00q1       00q3   01q1          01q3      02q1

                     simulated prob           counterfactual                                   simulated prob           counterfactual




Note: Measures calculated from 100% Medicare Home Health claims data. Solid line indicates average simulated
measures for each quarter. Dashed line indicates pre-IPS or PPS trend. Vertical line in IPS graphs indicates quarter
prior to Interim Payment System implementation, for PPS graphs quarter prior to Prospective Payment System
implementation.




                                                                      32
Figure 4. Selection estimates for pooled sample (acute discharges for stroke+hip+lower extremity joint
replacement)
a. IPS: 99q2 costs simulated for each HH cohort          b. PPS: 02q2 costs simulated for each HH cohort
 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600




                                                                                                                        1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600
                     dollars




                                                                                                                                            dollars
                                                96q1    96q3    97q1        97q3   98q1          98q3       99q1                                                       99q1    99q3    00q1        00q3   01q1          01q3       02q1

                                                               simulated costs             counterfactual                                                                             simulated costs             counterfactual



c. IPS: 99q2 admits simulated for each discharge cohort                                                             d. PPS: 02q2 admits simulated for each discharge cohort
   .55




                                                                                                                          .55
   .5




                                                                                                                          .5
   .45




                                                                                                                          .45
   .4




                                                                                                                          .4
   .35




                                                                                                                          .35




                             96q1                      96q3    97q1       97q3     98q1          98q3       99q1                                    99q1                      99q3    00q1       00q3     01q1          01q3       02q1

                                                               simulated prob             counterfactual                                                                              simulated prob             counterfactual




                                                                                                                   33
e. IPS: Coef of var for simulated costs and admissions                      f. PPS: Coef of var for simulated costs and admissions
 .5




                                                                                .5
 .4




                                                                                .4
 .3




                                                                                .3
 .2




                                                                                .2
 .1




                                                                                .1
 0




                                                                                0
      96q1   96q3       97q1        97q3   98q1        98q3         99q1             99q1   99q3       00q1        00q3   01q1        01q3         02q1

               CV predicted admissions            CV for predicted costs                      CV predicted admissions            CV for predicted costs




Note: Measures calculated from 100% Medicare Home Health claims data. For a-d: Solid line indicates average
simulated measures for each quarter. Dashed line indicates pre-IPS or PPS trend. For e-f: Solid line indicates
coefficient of variation for home health predicted admissions and dotted line indicates coefficient of variation for home
health predicted costs.




                                                                           34
Figure 5. Simulated changes in outcomes
a. IPS: readmission                                                                 b. PPS: readmission
 .45 .5




                                                                                        .45 .5
 .35 .4




                                                                                        .35 .4
 .25 .3




                                                                                        .25 .3
 .15 .2




                                                                                        .15 .2
 .05 .1




                                                                                        .05 .1
 0




                                                                                        0
          96q1   96q3       97q1           97q3         98q1    98q3        99q1                 96q1   96q3       97q1           97q3         98q1    98q3        99q1
                                   quarter of acute discharge                                                             quarter of acute discharge

                        simulated outcome, base cohort                 actual                                  simulated outcome, base cohort                 actual



c. IPS: mortality                                                                   d. PPS Mortality
 .45 .5




                                                                                        .45 .5
 .35 .4




                                                                                        .35 .4
 .25 .3




                                                                                        .25 .3
 .15 .2




                                                                                        .15 .2
 .05 .1




                                                                                        .05 .1
 0




                                                                                        0




          96q1   96q3       97q1           97q3         98q1    98q3        99q1                 99q1   99q3       00q1           00q3         01q1    01q3        02q1
                                   quarter of acute discharge                                                             quarter of acute discharge

                        simulated outcome, base cohort                 actual                                  simulated outcome, base cohort                 actual



Note: Solid line indicates average simulated measures for each quarter. Patient cohort is 96 q1 acute discharges for IPS, 99 q1
acute discharges for PPS. Dotted line indicates actual average health outcomes. Vertical line for IPS graphs indicates quarter prior
to Home Health IPS implementation, for PPS graphs quarter prior to Home Health PPS implementation.




                                                                                   35
Figure 6. Simulated outcomes for hospital service areas above and below Census Division mean visits in 1996
a. IPS: payments                                        b. IPS: costs
                3400




                                                                                                                                     3400
                3200




                                                                                                                                     3200
                3000




                                                                                                                                     3000
 2600 2800




                                                                                                           2600 2800
   dollars




                                                                                                             dollars
                2400




                                                                                                                                     2400
                2200




                                                                                                                                     2200
                2000




                                                                                                                                     2000
                                 96q1   96q3      97q1        97q3   98q1          98q3       99q1                                                             96q1   96q3      97q1        97q3   98q1          98q3       99q1

                                        hsa above division mean             hsa below division mean                                                                   hsa above division mean             hsa below division mean




d. IPS: admissions                                                                                     e. IPS: Hospital readmissions




                                                                                                           .2 .21 .22 .23 .24 .25 .26 .27 .28 .29 .3 .31 .32
                .5         .45
 fraction of acute discharges




                                                                                                                      fraction of acute discharges
 .35           .4
                .3




                                 96q1   96q3      97q1        97q3   98q1          98q3       99q1                                                             96q1   96q3      97q1        97q3   98q1          98q3       99q1

                                          hsa above division mean             below division mean                                                                     hsa above division mean             hsa below division mean




                                                                                                      36
f. IPS: Mortality
                    .2
 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 .18 .19
        fraction of acute discharges
                    .1




                                       96q1   96q3      97q1        97q3   98q1          98q3       99q1

                                              hsa above division mean             hsa below division mean



Note: Solid line indicates simulated outcomes in hospital service areas with average home health visits above census
division mean, dashed line indicates simulated outcomes in hospital service areas with average home health visits
below census division mean. Index patient cohort is 96 q1 acute discharges for IPS, 99 q1 acute discharges for PPS.
Vertical line for IPS graphs indicates quarter prior to IPS implementation, for PPS graphs quarter prior to PPS
implementation




                                                                                                            37
Table 1. Summary Statistics
                 (1) Stroke               (2) Hip fracture,   (3) Joint,
                 90 day episode           90 day episode      90 day episode
Age              77.90                    82.43               73.58

Male               0.41                   0.23                0.35

White              0.83                   0.93                0.91

MSA                0.71                   0.71                0.69

MSA adjacent       0.16                   0.16                0.17

non-MSA            0.13                   0.13                0.14

Comorbid           0.72                   0.78                0.54
conditions(any)

Comorbid           1.26                   1.49                0.82
conditions(n)

Complications      0.25                   0.57                0.41
(any)


Any home health    0.36                   0.45                0.61

Home health        2705.70                2491.52             1887.53
payments
(conditional on
use)

Home health          2764.26              2404.48              1698.74
costs
(conditional on
use)
Any re-admission 0.27                     0.24                 0.13
N                    1,738,220            1,311,755            1,671,211
      Notes: Sample includes 90-day episodes following acute discharges for each
      primary diagnosis occurring from January 1996 through June 2002. Measures
      calculated from Medicare claims and denominator files.




                                           38
 Table 2a. Treatment and admission policy estimates: effects of Home Health IPS and PPS, stroke patients
                                (1)                                     (2)                                   (3)
                    Medicare home health payments                 Home health costs                   Home health admission
                       IPS                PPS                  IPS                PPS                IPS                PPS
 Mean           2592               2737                2860                2572              0.386               0.332
 POST1          -179.08***         688.59***           -132.32***          -3.69             -0.024***           -0.031***
                (4.58)             (13.21)             (3.03)              (5.43)            (0.000)             (0.000)
 POST2           -391.78***           703.45***            -254.53***           116.98***            -0.062***            -0.018***
                 (7.29)               (10.61)              (5.06)               (3.79)               (0.000)              (0.001)
 POST3           -576.50***           674.11***            -487.57***           45.72***             -0.052***            -0.029***
                 (10.94)              (11.22)              (10.22)              (3.87)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST4           -700.22***           753.09***            -617.37***           99.65***             -0.059***            -0.029***
                 (13.69)              (10.68)              (11.63)              (3.67)               (0.001)              (0.000)
 POST5           -746.19***           810.03***            -622.26***           184.09***            -0.058***            -0.019***
                 (16.53)              (12.35)              (15.02)              (5.86)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST6           -713.63***           759.71***            -561.68***           263.13***            -0.059***            -0.015***
                 (15.13)              (10.70)              (13.48)              (3.96)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST7           -696.43***           694.22***            -592.43***           228.15***            -0.063***            -0.018***
                 (15.63)              (10.58)              (15.00)              (4.72)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 Time trend      0.81                 37.46***             6.15***              -10.62***            -0.001***            -0.001***
                 (1.05)               (0.44)               (0.68)               (0.62)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 Observations     441,952                327,264              441,952               327,264              1,049,510          933,688
 R-squared        0.32                   0.72                 0.21                  0.04                 0.18               0.05
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates from regression of simulated payments,
costs, or admissions on POST1-POST7 and quarterly trend. Index cohort is 96q1 patients for IPS, 99q1 patients for PPS. Standard
errors clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.




                                                               39
 Table 2b.Treatment and admission policy estimates: effects of Home Health IPS and PPS, hip fracture patients
                               (1)                                      (2)                                   (3)
                  Medicare home health payments                   Home health costs                  Home health admission
                      IPS                PPS                   IPS                PPS               IPS                PPS
 Mean          2255               2633                 2479                2272              0.461               0.434
 POST1           -142.42***           898.95***            -88.71***            50.48***             -0.026***            -0.032***
                 (2.32)               (9.78)               (2.29)               (3.56)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 POST2           -269.28***           929.24***            -151.68***           137.81***            -0.077***            -0.024***
                 (3.58)               (6.39)               (2.60)               (4.03)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 POST3           -396.29***           867.07***            -309.10***           87.19***             -0.051***            -0.030***
                 (8.34)               (4.47)               (7.36)               (4.15)               (0.001)              (0.000)
 POST4           -549.50***           924.67***            -477.24***           107.45***            -0.061***            -0.036***
                 (7.42)               (3.86)               (6.80)               (4.78)               (0.001)              (0.000)
 POST5           -563.53***           978.09***            -452.24***           235.23***            -0.057***            -0.031***
                 (7.80)               (4.24)               (6.78)               (5.51)               (0.001)              (0.000)
 POST6           -522.61***           882.60***            -391.34***           279.56***            -0.051***            -0.039***
                 (9.25)               (5.15)               (8.07)               (6.34)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST7           -526.46***           787.49***            -434.20***           228.13***            -0.048***            -0.036***
                 (7.68)               (3.93)               (6.47)               (6.00)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 time trend      -8.61***             56.82***             -3.61***             -6.31***             0.001***             0.004***
                 (0.92)               (0.66)               (0.63)               (0.73)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 Observations     366,002                300,734              366,002               300,734              751,604            705,376
 R-squared        0.28                   0.78                 0.18                  0.07                 0.028              0.003
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates from regression of simulated payments,
costs, or admissions on POST1-POST7 and quarterly trend. Index cohort is 96q1 patients for IPS, 99q1 patients for PPS. Standard
errors clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.




                                                               40
 Table 2c.Treatment and admission policy estimates: effects of Home Health IPS and PPS, joint replacement patients
                                (1)                                     (2)                                   (3)
                   Medicare home health payments                  Home health costs                  Home health admission
                      IPS                PPS                   IPS                PPS               IPS                PPS
 Mean           1551               2069                1688                1656              0.636               0.582
 POST1           -47.38***             1,016.08***          -36.14***            64.80***             -0.016***            -0.026***
                 (2.65)                (6.04)               (2.13)               (1.97)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 POST2           -163.50***            1,042.06***          -69.85***            185.61***            -0.048***            -0.009***
                 (3.33)                (3.79)               (2.74)               (1.68)               (0.001)              (0.000)
 POST3           -211.77***            1,050.30***          -131.52***           160.54***            -0.052***            -0.023***
                 (3.92)                (4.13)               (3.58)               (1.73)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST4           -264.42***            1,076.90***          -189.89***           164.15***            -0.066***            -0.022***
                 (4.62)                (3.77)               (4.26)               (1.91)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST5           -297.88***            1,156.45***          -212.65***           206.62***            -0.071***            -0.010***
                 (5.24)                (5.04)               (4.87)               (2.18)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST6           -275.80***            1,122.03***          -157.24***           258.25***            -0.057***            0.001
                 (6.37)                (3.37)               (6.25)               (2.52)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST7           -288.08***            1,067.57***          -200.14***           250.43***            -0.071***            -0.005***
                 (6.90)                (3.65)               (6.87)               (2.48)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 time trend      -7.14***              38.86***             -2.80***             0.80***              0.001***             -0.002***
                 (0.23)                (0.19)               (0.27)               (0.26)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 Observations     550,438                534,128              550,438               534,128              834,091             878,528
 R-squared        0.13                   0.82                 0.05                  0.12                 0.091               0.027
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates from a regression of simulated payments,
costs, or admissions on POST1-POST7 and quarterly trend. Index cohort is 96q1 patients for IPS, 99q1 patients for PPS. Standard
errors clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.




                                                                41
 Table 3a. Selection estimates: effects of Home Health IPS and PPS, stroke patients
                                   (1)                                   (2)                                           (3)
                     Medicare home health payments                 Home health costs                           Home health admission
                         IPS                 PPS                IPS                PPS                        IPS                PPS
 Mean            2179                 3310               2531               2661                      0.344               0.321
 POST1           -0.65                -4.19              -0.73              -1.93                     -0.000              -0.001*
                 (2.72)               (2.72)             (2.77)             (2.40)                    (0.000)             (0.000)
 POST2           -0.72                 1.96                 0.19                 4.33                 -0.001*              -0.001**
                 (3.57)                (4.05)               (3.65)               (3.36)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 POST3           -1.87                 -0.16                -2.15                1.25                 -0.001*              -0.001*
                 (2.96)                (4.57)               (3.01)               (3.85)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 POST4           -0.99                 4.53                 -3.31                6.53*                -0.002***            -0.001**
                 (3.61)                (5.01)               (3.74)               (3.92)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST5           -4.78                 5.88                 -6.48                6.22                 -0.001**             -0.001**
                 (4.12)                (5.83)               (4.18)               (4.99)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST6           -0.69                 17.59***             -3.26                11.97**              -0.002***            -0.001
                 (4.49)                (6.22)               (4.45)               (5.01)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST7           -1.29                 17.88**              -4.55                14.34**              -0.002***            -0.000
                 (4.89)                (7.15)               (4.90)               (5.63)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 time trend      -0.08                 -0.51                0.08                 -0.38                0.000***             0.000***
                 (0.40)                (0.72)               (0.41)               (0.54)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 Observations     376,426               300,446               376,426               300,446              967,550             900,877
 R-squared        0.00                  0.00                  0.00                  0.00                 0.000               0.000
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates from regression of simulated payments,
costs, or admissions on POST1-POST7 and quarterly trend. Treatment and admission functions for each patient cohort are
estimated using 99q2 patients for IPS, and 02q2 patients for PPS. Standard errors clustered on health referral region are presented
in parentheses.




                                                                42
 Table 3b. Selection estimates: effects of IPS and PPS, hip fracture patients
                                   (1)                                     (2)                                         (3)
                     Medicare home health payments                  Home health costs                          Home health admission
                         IPS                 PPS                 IPS                 PPS                      IPS                PPS
 Mean             2255                 3343               2479                2377                    0.438               0.441
 POST1           -3.98                -5.52**             -6.20**             -9.70***                0.009***            0.007***
                 (2.69)               (2.52)              (2.86)              (2.25)                  (0.001)             (0.001)
 POST2           -2.62                 -1.21                -2.00                -6.37*               -0.001               0.008***
                 (3.10)                (4.09)               (3.30)               (3.33)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST3           2.02                  3.77                 2.30                 -0.78                0.002                0.006***
                 (3.56)                (4.38)               (3.66)               (3.60)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST4           -6.68                 1.24                 -8.11*               -1.23                0.004***             0.003**
                 (4.31)                (4.59)               (4.42)               (3.85)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST5           -7.19*                3.43                 -10.09**             -1.61                0.013***             0.009***
                 (4.21)                (5.22)               (4.48)               (4.29)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST6           -0.18                 18.87***             -2.41                7.57                 0.004**              0.007***
                 (4.91)                (7.11)               (5.13)               (5.63)               (0.002)              (0.002)
 POST7           -1.33                 19.30***             -3.54                9.50                 0.005***             0.007***
                 (5.69)                (7.23)               (5.84)               (5.88)               (0.002)              (0.002)
 time trend      0.50                  -0.06                0.89*                0.54                 -0.001***            -0.000
                 (0.46)                (0.70)               (0.50)               (0.54)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 Observations     326,489               303,891               326,489               303,891              716,300             695,149
 R-squared        0.00                  0.00                  0.00                  0.00                 0.001               0.000
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates from regression of simulated payments,
costs, or admissions on POST1-POST7 and quarterly trend. Treatment and admission functions for each patient cohort are
estimated using 99q2 patients for IPS, and 02q2 patients for PPS. Standard errors clustered on health referral region are presented
in parentheses.




                                                                43
 Table 3c. Selection estimates: effects of IPS and PPS, joint replacement patients
                                    (1)                                    (2)                                         (3)
                     Medicare home health payments                  Home health costs                          Home health admission
                         IPS                  PPS                IPS                 PPS                      IPS                PPS
                 1331                  2858               1547                1825                    0.595               0.575
 POST1           -18.56***             -16.94***          -22.46***           -20.44***               -0.004***           -0.006***
                 (2.18)                (2.58)             (2.15)              (2.21)                  (0.000)             (0.000)
 POST2           -27.52***             -25.58***            -28.92***            -34.99***            -0.004***            -0.008***
                 (2.72)                (3.41)               (2.61)               (2.51)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST3           -2.07                 -0.67                -2.37                -9.40***             0.001                -0.002**
                 (2.73)                (4.27)               (2.58)               (3.03)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST4           -6.53**               -9.24**              -7.56***             -15.51***            0.000                -0.004***
                 (3.06)                (4.54)               (2.89)               (3.23)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST5           -25.19***             -20.31***            -29.49***            -27.33***            -0.005***            -0.008***
                 (3.52)                (5.38)               (3.40)               (3.70)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST6           -24.39***             -17.06***            -28.41***            -34.50***            -0.002*              -0.009***
                 (4.29)                (5.61)               (3.77)               (4.00)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 POST7           -10.04**              2.00                 -14.68***            -15.33***            0.002*               -0.003**
                 (4.58)                (6.44)               (4.17)               (4.53)               (0.001)              (0.001)
 time trend      1.17***               1.62***              1.91***              2.88***              -0.000               0.001***
                 (0.39)                (0.60)               (0.36)               (0.42)               (0.000)              (0.000)
 Observations     543,082               548,893               543,082               548,893              853,478             940,014
 R-squared        0.00                  0.00                  0.00                  0.00                 0.001               0.001
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates from regression of simulated payments,
costs, or admissions on POST1-POST7 and quarterly trend. Treatment and admission functions for each patient cohort are
estimated using 99q2 patients for IPS, and 02q2 patients for PPS. Standard errors clustered on health referral region are presented
in parentheses.




                                                                44
 Table 3d. Selection estimates: effects of IPS and PPS, pooled across hip fracture, joint replacement, and stroke
                                   (1)                                     (2)                                     (3)
                     Medicare home health payments                 Home health costs                       Home health admission
                         IPS                 PPS                IPS                  PPS                  IPS                PPS
 Mean            1733                 3103               2011                 2188                0.455               0.448
 POST1           -6.60***             -7.82***           -8.11***             -11.53***           -0.001**            -0.001***
                 (2.13)               (1.93)             (2.38)               (2.10)              (0.000)             (0.000)
 POST2           -22.61***            -17.36***            -23.85***            -26.21***            -0.003***             0.002***
                 (2.86)               (3.16)               (3.12)               (3.09)               (0.001)               (0.001)
 POST3           -2.40                -8.83**              -2.58                -19.29***            -0.002***             0.004***
                 (3.05)               (3.80)               (3.26)               (3.37)               (0.001)               (0.001)
 POST4           -1.64                -15.59***            -2.53                -26.44***            -0.003***             0.004***
                 (3.02)               (3.96)               (3.28)               (3.55)               (0.001)               (0.001)
 POST5           -8.34**              -14.82***            -10.29***            -25.60***            -0.001                0.004***
                 (3.46)               (4.57)               (3.80)               (3.81)               (0.001)               (0.001)
 POST6           -11.90***            -13.59**             -14.28***            -32.56***            -0.003***             0.006***
                 (4.38)               (5.56)               (4.63)               (4.76)               (0.001)               (0.001)
 POST7           0.48                 -3.50                -1.34                -22.95***            -0.003***             0.007***
                 (4.60)               (5.79)               (4.82)               (4.73)               (0.001)               (0.001)
 time trend      -2.61***             -0.58                -2.51***             -0.59                0.000***              0.001***
                 (0.39)               (0.58)               (0.42)               (0.45)               (0.000)               (0.000)
 Observations     1,245,997              1,153,230            1,245,997             1,153,230            2,537,328          2,536,040
 R-squared        0.00                   0.00                 0.00                  0.00                 0.000              0.002
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates from regression of simulated payments,
costs, or admissions on POST1-POST7 and quarterly trend. Treatment and admission functions (controlling for main effects of
each tracer condition) for each patient cohort are estimated using 99q2 patients for IPS, and 02q2 patients for PPS. Standard errors
clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.




                                                               45
 Table 4. Home Health-IPS: Simulated changes in patient outcomes, by tracer condition
                          Mortality (90-days post-acute discharge)                                   Acute readmissions
                           (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                         (5)               (6)
                        Stroke               Hip              Joint            Stroke                        Hip              Joint
 Mean              0.147              0.111             0.008             0.271                       0.227             0.121
 POST x Q1         0.002***           0.003***          -0.000***         0.001***                    0.007***          0.001***
                   (0.000)            (0.001)           (0.000)           (0.000)                     (0.000)           (0.000)
 POST x Q2            0.002***            -0.003***           0.000***            -0.000              0.005***            0.001***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 POST x Q3            -0.000              -0.000              -0.000***           0.002***            -0.004***           0.006***
                      (0.000)             (0.001)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 POST x Q4            0.002***            -0.004***           0.001***            -0.002***           -0.001***           0.001***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 Q1                   -0.010***           -0.014***           0.001***            -0.003***           -0.004***           0.000
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 Q2                   -0.018***           -0.024***           -0.001***           -0.011***           -0.014***           0.001***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 Q3                   -0.014***           -0.021***           0.000**             -0.009***           -0.008***           -0.000
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 Linear time trend    0.001***            0.001***            0.000***            0.001***            0.001***            -0.000
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 Observations           1,049,510           751,604             834,092              1,049,510          751,604             834,092
 R-squared              0.005               0.013               0.002                0.008              0.016               0.001
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates come from regression of outcomes on
quarter indicators, and interaction of POST with quarter indicators. Index cohort is 1996 q1 discharges. Standard errors clustered
on health referral region are presented in parentheses.




                                                                46
 Table 5. Home Health-PPS: Simulated changes in patient outcomes, by tracer condition
                          Mortality (90-days post-acute discharge)                                  Acute readmissions
                           (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                        (5)               (6)
                        Stroke               Hip              Joint            Stroke                       Hip              Joint
 Mean              0.160              0.127             0.008             0.276                      0.246             0.126
 POST x Q1         0.007***           0.007***          0.001***          0.000                      0.008***          -0.000
                   (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)                    (0.001)           (0.000)
 POST x Q2            0.006***            0.007***            0.001***            -0.001***           0.005***           0.001***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.001)            (0.000)
 POST x Q3            0.003***            0.003***            0.001***            -0.003***           0.002***           0.001
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
 POST x Q4            -0.003***           -0.007***           -0.000              -0.005***           -0.002***          -0.003***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
 Q1                   -0.008***           -0.013***           -0.001***           -0.006***           -0.007***          -0.003***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
 Q2                   -0.020***           -0.026***           -0.002***           -0.012***           -0.017***          -0.006***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
 Q3                   -0.015***           -0.022***           -0.002***           -0.006***           -0.014***          -0.002***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
 Linear time trend    0.000***            0.001***            -0.000***           0.001***            0.001***           0.000***
                      (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
 Observations          933,688              705,376             878,528              933,688            705,376            878,528
 R-squared             0.004                0.010               0.002                0.005              0.014              0.002
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates come from regression of outcomes on
quarter indicators, and interaction of POST with quarter indicators. Index cohort is 1999q1 acute discharges. Standard errors
clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.




                                                               47
 Table 6. Difference-in-difference estimates for IPS, health service areas above and below division mean
 number of visits, stroke patients
                 (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                 (5)
                 Payments          Costs           Admission        Readmissions        Mortality
 Mean            2592              2859            0.386            0.269               0.147
 Above x         -50.29***         -22.86**        0.00***          0.002***            -0.002***
 POST1           (8.15)            (10.00)         (0.00)           (0.000)             (0.000)
 Above x          -77.62***        -38.54***         -0.00***         -0.003***            -0.001**
 POST2            (8.55)           (10.15)           (0.00)           (0.001)              (0.000)
 Above x          -51.83***        -39.85***         -0.00***         -0.000               0.002***
 POST3            (12.12)          (12.96)           (0.00)           (0.001)              (0.000)
 Above x          -79.96***        -54.52***         0.00***          0.004***             -0.005***
 POST4            (11.47)          (12.25)           (0.00)           (0.001)              (0.000)
 Above x          -61.70***        -60.74***         -0.00            -0.004***            0.002***
 POST5            (14.83)          (17.47)           (0.00)           (0.001)              (0.000)
 Above x          -123.25***       -127.07***        -0.01***         -0.005***            0.001***
 POST6            (13.89)          (13.67)           (0.00)           (0.001)              (0.000)
 Above x          -32.62**         -66.82***         -0.00**          0.003***             0.004***
 POST7            (14.05)          (16.09)           (0.00)           (0.000)              (0.000)
 Above            214.99***        188.73***         0.01**           -0.001               -0.003**
                  (29.33)          (31.11)           (0.00)           (0.002)              (0.001)
 N                403,718            403,634           961,598           961,618               961,338
 R2               0.33               0.22              0.18              0.008                 0.006
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Estimates of regression of simulated payments,
costs, and admissions on indicators for POST1 through POST7 interacted with “above” division mean indicator and quarter fixed
effects. Index cohort is 96q1 acute discharges. Standard errors clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.




                                                                48
Table 7a. Home Health IPS: Changes in probability of home health use and costs as a function of changes in
simulated conditional payments
                               Stroke                  Hip                          Joint
1. Predicted change in probability of home health use
Mean                           -0.08                   -0.04                        -0.07
!(simulated payments)          0.00                    -0.00***                     0.00***
                               (0.00)                  (0.00)                       (0.00)

Average effect                -0.003                           0.009                       -0.035

2. Predicted change in conditional home health costs
Mean                           -521.17                         -512.57                     -225.63
!(simulated payments)          1.05***                         1.08***                     0.96***
                               (0.01)                          (0.01)                      (0.01)

3. Predicted change in unconditional home health costs
Mean                          -424.44                          -330.52                     -263.30
!(simulated payments)         0.53***                          0.44***                     0.92***
                              (0.01)                           (0.01)                      (0.01)

N                               74,965                         53,686                          62,752
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Standard errors clustered on health
referral region. Regressions of changes in simulated admissions and costs between 1st and 14th quarter on changes in
simulated payments for index cohort consisting of patients discharged from acute care in 1996 q1.




                                                          49
Table 7b. Home Health PPS: Changes in probability of use and costs as a function of changes in simulated
conditional payments
                              Stroke                  Hip                            Joint
1. Predicted change in probability of home health use
Mean                          -0.03                   0.01                           -0.04
!(simulated payments)         -0.00***                0.00                           -0.00***
                              (0.00)                  (0.00)                         (0.00)

Average effect                -0.017                           0.002                       -0.017

2. Predicted change in conditional home health costs
Mean                           97.22                           126.46                      223.62
!(simulated payments)          0.77***                         0.48***                     0.24***
                               (0.02)                          (0.01)                      (0.01)

3. Predicted change in unconditional home health costs
Mean                          -47.22                           82.60                       71.42
!(simulated payments)         0.23***                          0.24***                     0.16***
                              (0.01)                           (0.01)                      (0.01)

N                               66,692                         50,384                          62,752
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent. Standard errors clustered on health
referral region. Regressions of changes in simulated admissions and costs between 1st and 14th quarter on changes in
simulated payments for index cohort consisting of patients discharged from acute care in 1999 q1.




                                                          50
Appendix Figure 1. Comorbidities and complications for home health patients

a. Total number of comorbidities                                                                                                  b. Total number of complications




                                                                                                               .8
                 2       1.75




                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                 number of complications
 number of comorbidities
          1.25   1.5




                                                                                                           .4
    1




                                                                                                 .2
                 .75
                 .5




                                                                                                               0
                           1996q1   1997q1   1998q1      1999q1       2000q1   2001q1   2002q1                           1996q1     1997q1   1998q1      1999q1       2000q1   2001q1   2002q1
                                                 quarter of acute discharge                                                                      quarter of acute discharge

                                                 stroke                        hip                                                               stroke                        hip
                                                 joint replacement                                                                               joint replacement




c. Fraction with three or more comorbidities                                                                                      d. Fraction with no comorbidities
                 .25




                                                                                                               .6         .5
                             .2
    fraction of HHA patients




                                                                                                 fraction of HHA patients
                                                                                                                   .4
                   .15




                                                                                                             .3
           .1




                                                                                                     .2
 .05




                                                                                                               .1
                 0




                                                                                                               0




                           1996q1   1997q1   1998q1      1999q1       2000q1   2001q1   2002q1                           1996q1     1997q1   1998q1      1999q1       2000q1   2001q1   2002q1
                                                 quarter of acute discharge                                                                      quarter of acute discharge

                                                 stroke                        hip                                                               stroke                        hip
                                                 joint replacement                                                                               joint replacement
e. Fraction two or more complications                                                                                             f. Fraction with zero complications
                 .15




                                                                                                               .9         .8
                            .12
    fraction of HHA patients




                                                                                                 fraction of HHA patients
                                                                                                                   .7
                   .09




                                                                                                             .6
           .06




                                                                                                     .5
 .03




                                                                                                               .4
                                                                                                               .3
                 0




                           1996q1   1997q1   1998q1      1999q1       2000q1   2001q1   2002q1                           1996q1     1997q1   1998q1      1999q1       2000q1   2001q1   2002q1
                                                 quarter of acute discharge                                                                      quarter of acute discharge

                                                 stroke                        hip                                                               stroke                        hip
                                                 joint replacement                                                                               joint replacement



Note: Measures calculated from 100% Medicare Home Health claims data. Lines indicate average number of
comorbidities and complications for patients in home health with an acute discharge for stroke (solid line), hip fracture
(dashed line), and lower extremity joint replacement (dotted line). Vertical line in IPS graphs indicates quarter prior to
Interim Payment System implementation, for PPS graphs quarter prior to Prospective Payment System implementation.
Appendix Figure 2. Relative share of each tracer condition in home health patients within sample period
                 .5        .45
  fraction of HHA patients
      .3     .35 .25
                 .2 .4




                           1996q1   1997q1    1998q1      1999q1       2000q1      2001q1        2002q1
                                                  quarter of acute discharge

                                         fraction hip               fraction joint replacement
                                         fraction stroke


Notes: Figure exhibits the fraction of home health admissions for each tracer condition as a fraction of total hip
fracture, stroke, and lower extremity joint replacement admissions in each quarter. The first vertical line indicates the
quarter prior to the Interim Payment System (October 1997) and the second vertical line indicates the quarter prior to
the Prospective Payment System (October 2000).
Appendix Table 1a. Difference-in-difference estimates for IPS, health service
areas above and below division mean number of visits, hip fracture patients
            (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)               (5)
            Payments        Costs        Admission    Readmissions      Mortality
Mean        2255            2480         0.461        0.225             0.111

Above x     -66.46***       -55.55***    -0.00*       0.004***          0.002***
POST1       (6.52)          (9.15)       (0.00)       (0.001)           (0.000)

Above x     -100.87***      -80.88***    0.01***      0.000             -0.003***
POST2       (7.25)          (10.06)      (0.00)       (0.000)           (0.001)

Above x     -103.24***      -99.06***    -0.00***     -0.002***         -0.003***
POST3       (8.42)          (10.72)      (0.00)       (0.001)           (0.000)

Above x     -116.99***      -114.66***   0.00         0.004***          -0.000
POST4       (12.11)         (14.98)      (0.00)       (0.000)           (0.001)

Above x     -98.17***       -82.47***    0.00***      -0.000            -0.000
POST5       (11.69)         (13.02)      (0.00)       (0.001)           (0.000)

Above x     -88.89***       -94.09***    0.00         0.006***          0.004***
POST6       (12.20)         (15.60)      (0.00)       (0.001)           (0.000)

Above x     -104.38***      -140.96***   -0.00**      0.004***          -0.004***
POST7       (11.50)         (13.58)      (0.00)       (0.001)           (0.000)

Above       214.14***       196.84***    0.00         -0.002            0.002**
            (26.98)         (28.71)      (0.00)       (0.001)           (0.001)

N           337,036         336,966      693,979      693,994           693,826
R2          0.29            0.18         0.03         0.016             0.013
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent.
Estimates of regression of simulated payments, costs, and admissions on
indicators for POST1 through POST7 interacted with “above” division mean
indicator and quarter fixed effects. Index cohort is 96q1 acute discharges.
Standard errors clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.
Appendix Table 1b. Difference-in-difference estimates for IPS, health service
areas above and below division mean number of visits, joint replacement
patients
            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)
            Payments     Costs        Admission    Readmissions    Mortality
Mean        1551         1687         0.637        0.120           0.008

Above x     -7.87**      4.77         -0.00        -0.003***       -0.000***
POST1       (3.67)       (3.67)       (0.00)       (0.000)         (0.000)

Above x     -40.19***    -40.97***    -0.00*       -0.002***       0.001***
POST2       (4.92)       (5.55)       (0.00)       (0.000)         (0.000)

Above x     -43.41***    -45.82***    0.00***      -0.000          0.001***
POST3       (5.15)       (5.71)       (0.00)       (0.000)         (0.000)

Above x     -24.03***    -18.36***    -0.00        -0.009***       -0.003***
POST4       (5.64)       (5.76)       (0.00)       (0.000)         (0.000)

Above x     -31.38***    -34.10***    -0.01***     -0.004***       -0.000
POST5       (6.39)       (6.09)       (0.00)       (0.000)         (0.000)

Above x     -21.97***    -44.45***    -0.01***     0.002***        -0.000***
POST6       (7.52)       (8.24)       (0.00)       (0.000)         (0.000)

Above x     -30.32***    -54.58***    -0.01***     0.002***        -0.000
POST7       (7.36)       (8.07)       (0.00)       (0.000)         (0.000)

Above       96.16***     81.39***     0.02***      0.001           0.000***
            (17.79)      (17.58)      (0.00)       (0.001)         (0.000)

N           509,054      508,928      770,935      770,938         770,770
R2          0.14         0.06         0.10         0.002           0.003
Notes: *** indicates significant at 1 percent level, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent.
Estimates of regression of simulated payments, costs, and admissions on
indicators for POST1 through POST7 interacted with “above” division mean
indicator and quarter fixed effects. Index cohort is 96q1 acute discharges.
Standard errors clustered on health referral region are presented in parentheses.
