                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               PRIVATE EQUITY PERFORMANCE:
                                    WHAT DO WE KNOW?

                                           Robert S. Harris
                                            Tim Jenkinson
                                           Steven N. Kaplan

                                         Working Paper 17874
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17874


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2012




This research has been supported by the UAI Foundation and the Center for Research in Security Prices. Rui
Cui provided able research assistance. We thank Burgiss for supplying data. Kaplan has consulted to
private equity general partners and limited partners. He also has invested in private and public equities.
We thank James Bachman, Stuart Lucas and participants at the University of North Carolina Private
Equity Conference for helpful comments. Address correspondence to Steven Kaplan, University of
Chicago Booth School of Business, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 or e-mail
at skaplan@uchicago.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17874.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Equity Performance: What Do We Know?
Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan
NBER Working Paper No. 17874
February 2012
JEL No. G10,G24,G30

                                            ABSTRACT

We present evidence on the performance of nearly 1400 U.S. private equity (buyout and venture capital)
funds using a new research-quality dataset from Burgiss, sourced from over 200 institutional investors.
Using detailed cash-flow data, we compare buyout and venture capital returns to the returns produced
by public markets. We also compare the evidence from Burgiss to that derived from other commercial
datasets – Venture Economics, Preqin and Cambridge Associates – as well as recent research. We
find better buyout fund performance than has previously been documented. This in part reflects recently
discovered problems with data provided by Venture Economics, upon which several previous studies
had relied. Average U.S. buyout fund performance has exceeded that of public markets for most vintages
for a long period of time. The outperformance versus the S&P 500 averages 20% to 27% over the
life of the fund and more than 3% per year. Average U.S. venture capital funds, on the other hand,
outperformed public equities in the 1990s, but have underperformed public equities in the 2000s.
Using individual fund data, we explore the relationship between absolute measures of performance
– internal rates of return (IRRs) and multiples of invested capital – and performance relative to public
markets. Within a given vintage year, performance relative to public markets can be predicted well
by a fund’s multiple of invested capital and IRR, so we are able to estimate the performance relative
to public markets that would have been derived from the other commercial datasets, had the required
cash-flow data been available. Private equity performance in the other commercial sources – other
than Venture Economics – is qualitatively similar to that we find using the Burgiss data.


Robert S. Harris                                          Steven N. Kaplan
University of Virginia Darden School of Business          Booth School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard                                      The University of Chicago
Charlottesville, VA 22903 USA                             5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
HarrisR@darden.virginia.edu                               Chicago, IL 60637
                                                          and NBER
Tim Jenkinson                                             steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu
University of Oxford
Said Business School
Park End Street
Oxford OX1 1HP
UK
tim.jenkinson@sbs.ox.ac.uk
1.     Introduction

Despite the large increase in investments in private equity funds and the concomitant increase in

academic and practitioner scrutiny, the historical performance of private equity (PE) remains

uncertain, if not controversial. The uncertainty has been driven by the uneven disclosure of

private equity returns and questions about the quality of the data that have been available for

research. While several commercial enterprises collect performance data, they do not obtain

information for all funds; they often do not disclose, or even collect, fund cash flows; and the

source of the data is often obscure, resulting in concerns about biases in the samples.

Furthermore, some data are only periodically made available to academic researchers.

       In this paper, we use a new research-quality data set of private equity fund-level cash

flows from Burgiss. We refer to private equity as the asset class that includes buyout funds and

venture capital (VC) funds. We analyze the two types of funds separately. The data set has a

number of attractive features that we describe in detail later. A key attribute is that the data are

derived entirely from institutional investors (the limited partners or LPs) for whom Burgiss’

systems provide record-keeping and performance monitoring services. This feature results in

detailed, verified and cross-checked investment histories for nearly 1400 private equity funds

derived from the holdings of over 200 institutional investors. Using these data we reassess the

performance of private equity funds, in absolute terms and relative to public markets. Our results

are markedly more positive for buyout funds than have previously been documented.

       Several prior papers have studied private equity returns. Kaplan and Schoar (2005)

examine the returns to buyout and VC funds using fund cash flow data from Venture Economics

(VE). They calculate a public market equivalent (PME) that compares how much a PE fund

investor actually earned net of fees to what the investor would have earned in an equivalent

investment in the S&P 500. While their focus is return persistence across funds of the general

partner (GP), they report that buyout fund investors earn slightly less than the public market.

                                                 1
Venture capital (VC) funds slightly underperform public markets on an equal-weighted, but

outperform on a capital-weighted basis. Using a slightly updated version of the Kaplan and

Schoar (2005) dataset, Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) obtain qualitatively similar results and

reach a similar, but somewhat more negative, conclusion for buyout funds. They assume that any

remaining investments held by funds for which VE reports no cash flows after 10 years have no

value (rather than the book value applied by Kaplan and Schoar (2005)).

        However, Stucke (2011) identifies a significant problem with the VE data: he presents

strong evidence that many funds stopped being updated from around 2001 and yet were retained

in the VE database. For these funds, no additional cash flows were recorded and net asset values

(NAVs) were simply rolled forward each quarter. As a result, fund-level internal rates of return

(IRRs) in the VE sample fall with the passage of time. This is consistent with the findings of

Harris et al. (2010) that returns based on the VE sample are consistently lower than those for

other commercial providers for most vintage years. We confirm this finding. This serious bias in

the VE performance data suggests that the results in Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Phalippou

and Gottschalg (2009) understate fund returns, particularly for buyout funds.

        Furthermore, these papers focus on funds that were close to being fully liquidated at the

time the data were made available to the researchers, and so only funds that started investing (the

so-called “vintage year”) before 1995 are included.1 Subsequent years have seen a huge increase

in the number and size of private equity funds. Whereas around $148bn was raised by U.S.

buyout and VC funds from 1980-95, $668bn was raised for 1996-2004 vintage funds. These sums

were further eclipsed by the boom period 2005-08 when $794bn was raised by private equity




1
 The main results of Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) use funds with a vintage year of 1993 or earlier, although they
also report results for the same sample – up to the 1995 vintage – as employed by Kaplan and Schoar (2005).

                                                         2
funds over just four vintage years.2 The samples in the earlier papers offer no evidence on more

recent performance from private equity investing.

        To shed new light on private equity performance and on the data issues that have hindered

private equity research, we use data from four commercial sources to study U.S buyout and

venture capital funds. Our most detailed analyses take advantage of Burgiss data on fund-level

cash flows. In tandem, we use summary level data from the other leading commercial sources –

Preqin, Cambridge Associates (CA) and Venture Economics (VE).3 We also compare our results

to vintage year performance taken from Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Robinson and Sensoy

(2011a), both of which use underlying cash flow data for funds. Kaplan and Schoar study VE

data. Robinson and Sensoy use data from a single large LP who, they argue, invested very much

like an index fund, particularly for buyout funds. By comparing results across datasets with very

different selection criteria and methods of gathering information, we are able to draw stronger

conclusions. Moreover, since our data allow us to examine more recent vintage years than

covered in prior research, we can compare performance across different time periods, including

parts of the last decade when private equity fund raising increased dramatically.

        Using Burgiss cash flow data, we find that average U.S. buyout fund returns have

exceeded those of public markets for most vintages since 1984. The outperformance versus the

S&P 500 averages 20% to 27% over the life of the fund and more than 3% per year. Buyout fund

outperformance remains similar in magnitude when benchmarked against the Nasdaq and the

(small-cap) Russell 2000, and is also positive, but slightly lower, measured against the (small-

cap) Russell 2000 value index. These results are consistent with and supported by those in

Robinson and Sensoy (2011a). Average venture capital fund returns in the U.S., on the other

hand, outperformed public equities in the 1990s, but have underperformed public equities in the

2
 These figures are estimates from Private Equity Analyst, see Table 2.
3
 Harris et al. (2010) and Cornelius (2011) also present performance data from different commercial data sets, but do
not use cash flow data for individual funds. Lerner, Schoar and Wongsunwai (2007) use Preqin data.

                                                         3
most recent decade. We do not find any evidence that our conclusions for buyout funds or

venture capital funds are affected by different assumptions of systematic risk.

       Again harnessing fund-level cash flows from Burgiss, we study the relationship between

market-adjusted performance (PMEs) and absolute performance (IRRs and multiple of invested

capital). We find that within a given vintage year, PMEs are reliably predicted by a fund’s

multiple of invested capital and IRR. Regression results show that multiples and IRRs explain at

least 93% of the variation in PMEs in more than 90% of vintage years. Although both add

explanatory power, the multiple of invested capital provides more explanatory power than the

IRR overall and in most vintage years. This suggests to us that multiples of invested capital

should be preferred to IRRs as summary measures of private equity performance.

       Using these strong statistical patterns, we are then able to estimate the market-adjusted

average performance in the other commercial databases. We apply the regression coefficients to

the vintage year IRRs and investment multiples from VE, Preqin, and CA to estimate vintage

year PMEs for the funds in those databases. This procedure only requires the vintage year IRRs

and multiples from the other databases, even if the underlying fund cash flows are not available

to us or, even, to the commercial source (as is likely the case for some of the Preqin data).

       As with the Burgiss data, we find that buyout funds outperform public markets in the

1990s and 2000s in the three other commercial databases. We estimate that the funds in Preqin

and CA, like those in Burgiss, all outperform the S&P 500 in the average vintage year by at least

20% over the life of the fund. Although the PMEs are lower in the (likely downwardly biased)

VE database, the VE PMEs still imply that the average private equity fund outperformed the S&P

500 by more than 10% over the life of the fund. For VC funds, the PME results are generally

consistent across all four databases although, again, lower in the VE data.

       Our results suggest that it is highly likely that the VE returns, upon which a number of

academic papers have relied, understate buyout and, possibly, VC fund performance.

                                                  4
Furthermore, the consistency of the returns from Burgiss, Preqin and CA despite very different

sample selection criteria suggests that they likely represent reliable measures of average buyout

and VC fund performance.

        Overall, our findings strongly suggest that buyout funds have outperformed the public

equity markets over most of our sample period. To invalidate that conclusion, all three reliable

commercial datasets would have to be subject to a similar and large positive selection bias despite

very different data collection and reporting methods. We view this as very unlikely.

        We also examine whether fund performance is linked to the aggregate amount of capital

flowing into private equity or to the size of a fund. We find that both absolute performance and

performance relative to public markets are negatively related to aggregate capital commitments

for both buyout and VC funds. This is consistent with and extends the results in Kaplan and

Stromberg (2009). These results differ from those in Robinson and Sensoy (2011a) who do not

find that buyout funds PMEs are negatively related to capital commitments. We find no

significant relation between performance and fund size for buyout funds. For VC funds, we find

that funds in the bottom quartile of fund size underperform. Controlling for vintage year, top size

quartile funds have the best performance although it does not differ significantly from funds in

the 2nd and 3rd size quartiles.4

        The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we discuss the data we use. In section 3, we

present and discuss performance results.               In section 4, we consider the relationship of

performance relative to public markets (PMEs) to IRRs and multiples of invested capital. In

section 5, we use the relationships from section 4 to estimate the PMEs implied by the vintage

year IRRs and multiples in the VE, Preqin and CA databases. In section 6, we study the relation



4
  The other relationship of interest relates to performance persistence across funds of the same GP, as analyzed by
Kaplan and Shoar (2005). At present the Burgiss data do not include sequence numbers for funds, but this
information will be available in due course and so remains for future research.

                                                        5
of performance to aggregate fundraising and fund size.       We conclude by summarizing the

implications of our results.



2.     Data

We use vintage year performance data for U.S. buyout and venture capital funds from four

commercial sources: Burgiss, Venture Economics (VE), Preqin, and Cambridge Associates (CA).

The data are for performance as of March 2011. Our results aggregate performance for funds in a

particular fund raising (vintage) year as defined by the data provider. Burgiss, for example,

classifies a vintage year as the year in which a fund first draws capital from its LPs. We report

performance for vintages from 1984 through 2008.

       Each of the four datasets gathers information on fund performance differently. Given that

this paper is the first to take advantage of the Burgiss data we explain it in detail. The Burgiss

dataset “is sourced exclusively from LPs and includes their complete transactional and valuation

history between themselves and their primary fund investments.          The flows are rescaled

to be representative of the full fund.” The Burgiss data include all funds and cash flows from the

LPs that provide the data. The data come from “over 200 investment programs and represent over

$1 trillion in committed capital.” The LPs comprise a wide array of institutions and over two

thirds have private equity commitments in excess of $100 million. Of these, about sixty percent

are pension funds (a mix of public and corporate) and over 20% are endowments or foundations.

       The underlying cash flow data of the funds are likely to be extremely accurate because

Burgiss systems are used by the LPs for record keeping and fund investment monitoring. This

“check book” data – recording the exact cash outflows made by the LPs to the GPs as well as the

distributions from the GPs back to the LPs – has a number of unique advantages for research

purposes. The fact that the data are sourced from the back-office systems used by the LPs for

reporting and fund accounting, and are cross-checked across investors in the same fund, results in

                                                6
levels of data integrity and completeness that could not be achieved by surveys, voluntary

reporting, or (largely) involuntary reporting using Freedom of Information (FOIA) requests (the

method employed by Preqin). Furthermore, when data are sourced at least in part from GPs it is

possible for a GP to strategically stop reporting. The Burgiss data also are up to date – given the

need for quarterly reporting by most investors – and so there are no problems resulting from a

lack of updating as there can be with other commercial databases. In other words, for a given LP,

there is unlikely to be any selection bias. This is an advantage over other commercial sources

whose data rely on voluntary and FOIA disclosures by GPs and LPs.

        The potential bias in the Burgiss data – which it shares with the other commercial sources

– is how representative the LPs (and resulting GPs) are. For example, it is possible that the LPs

in the Burgiss sample have had better than average experience with private equity which is why

they use Burgiss and allow Burgiss to aggregate their results. Our results that follow, however,

lead us to doubt that this is the case.

        VE sources data from both LPs and GPs. Preqin obtains data primarily from public

filings by pension funds, from FOIA requests to public pension funds, and also voluntarily from

some GPs and LPs. As a result, for some, if not many funds, Preqin has IRRs and multiples, but

does not have the underlying fund cash flows. CA provides investment advice to LPs and, as a

result, is able to obtain its data from LPs and from GPs who have raised or are trying to raise

capital. Harris et al. (2010) describe VE, Preqin and CA in greater detail.

        Each dataset has a potential bias. Burgiss, while providing complete data from each LP,

may have a selected sample of LPs. VE is dependent on LPs and GPs providing information.

Preqin is dependent on public filings and FOIA requests. As a result, Preqin may be missing

some high performing funds that do not have public pension fund investors. CA may have a bias

towards GPs who are raising new funds and, therefore, may have performed well.



                                                 7
       In addition to results using the four commercial sources, we report vintage year

performance taken from Kaplan and Schoar (2005) who use fund-level cash flows from VE. We

also report performance from Robinson and Sensoy (2011a) who study fund-level cash flows

supplied by a single large LP who, they argue, invested much like an index fund, particularly for

buyout funds.


A.     Buyout funds

       Panel A of Table 1 reports the number of U.S. buyout funds in each source from 1984 to

2008, where 1984 is the first year with meaningful numbers of funds in the datasets. Figure 1

(Panel A) graphs the number of funds. VE (and hence Kaplan and Schoar) have the most funds

in the 1980s. VE, Preqin, CA and Robinson and Sensoy have roughly equal numbers of funds in

the 1990s with CA the highest of the four. In the 2000s, VE coverage tails off markedly while

Burgiss increases markedly. Burgiss, Preqin and CA have roughly equal coverage in the 2000s

with CA, again, the highest. Unfortunately, because only Preqin reveals the identities of its

underlying funds, it is difficult to know the extent of overlap across the various datasets. The

Preqin numbers overstate U.S. buyout funds because they include some funds raised by U.S. GPs

in dollars that are earmarked for investment outside the U.S. The Burgiss data do not include

such funds.

       Panel A of Table 2 reports capital committed to the buyout funds in the Burgiss, Preqin

and VE performance datasets. Capital commitments for CA funds were not available. The panel

also provides a comparison to the total capital commitments to U.S. buyout funds reported by

Private Equity Analyst (PEA). PEA maintains an annual measure of capital commitments to U.S.

buyout and VC funds that goes back to the early 1980s.

       VE has the greatest coverage of funds in the 1980s, roughly equal to two-thirds of total

capital committed (as reported by PEA). Preqin and Burgiss come in substantially lower at 41%


                                                8
and 29%, respectively. In the 1990s, the coverages in VE and Preqin are similar at over 70%

with Burgiss covering over 50%. In the 2000s, Preqin coverage remains above 70%; Burgiss

increases to over 60%; while VE declines to below 40%.

       These results suggest that the commercial datasets cover a substantial, but incomplete,

fraction of capital committed to buyout funds over the last thirty years. Consistent with the

number of funds covered, these results suggest that VE’s coverage has declined substantially in

the 2000s. Preqin and, likely, CA (with its large number of funds) have the greatest coverage in

the 1990s and 2000s. In the latest vintages of 2006 to 2008, Burgiss’ coverage reaches roughly

the same level as Preqin’s and, likely, CA’s.


B.     Venture capital funds

       Panel B of Table 1 reports the number of U.S. VC funds in each of the datasets from 1984

to 2008. Figure 1 (Panel B) graphs the number of funds. Again VE (and hence Kaplan and

Schoar) have the most coverage for funds in the 1980s. In the 1990s VE and CA have roughly

equal numbers of funds and about 100 (200) more funds than Preqin (Burgiss). Robinson and

Sensoy have substantially fewer 1990s vintage funds than the other four datasets and less than

one-third as many as VE and CA. In the 2000s, VE again tails off markedly dropping well below

Preqin, CA, and Burgiss. Preqin and CA have roughly equal coverage with Burgiss having about

30% or 150 fewer funds over this period.

       Panel B of Table 2 reports capital committed to VC funds in the Burgiss, Preqin and VE

performance datasets, as well as the total capital commitments to U.S. VC funds reported by

PEA. Again, VE has the greatest coverage of funds in the 1980s, with more than 100% of the

PEA estimate of capital committed. Preqin and Burgiss come in substantially lower at 45% and

53%, respectively. In the 1990s, VE remains the highest of the three, but with coverage of




                                                9
roughly 75%. Preqin increases to almost 53% while Burgiss declines to 43%. In the 2000s,

Preqin increases to over 71%; Burgiss increases to over 58%; while VE declines to below 52%.

       As is the case with buyout funds, the commercial datasets appear to cover a substantial,

but incomplete, fraction of capital committed to VC funds over the last three decades. While VE

initially has the most funds, its coverage has declined substantially in the 2000s. VE and, likely,

CA have the greatest coverage in the 1990s while Preqin and, likely, CA have the greatest

coverage in the 2000s. Again, for the most recent vintages (2006 to 2008) Burgiss has close to

the same coverage as do Preqin and CA.



3.     Summary Performance Measures

In this section, we study three measures of private equity performance; each is net of fees. The

first measure is the LP’s annualized IRR based on fund contributions and distributions. The

distributions include the estimated value of any unrealized investments (or residual value) as of

the last reporting date. The second measure is the multiple of invested capital. The multiple’s

numerator is the sum of all fund distributions and the value of unrealized investments. The

denominator is the sum of all fund contributions by LPs.

       The third performance measure is the public market equivalent (PME) from Kaplan and

Schoar (2005). The PME compares an investment in a private equity fund to an equivalently

timed investment in the public market. The PME calculation discounts (or invests) all cash

distributions and residual value to the fund at the public market total return and divides the

resulting value by the value of all cash contributions discounted (or invested) at the public market

total return. A PME greater than one indicates the fund outperformed the public market net of

fees. The PME can be viewed as a market-adjusted multiple of invested capital. A PME of 1.20,

for example, implies that at the end of the fund’s life, investors ended up with 20% more than

they would have if they had invested in the public markets.

                                                10
       We also report (but do not present) an annualized excess return measure using the Long-

Nickels methodology in Kocis et al. (2009). We first calculate the annualized IRR that an

investor in a fund would have earned if it had invested the money in the S&P 500 or relevant

index. We calculate the annualized excess return as the difference between the actual IRR and

the annualized S&P 500 IRR. This excess return measure is positive when the PME is greater

than one and negative when the PME is less than one. We do not focus on this measure because

it has the peculiarity that for a small number of funds with particularly good performance, it is

not possible to calculate a return on an S&P 500 equivalent investment.

       Like Kaplan and Schoar, we use the S&P 500 index to proxy the public market. This is

arguably an appropriate standard of comparison for institutional investors. We do not attempt to

adjust for differences in systematic risk in these basic analyses and thus assume a beta of one. In

their study of publicly traded funds-of-funds that invest in unlisted private equity funds,

Jegadeesh et al. (2009) provide additional justification for this assumption. They find that these

publicly traded funds-of-funds have a market beta of one. Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2011)

report a beta of 1.3 for buyout and a beta of 2.7 for venture. Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) find

betas for VC portfolio investments of roughly 2.5. These results suggest that the assumption of a

beta of one for buyout funds is reasonable while the assumption for VC funds is more debatable.

       Later in the paper, we report on the sensitivity of PMEs if we use alternative benchmark

indices – such as the NASDAQ or growth focused indices – sometimes used by LPs and which

partially control for differences in risk. We also report on the sensitivity of PMEs to assuming

that private equity funds have betas of 1.5 and 2.0.

       Assumptions about residual value have created controversy in the literature and merit

discussion. As we do, Kaplan and Schoar (2005) use the stated residual values (i.e. net asset

values or NAVs) in their analysis of VE data. Again using VE data, Phalippou and Gottschalg

(2009) question the NAVs based on patterns in the data and, in their primary analysis, assume

                                                 11
that for funds beyond their 10th year with no cash flow activity NAVs are zero. However, Stucke

(2011) convincingly demonstrates that VE did not update cash flows and NAVs for many funds.

As a consequence, calculations using VE data that were available to Phalippou and Gottschlag

understate returns for many funds even if the stated NAVs are used. The Phalippou and

Gottschalg (2009) assumption, therefore, is clearly (with hindsight) inappropriate and understates

performance.

       For buyout funds in the Burgiss data, unrealized investments never exceed 3% of invested

capital for the median fund in pre-1999 vintages. Unrealized investments are only 10% of

invested capital for the median 1999 fund. The Burgiss results for pre-2000 vintages, therefore,

represent largely realized funds. Residual value assumptions cannot affect the results for those

vintages. Unrealized investments do become more important for the later vintages, increasing to a

median of 38%, 42%, 55% and 71% for 2000 to 2003 vintages, and exceeding 80% for vintages

after 2003. The residual value assumptions, therefore, become increasingly important for more

recent vintages.

       For the Burgiss VC funds, unrealized investments never exceed 3% of invested capital for

the median fund in pre-1999 vintages. As with the buyout funds, unrealized investments increase

thereafter, moving to 15%, 33%, 39%, 45%, and 58% for 1999 to 2003 vintages, and exceeding

75% of invested capital for vintages after 2003.

       The residual values from Burgiss that we use benefit from two features not available to

authors of the earlier papers. First, since the end of 2009, topic 820 of the Financial Accounting

Standards Board (FASB) requires private equity firms to value their assets at fair value every

quarter, rather than permitting them to value the assets at cost until an explicit valuation change.

This has likely had the practical effect of making estimated unrealized values closer to true

market values than in the past, particularly for buyout funds. Second, the Burgiss figures for both

distributions and NAVs are up-to-date because the data are sourced directly from LPs, subject to

                                                   12
extensive cross-checking, and part of the Burgiss systems that are used for the LPs’ monitoring

and record-keeping.


A.      IRRs

(i)     Buyouts

        Panel A of Table 3 reports the (capital) weighted average, average and median vintage

year IRRs for U.S. buyout funds for the different datasets. Figure 2 graphs the weighted average

and average returns.

        The clearest pattern in the data is the consistently lower returns for VE: VE returns are

significantly lower than those derived from the other three commercial sources.                      This is

particularly true for 1990s and 2000s vintages, when all four datasets have a reasonably large

number of funds. The VE returns also are significantly lower than the returns for the 1990s

vintages in Robinson and Sensoy (2011a) (that make up the bulk of their sample). This pattern is

consistent with the finding in Stucke (2011) that VE systematically understates buyout returns,

and may help explain why so many funds are able to characterize themselves as top quartile: they

likely compare themselves to the VE benchmarks.5 In fact, the median IRRs from Burgiss,

Preqin and CA exceed the top quartile IRRs in VE in roughly 20% of the vintage years.

Interestingly, the VE returns are not lower than those of the other datasets for the 1980s vintages,

suggesting that problems with the VE methodology surfaced after that.

        The returns of Burgiss, Preqin, CA, and Robinson and Sensoy (for 1990s vintages)

portray a consistent picture; their mean IRRs are not significantly different from each other

overall or for 1990s and 2000s vintages. These results suggest that it is highly likely that VE

returns understate buyout fund performance. Furthermore, the consistency of the returns from


5
  This was confirmed anecdotally by a GP who told one of us his firm routinely chose to show VE as a benchmark
because the VE benchmark returns were lower.

                                                     13
Burgiss, Preqin, CA, and Robinson and Sensoy (for 1990s vintages) – despite very different

sample selection criteria – suggests that they likely represent reliable measures of average buyout

fund performance.

(ii)   Venture capital

       Panel B of Table 3 reports the (capital) weighted average, average and median vintage

year IRRs for U.S. VC funds for the different datasets. Figure 3 graphs the weighted average and

average returns. Capital weighted IRRs for VC funds are generally consistent across VE, Preqin

and CA overall and for 1990s and 2000s vintages. The Burgiss returns also are consistent with

these three for 2000s vintages. Burgiss returns are somewhat higher for 1990s vintages where

Burgiss has fewer funds than the other three sources. The returns to the generally fewer funds in

Robinson and Sensoy are significantly lower than those in the other four datasets strongly

suggesting that the Robinson and Sensoy VC sample has a downward bias.

       Average and median IRRs for VC funds show VE returns are somewhat lower than those

for Burgiss, Preqin and CA. For 1980s vintages, average and median IRRs from VE are lower

than those from the three other sources. For the 1990s, the pattern is similar but less pronounced.

All four datasets have similar VC results for 2000s vintages.

       Overall, the four major datasets are in closer agreement on VC funds than on buyout

funds, although VE data, again, produce lower estimates of performance than do the other

sources. Again, these patterns suggest that the other datasets are likely to provide more reliable

measures of VC performance than do VE data.


B.     Multiples

(i)    Buyouts

       Panel A of Table 4 reports the (capital) weighted average, average and median investment

multiples (net of fees) for U.S. buyout funds by vintage year. Figure 4 (Panel A) graphs the

                                                14
average multiples. We do not have weighted average or median vintage multiples from CA or

Robinson and Sensoy (2011a).

       The patterns for multiples are similar to those for IRRs.         Multiples from VE are

consistently and significantly lower than those from Burgiss, Preqin and CA. This is true for

1980s, 1990s, and 2000s vintages. While, on average, Preqin multiples are the highest, this is

driven by particularly high multiples for Preqin in the 1980s. Since the mid-90s, the average

multiples have ranged largely between 1.0 and 2.0 in all four commercial databases. The

multiples for Burgiss, Preqin and CA are very similar in the 1990s and 2000s and suggest, again,

that despite different sample selection criteria they are likely to represent reliable measures of

average buyout fund performance.

(ii)   Venture Capital

       Panel B of Table 4 reports the weighted average, average and median investment

multiples for U.S. venture funds. Figure 4 (Panel B) graphs the average multiples. The average

multiples are well above 2.0 in most of the 1990s and at roughly 1.0 for most of the 2000s.

       As with the IRRs, the average and median VE multiples are lower than those from Preqin,

Burgiss and CA for 1980s and 1990s vintages, but not for 2000s vintages. The capital weighted

averages for VE are also somewhat lower than those of Burgiss and Preqin for the 1980s and

1990s. Again, the Burgiss, Preqin and CA multiples are similar to one another overall and for

each of the decades, despite different sample selection criteria.


C.     Public Market Equivalents (PMEs)

       In this section, we report PMEs calculated using the individual fund-level cash flows from

Burgiss. The relatively similar results for Burgiss, CA and Preqin in terms of IRRs and multiples

in the previous sections suggest that the Burgiss PMEs are likely to be representative of the

PMEs that would be calculated using the other two datasets. We explore this is greater detail in

                                                 15
section 4. For comparison purposes, we also report the analogous PME calculations from Kaplan

and Schoar (2005) and Robinson and Sensoy (2011a).

(i)    Buyouts

       Panel A of Table 5 reports, by vintage year, the (capital) weighted average PMEs for U.S.

buyout funds for Burgiss, Kaplan and Schoar, and Robinson and Sensoy, as well as the average

and median for Burgiss. Figure 5 (Panel A) graphs the weighted average multiples.

       In the Burgiss dataset, the PMEs of buyout funds consistently and significantly exceed

1.0. The average of the weighted average vintage PMEs is 1.27; the average of the averages is

1.22; and the average of the medians is 1.16. All of these significantly exceed 1.0. The weighted

average, average, and median PMEs also exceed 1.0 in all three decades. The weighted average

and the average buyout PMEs each exceed 1.0 for 20 of 25 vintages from 1984 to 2008; even the

median PME exceeds 1.0 for 19 of 25 vintages. Three of the six vintage years with a median

below 1.0 – 1984, 1985 and 1992 – have five or fewer funds. In vintage years with at least 10

funds, the median PME is below 1.0 in only 2 of 15 years. And, the average fund in the entire

sample has an average PME of 1.20 and a median PME of 1.11.

       The average PMEs of at least 1.20 to 1.27 by all three measures – weighted average

vintage, average vintage, and sample average – imply outperformance of 20% to 27% over the

life of the fund relative to investing in the S&P 500.

       We also calculate an annualized excess return measure using the Long-Nickels

methodology in Kocis et al. (2009). We find that the average fund in the sample has a return that

is 6.6% greater than if it had been invested in the S&P 500 while the median is 3.4%. The capital

weighted average excess return is 3.7% while the median is 3.0%. We could not calculate an

S&P 500 equivalent for 22 funds. These funds have an average PME of 2.0. If we assume these




                                                 16
funds have an excess return of 10% (top quartile) and include them, the averages increase by

0.10% and the medians increase by 0.40%.

       These results strongly suggest that the buyout funds in Burgiss have significantly

outperformed public markets for a long period of time.          Not only have top quartile funds

outperformed, but so have average and median funds. The Burgiss results also are largely

consistent with those of Robinson and Sensoy on average. While PMEs from Burgiss and

Robinson and Sensoy differ for individual vintage years, the overall conclusion that buyout

PMEs exceed 1.0 is the same.

       The Burgiss results are based on a relatively large number of 1990s and 2000s vintage

funds; the Robinson and Sensoy results on a relatively large number of 1990s vintage funds. The

1980s results, in contrast, are based on a smaller number of funds, particularly relative to those in

VE. The Kaplan and Schoar results, however, suggest the same conclusion for 1980s vintages.

As mentioned before, Stucke (2011) and our earlier results provide strong evidence that VE, and

hence Kaplan and Schoar, understate returns to 1980s and 1990s vintage funds. Like Burgiss,

Robinson and Sensoy find that PMEs exceed 1.0 for 1980s vintage funds.

       Overall then, the Burgiss and Robinson and Sensoy results suggest that 1980s and 1990s

buyout fund vintages have average PMEs that exceed 1.0. The Burgiss results suggest that 2000s

buyout fund vintages through 2005 have PMEs substantially greater than 1.0 conditional on the

valuations of unrealized investments being unbiased or, not overly upward biased estimates of the

actual values. Given the scrutiny such valuations receive post-topic 820, this seems a reasonable

assumption. The results for the 2000s vintages are buttressed by the consistency of the Burgiss

IRRs and multiples with those of CA and Preqin.                 To invalidate the conclusion of

outperformance, all three reliable commercial datasets – Burgiss, CA, and Preqin – as well as the

large LP analyzed by Robinson and Sensoy (2011a) would have to be subject to a similar positive

selection bias despite very different data collection and reporting methods.

                                                 17
           It is worth pointing out again that the eventual performance for the more recent 2000s

vintages will depend on the future realization of investments over the funds’ remaining lives.

That performance will improve if the historical J-Curve pattern of private equity funds – in which

fund multiples increase over a fund’s life – continues to hold.6

(ii)       Venture capital

           Panel B of Table 5 reports, by vintage year, the weighted average PMEs for U.S. VC

funds for Burgiss, Robinson and Sensoy, and Kaplan and Schoar, as well as the average and

median for Burgiss. Figure 5 (Panel B) graphs the weighted average multiples.

           All three datasets are in agreement that PMEs are less than one for 1984 to 1986 vintages.

In the Burgiss data, PMEs for vintages from 1987 to 1998 exceed 1.0 with the 1996 vintage

having a weighted-average PME above 4.0. Kaplan and Schoar PMEs also exceed 1.0 for those

vintages with the exception of 1987 at 0.98. The Robinson and Sensoy PMEs, like the Robinson

and Sensoy IRRs, are appreciably lower over this period although they, too, exceed 1.0 for most

of the vintages. As was the case for buyout funds, most of the VC funds in the vintages through

1998 are largely fully realized.

           From 1999 to 2008, the pattern reverses in the Burgiss data. Except for 2005, none of

those vintages have a weighted average or simple average PME greater than 1.0. The 1999 to

2002 vintages are particularly low with weighted average and average PMEs all at 0.90 or below.

Vintages from 2003 to 2007 do better with weighted average PMEs close to and not significantly

different from 1.0. As with the buyout funds, these vintages are not yet fully realized.

           Overall, then, the results suggest that VC PMEs exceeded 1.0 for most of the 1990s by a

fairly wide margin. Since 1999, they have been less than 1.0, being particularly low for 1999 to




6
    See Kocis et al. (2009) for a description of the J-Curve.

                                                                18
2002 vintages. As with the buyout fund results, the venture capital fund results for the more

recent vintages are potentially subject to change as unrealized investments are realized.


D.      Sensitivity of PMEs to the Choice of Index

        So far our PME calculations have used the S&P 500 since it is a widely used proxy for

U.S. public market returns and allows direct comparison to past research. To gauge the sensitivity

of our results, Table 6 reports vintage-year average, average, and median PMEs using different

indices, each of which represents a public market alternative for investing funds.7 Overall, the

results are similar across the indices.

        For buyout funds (Panel A), the average vintage-year PMEs exceed one measured against

each of the benchmark indices. They are of similar magnitude (1.20 to 1.22) using the S&P500,

the Russell 3000, the Nasdaq index, and the (small cap) Russell 2000 index. The average

vintage-year PME is slightly lower (1.16), but still positive, using the narrower Russell 2000

Value (small cap value). Average vintage-year PMEs also are consistent across time – they all

exceed one for each of the indices in each of the three decades for which we have data.

        The overall sample average PMEs also exceed 1.0 across all indices. Measured against

the S&P 500, the Russell 3000, and the Nasdaq, sample average PMEs are 1.20, 1.18 and 1.17,

respectively. They are lower using the Russell 2000 (1.11) and the Russell 2000 Value (1.07),

but still greater than 1.0. The lower PMEs for the Russell 2000 Value index are driven by PMEs

below 1.0 for the late 1990s vintages, and are consistent with buyout fund investments having

value characteristics.

        For venture funds (Panel B), the average vintage-year PMEs exceed one across all

indices. At the same time, however, the average vintage-year PMEs all are below 1.0 in the

2000s and well above 1.0 in the 1990s.             Sample average PMEs are similar for the different
7
  For instance, a number of LPs indicated to us that they considered the Nasdaq or Russell 2000 better benchmarks
for VC as these indices capture returns to smaller firms.

                                                       19
indices with the lowest using the Nasdaq (1.12) and the highest using the Russell 2000 Growth

index (1.25).

       Overall, Table 6 shows that average PMEs across our sample are robust to a range of

public market benchmarks. This reinforces our conclusions about private equity performance

from the prior section. In keeping with prior research, we rely on PMEs using the S&P 500 for

the remainder of our analysis.


E.     Sensitivity of PMEs to Beta or Systematic Risk

       As mentioned above, our PME analyses implicitly assume the private equity funds have a

beta of one. This is consistent with previous work on private equity performance. It also is

consistent with actual estimates of beta for buyout funds. The relatively stable and positive

pattern of PMEs for buyout funds that we find over the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s, periods of very

different market returns is particularly consistent with the assumption of a beta of 1.

       Nevertheless, to consider the reasonableness of this assumption, we approximated

assuming betas of 1.5 and 2.0 by estimating PMEs assuming that an alternative investment

earned, respectively, 1.5 times and 2 times the return on the S&P 500.

       For buyout funds, we find that the average fund has a PME of 1.20, 1.18, and 1.20,

respectively, assuming public market returns of 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 times the S&P 500. The median

PMEs are, respectively, 1.12, 1.11, and 1.13. The PMEs are similarly insensitive for 1990s

vintages and 2000s vintages. These PMEs are remarkably insensitive to the multiple of the S&P

500 return. We conclude that systematic risk does not explain our PME results for buyout funds.

       For venture capital funds, we find that the average fund has a PME of 1.21, 1.10, and

1.07, respectively, assuming public market returns of 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 times the S&P 500. The

medians are much closer at 0.90, 0.87 and 0.85. The average 1990s fund has a PME of 1.77,

1.53, and 1.40, respectively. The 2000s fund has a PME of 0.94, 0.95, and 0.99, respectively.


                                                 20
These results suggest that the systematic risk assumption makes a moderate difference,

particularly in the 1990s. Venture Capital funds may have had a beta greater than 1.0 in the

1990s, but do not appear to have such a beta in the 2000s. It is important to stress that our basic

conclusions are unchanged regardless of systematic risk – VC funds outperformed in the 1990s

and underperformed in the 2000s.



4.         Relation of Absolute and Relative Performance Measures

Most commercial data providers and practitioners calculate and report absolute measures of

private equity performance – IRRs and multiples of invested capital. To our knowledge, only

Burgiss calculates and reports performance relative to public markets. Burgiss reports the Kaplan

Schoar-based PME as well as the Long-Nickels based market-adjusted IRR.8

           A logical question is whether the absolute fund IRRs and multiples can be used to predict

relative or market-adjusted performance in the absence of having fund cash flows to make that

calculation directly. The answer to this question is also relevant for a debate among practitioners

as to whether IRRs or multiples are better indicators of performance. Said another way, do IRRs

or multiples provide more accurate indicators of market-adjusted performance?

           Accordingly, in this section, we use the Burgiss cash-flow data to explore the relation of

PMEs to IRRs and multiples. In Table 7, we show regressions of PMEs on IRRs and multiples.

We report standard errors both unclustered and clustered by vintage years. Clustering by vintage

years increases standard errors, but all coefficients of interest remain strongly statistically

significant.      Panel A reports results for each vintage year; Panel B summarizes results for

vintages starting with 1993 because from that year onward all VC vintages and all but one

vintage for buyout funds have at least ten observations. We focus on the Panel A regressions

which are reinforced by very similar results in Panel B.

8
    See Kocis et al. (2009) for a description of the Long-Nickels calculation.

                                                            21
       Columns 1 to 3 of Panel A report regressions, each with vintage year dummies, of buyout

fund PMEs on IRRs, on multiples and on both IRRs and multiples. Buyout fund PMEs are

strongly related to IRRs and multiples. IRRs and vintage years alone explain 75% of the

variation in PMEs; multiples and vintage years alone, 88% of the variation; and IRRs, multiples

and vintage years explain 90% of the variation in PMEs. In other words, it is possible to predict

a buyout fund’s PME with a great degree of reliability knowing a fund’s IRR, multiple, and

vintage year. Multiples explain substantially more of the variation in PMEs than do IRRs.

       Columns 4 to 6 of Panel repeat the regressions for VC funds. Again, both IRRs and

multiples explain a significant amount of variation in PMEs. And, as with buyout funds,

multiples explain substantially more of the variation in PMEs than do IRRs.

       These results have two implications for understanding performance. First, the consistent

findings for both buyout and VC funds suggest that multiples are more robust indicators of fund

performance relative to public markets than are IRRs (controlling for vintage year). Second, each

0.10 increase in a multiple (equal to 10% of invested capital) is associated with an increase in

PME of 0.066 for buyout and 0.055 for VC funds. If the funds have an effective duration of

about five years and we use the estimated impact on PME, a 0.10 increase in multiple translates

to roughly an additional 100 to 125 basis points per year relative to public markets.

       In Table 8, we report regressions of PMEs on IRRs and multiples for individual vintage

years from 1993 to 2008. Again, we start with 1993 because from that year onward all VC

vintages and all but one vintage for buyout funds have at least ten observations. For both buyout

(Panel A) and VC (Panel B) funds, IRRs and multiples explain a large amount of the variation of

PMEs within vintage years. There is not one vintage year in which IRRs and multiples explain

less than 86% of the variation in PMEs. In all but three of the thirty-two vintage year cohorts,

IRRs and multiples explain at least 93% of the variation in PMEs. As with the combined



                                                 22
regressions in Table 7, multiples typically provide greater explanatory power for PMEs than do

IRRs.



5.      Estimated PMEs in VE, Preqin and CA Databases.

An important implication of the vintage year regressions in section 4 is that PMEs can be

estimated with a great degree of reliability given a fund’s (or funds’) IRR, multiple and vintage

year. This is true even if one does not have a fund’s cash flows, but only the (summary) IRR and

multiple. We take this implication seriously in Table 9. For each vintage year for each of the

three commercial databases (VE, Preqin and CA), we apply the regression coefficients from

Table 8 to the multiples and IRRs for the vintage year to estimate PMEs for each vintage year for

each database.


A.      Buyouts

        The estimates in Panel A imply that the weighted average and average PMEs for buyout

funds of 1990s and 2000s vintages exceed 1.0 for all three commercial databases just as they do

for the Burgiss data. As with the IRRs and multiples, the PME estimates for VE are lower than

those of Preqin, CA and Burgiss both in the 1990s and 2000s. The CA PMEs are the highest, but

only slightly larger than those from Burgiss and Preqin which are themselves similar in size.

        Consistent with the previous section, these PME results indicate that buyout funds in the

commercial databases have consistently outperformed public markets for some time.               Such

outperformance holds despite the different selection criteria and data gathering methods used by

the datasets. This alignment of PME results suggests that it is likely that buyout funds as an asset

class indeed have outperformed public markets for some time. Confirmation of this claim must

await the emergence of a complete buyout fund dataset. Nevertheless, for this conclusion to turn




                                                23
out to be incorrect, the four commercial datasets (as well as Robinson and Sensoy (2011a)) with

different selection criteria would all have to have a substantial positive selection bias.


B.      Venture Capital

        Panel B of Table 9 repeats our analysis for VC funds. The results are consistent across all

four commercial datasets. VC funds outperformed public markets substantially in the 1990s in

all four datasets. Burgiss and CA show somewhat stronger performance than Preqin and VE.

This may be driven by problems with VE data that lead to understated returns and Preqin’s

inability to use publicly available sources to obtain returns for some prominent VC funds. In

contrast to the strong VC performance in the 1990s, VC funds with 2000s vintages modestly

underperform public markets in all four commercial datasets. The estimated PMEs are similar

across all four datasets.



6.      Relation of Performance to Fund Flows and Fund Size

In this section, we use Burgiss data to examine two possible determinants of private equity

performance which have been studied in prior research – the relation of performance to aggregate

private equity capital commitments (or fund flows) and the relation of private equity performance

to fund size.


A.      Fund Flows

        Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) and Robinson and Sensoy

(2011a) all find some evidence that increased aggregate capital commitments to buyout and

venture capital funds are related to subsequent performance.

        In our analysis, we report the weighted average performance of all funds in a vintage year.

We use Burgiss data because we have consistent measures of all three performance metrics



                                                  24
(IRRs, investment multiples and PMEs) over time. The results are qualitatively and statistically

similar using unweighted average performance. To measure fund flows into the industry, we take

capital committed to U.S. buyout and VC funds using annual estimates from PEA for the current

and previous vintage year. This sum provides a measure of the amount of capital available to

fund deals. In order to compare these capital flows over a long period of time, we deflate the

two-year capital commitments by the total value of the U.S. stock market at the beginning of the

vintage year. Our aggregate capital commitment variable, therefore, reflects the amount of fund

buying power available relative to the total value of the stock market. In a typical year, the two-

year capital commitments to buyout funds average 0.76% (median of 0.70%) of the stock market

value. The two-year capital commitments to VC funds average 0.27% (median of 0.23%).

       Panel A of Table 10 reports regressions using all vintages, whereas Panel B employs

vintages beginning in 1993 when Burgiss begins to have more substantial fund coverage.

Consistent with Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) and Robinson and Sensoy (2011a), buyout fund

IRRs and multiples are significantly negatively related to capital commitments both over the

entire sample period and in the more recent 1993 to 2008 period. As in the previous papers, this

result strongly suggests that an influx of capital into buyout funds is associated with lower

subsequent returns. The regression coefficients imply that when capital flows increase from the

bottom quartile of years (0.42%) to the top quartile of years (0.87%), IRRs decline by more than

500 basis points or 5% per year while multiples decline by 0.3 to 0.45.

       We also find a negative relation between PMEs and capital commitments. This relation is

economically, but not statistically significant over the entire period. However, for the more

recent period (Panel B) the relation is statistically significant at the 1% level and capital

commitments explain 42% of the variation in PMEs. It turns out that the insignificance over the

entire sample period is driven by the observations in 1984 and 1985 when Burgiss has relatively

few observations. When these two years are excluded, the relation is statistically significant at

                                                25
the 7% level. The coefficients imply that PMEs decline by 0.08 to 0.14 when capital flows move

from the bottom to top quartile.

       These results support the conclusion that buyout funds’ performance relative to public

markets is negatively related to aggregate commitments to those funds. This finding differs from

that in Robinson and Sensoy (2011a), likely due to the relatively shorter time series in their data.

       Turning to VC funds, IRRs and multiples are significantly negatively related to capital

commitments both over the entire sample period (Panel A) and in the more recent vintages (Panel

B). This finding is consistent with Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) and Robinson and Sensoy

(2011a) and strongly suggests that an influx of capital into VC funds is associated with lower

subsequent returns. The regression coefficients imply that when capital flows increase from the

bottom quartile of years (0.18%) to the top quartile of years (0.30%), IRRs decline by 780 to 900

basis points per year while multiples decline by 0.65 to 0.75.

       As with buyout funds, we find a negative relation between PMEs and capital

commitments for VC funds, consistent with Robinson and Sensoy (2011a). The relation is

significant (at the 5% level) for the more recent period and is also significant (at the 10% level)

over the entire period. The coefficients imply that PMEs decline by 0.23 to 0.33 when capital

flows move from the bottom to top quartile.

       These results support the conclusion that VC fund returns relative to public markets are

negatively related to VC fund capital commitments. The performance sensitivities to flows, both

absolute and relative, appear to be substantially larger for VC funds than for buyout funds.


B.     Fund Size

       Using the VE database, Kaplan and Schoar (2005) find a concave relation between

performance and fund size for VC funds, but not for buyout funds. Robinson and Sensoy




                                                 26
(20011a) find that PMEs for both buyout and VC funds are modestly concave in the log of fund

size. We undertake a similar, but slightly different, analysis using the Burgiss data.

       Most practitioners are concerned with how performance varies with fund size.             We

address this question by classifying buyout and VC funds into size quartiles by decade. For

example, we take all buyout funds in our sample with vintage years in the 1980s and put those

funds into size quartiles. We do the same for buyout funds in the 1990s and in the 2000s. We

then look at the performance of the different fund quartiles. We do the analogous procedure for

VC funds.

       Panel A of Table 11 presents the quartile cutoffs for buyout and VC fund size for the

three different decades. Buyout fund sizes have increased markedly over time going from an

average size of $390 million in the 1980s to $782 million in the 1990s to $1.4 billion in the

2000s. VC fund sizes also increased from an average of $77 million to $191 million to $358

million.

       Panel A also reports the three measures of fund performance by size quartile for buyout

and VC funds. These measures do not control for vintage year. Panel B regresses the three

measures of performance against dummy variables for size quartiles, again not controlling for

vintage year. Panel C runs the same regressions, but controls for vintage year.

       For buyouts, PMEs and multiples are not significantly related to fund size whether

vintage year dummies are included or not. PMEs for funds in the smallest size quartile are the

lowest, but they are not significantly different from PMEs of the other size quartiles. The only

significant relation is for IRRs. Funds in the 2nd and 3rd size quartile have higher IRRs than funds

in the first quartile controlling for vintage year. Combined with the insignificant results for

multiples and PMEs, this suggests that funds in the 2nd and 3rd size quartile hold their investments

for a shorter period of time than those in the other two quartiles.         These findings remain



                                                 27
consistent with those in Kaplan and Schoar who find no relation between size and performance

for buyout funds.

        For VC funds, when we control for vintage year (Panel C), we find a strong positive

relation between size and all three measures of performance. Funds in the smallest size quartile

significantly underperform funds in the 3rd and 4th size quartiles. Fund performance, however,

does not drop off with size. Controlling for vintage year, funds in the 4th size quartile have the

best performance albeit not significantly greater than the performance of the 3rd and even 2nd size

quartiles.

        In unreported regressions, like Robinson and Sensoy, we find a concave relation between

PME and the log of fund size for both buyout and VC funds controlling for vintage year. The

regression coefficients, however, are significant only at the 12% level for buyout funds and are

not at all significant for VC funds.

        Overall, then, the results suggest a concave relation between size and performance for VC

funds, but one that is driven by lower returns to smaller funds.



7.      Summary and Implications

Our research highlights the importance of high quality data to our understanding of private equity

and the returns it provides to investors. Many of the existing papers in the academic literature

relied upon data whose reliability has recently been questioned, and focused on funds raised up

until the mid-1990s. The recent enormous growth in investor allocations to private equity funds

has created the need for a re-evaluation of the performance of the asset class, and this paper is the

first to take advantage of a new research-quality cash flow data set from Burgiss, using data as of

March 2011. We believe our paper has several implications.

        First, it seems highly likely that buyout funds have outperformed public markets in the

1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. This conclusion is supported not only from our analysis of the Burgiss

                                                 28
data but also using the other existing commercial datasets – Preqin, and CA – as well as

Robinson and Sensoy (2011), who rely on data from a single large LP. Our estimates imply that

each dollar invested in the average fund returned at least 20% more than a dollar invested in the

S&P 500. This works out to an outperformance of at least 3% per year. The VE dataset, despite

a likely downward bias, also implies that the average buyout fund has outperformed public

markets. These conclusions appear to be insensitive to assumptions about benchmark indices and

systematic risk. For the more recent vintage funds, however, the eventual performance will

depend on the ultimate realization of their remaining investments, which could be higher or lower

than the current valuations upon which we rely.

       We acknowledge that the different datasets may not constitute complete samples of

buyout funds. Accordingly, confirmation of our outperformance result must await the emergence

of a complete buyout fund dataset. Nevertheless, for the conclusion of outperformance to turn

out to be incorrect, all the various datasets would have to have a substantial positive selection

bias. We believe that is unlikely. It is worth adding that all of the performance results are net of

fees. The results from Burgiss and the other datasets imply that the buyout funds outperformed

public markets much more substantially gross of fees. Nailing down the sources of this large

outperformance would seem a fruitful subject for future research.

       Second, VC funds outperformed public markets substantially in the 1990s, but have

underperformed in the 2000s. All four commercial datasets support that conclusion. These

conclusions, too, do not appear sensitive to assumptions about systematic risk.

       Third, within a given vintage year, PMEs are reliably related to IRRs and investment

multiples for both buyout and VC funds. In vintage year regressions, IRR and investment

multiples explain at least 93% of the variation of PMEs in most vintage years. When vintage

years are combined, IRR, investment multiples and year dummies explain at least 90% of the

variation in PMEs. As a result, researchers and practitioners can use our models to estimate

                                                  29
PMEs without having underlying fund cash flows as long they have access to IRRs and

investment multiples.

         Fourth, investment multiples generally provide better measures of performance relative to

public markets than do IRRs. In regressions to explain PMEs, investment multiples consistently

explain substantially more variation than do IRRs. These findings suggests that LPs interested in

outperforming public markets should place more weight on investment multiples.

         Fifth, vintage year performance for buyout and VC funds, both absolute and relative to

public markets, decreases with the level of aggregate capital committed to the relevant asset

class. This suggests that a contrarian investment strategy would have been successful in the past

in these asset classes. The magnitudes of these relations have been greater for VC funds. Why

these patterns have persisted is something of a puzzle and an interesting topic for future research.

         Finally, although it is natural to benchmark private equity returns against public markets,

investing in a portfolio of private equity funds across vintage years inevitably involves

uncertainties and potential costs related to the timing of cash flows and the liquidity of holdings

that differ from those in public markets. For instance, there is uncertainty regarding how much to

commit to private equity funds to achieve a target portfolio allocation. This is due to the

uncertain time profile of capital calls and realizations. Consequently, there exists “commitment

risk” when investing in private equity. This contrasts with investing in public markets where

there is no distinction between capital committed and invested, and trading is continuous.

Estimating plausible ranges9 for a commitment risk premium is a subject for future research that

we hope to explore with the Burgiss cash flow data.


9
  The size of the commitment risk premium is likely to depend upon the ability (or willingness) of the investor to
diversify their holdings across vintage years and, within vintage years, between funds. Given that many funds have
minimum investment levels, this in turn would depend upon the overall size of the portfolio being managed.
Furthermore, the cost of deviating from an “optimal” portfolio allocation, and the impact of cash-flow uncertainty,
will vary across investors. Hence, it is likely that commitment risk will vary significantly across investors. Note that
such risks could be mitigated, to some extent, by secondary transactions to sell commitments to private equity funds.
However, the development of such trading is still in its infancy.

                                                          30
References

Cornelius, P., 2011, International Investments in Private Equity: Asset Allocation, Markets, and Industry
Structure, London, UK: Academic Press.

Harris, R., T. Jenkinson, and R. Stucke, 2010, A White Paper on Private Equity Data and Research, UAI
Foundation Working Paper, University of Virginia.

Jegadeesh, N., R. Kraussl, and J. Pollet, 2009, Risk and Expected Returns of Private Equity Investments:
Evidence Based on Market Prices. Journal of Finance.

Jones, C. and M. Rhodes-Kropf, 2004, The Price of Diversifiable Risk in Venture Capital and Private
Equity. Working Paper, Columbia University

Kaplan, S. N., and A. Schoar, 2005. Private Equity Returns: Persistence and Capital flows. Journal of
Finance 60, 1791-1823.

Kaplan, S.N. and P. Strömberg, 2009, Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Winter, 121-146.

Kocis, James M., James C. Bachman, Austin M. Long and Craig J. Nickels, 2009, Inside Private Equity,
Hoboken, N.J., USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Korteweg, Arthur and Morten Sorensen, 2010. Risk and Return Characteristics of Venture Capital-Backed
Entrepreneurial Companies. Review of Financial Studies.

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar and Wan Wongsunwai, 2007, Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices? The
Limited Partner Performance Puzzle, Journal of Finance 62:731-64.

Ljungqvist, A. and M. Richardson, 2003, The Cash Flow, Return, and Risk Characteristics of Private
Equity. Working Paper No. 9495, NBER.

Ljungqvist, A., M. Richardson, and D. Wolfenzon, 2007, The Investment Behavior of Buyout Funds:
Theory and Evidence.

Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010. The Economics of Private Equity Funds. Review of Financial
Studies 23: 2303-2341.

Phalippou, Ludovic and Oliver Gottschalg, 2009, The Performance of Private Equity Funds, Review of
Financial Studies Vol. 22, No. 4, 1747-1776.

Robinson, D. and B. Sensoy, 2011a, Private Equity in the 21st Century: Liquidity, Cash Flows, and
Performance from 1984-2010, Working Paper, Duke University and Ohio State University.

Robinson, David and Berk Sensoy, 2011b. Manager Compensation, Ownership, and the Cash Flow
Performance of Private Equity Funds, Working Paper, Duke University and Ohio State University.

Stucke, R., 2011, Updating History, Working Paper, Oxford University

Swensen, D. 2000, Pioneering Portfolio Management: An Unconventional Approach to Institutional
Investment. Free Press.




                                                    31
                        Table 1: Number of Funds in Private Equity Datasets
This table shows the number of funds in the various private equity datasets, for which performance data are
available. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, and Panel B on venture capital, using the classifications provided by the
suppliers or authors. Only funds with a North American geographical focus are included.

                                         Panel A : Buyout Funds
Vintage                 Burgiss       Venture        Preqin     Cambridge                 Kaplan-      Robinson-
                                    Economics                   Associates                 Schoar        Sensoy
1984                           2            7              6                                    6
1985                           1            7              3                                   12
1986                           5           10              9            11                     16               1
1987                           7           25              7           12                      22               8
1988                           7           17            14            17                      21              14
1989                           8           24            10            18                      22              16
1990                           2            9            14              8                     14               7
1991                           4            5              8            11                      6               2
1992                           5           15            17            14                      17               4
1993                          11           21            18            25                      11               9
1994                          13           26            24            21                       6              24
1995                          17           23            22            33                       7              24
1996                           9           23            24            38                                      41
1997                          30           40            35            51                                      40
1998                          38           53            50            52                                      59
1999                          28           38            43            55                                      59
2000                          39           46            67            72                                      68
2001                          26           27            25            22                                      26
2002                          21           15            28            32                                       5
2003                          13           13            29            34                                       8
2004                          46           17            35            62                                       3
2005                          57           20            63            78                                       2
2006                          67           26            60            72                                       8
2007                          74           22            65            70                                       6
2008                          68           14            53            54                                      12
Total                        598          543           729           862                      160            446
Total 2000-08                411          200           425           496
Total 1990-99                157          253           255           308                       61            269
Total 1984-89                 30           90            49            58                       99             39
                                     Panel B : Venture Capital Funds
Vintage                 Burgiss       Venture        Preqin       Cambridge               Kaplan-      Robinson-
                                    Economics                     Associates               Schoar        Sensoy
1984                          18           63            17              32                    57              6
1985                          20           46            23              25                    37              5
1986                          12           41            19              30                    36              3
1987                          17           64            21              34                    63              6
1988                          16           44            24              26                    42              9
1989                          18           50            38              37                    45            10
1990                          13           21            20              16                    20              1
1991                           6           18            12              17                    11
1992                          17           27            22              23                    18               4
1993                          13           41            32              37                    45               5
1994                          20           36            31              42                    49               7
1995                          18           49            29              34                    43              13
1996                          20           36            35              40                                    13
1997                          33           64            54              73                                    19
1998                          46           78            59              81                                    36
1999                          65          107            78             112                                    40
2000                          80          122           115             155                                    55
2001                          48           59            66              52                                    18
2002                          18           20            47              32                                     7
2003                          25           17            37              34
2004                          32           22            51              64
2005                          48           20            58              58                                      1
2006                          62           37            77              67
2007                          65           18            71              50                                      2
2008                          45           14            57              55
Total                        775         1114          1093            1226                    466            260
Total 2000-08                423          329           579             567
Total 1990-99                251          477           372             475                    186            138
Total 1984-89                101          308           142             184                    280             39

                                                         32
    Table 2: Capital Commitments Represented in Private Equity Performance Datasets
This table shows the estimated total commitments to private equity funds each year, as estimated by Private Equity
Analyst. Burgiss, Venture Economics and Preqin report performance data for a subset of funds. We show the size of
the funds covered by these databases in dollars and relative to the Private Equity Analyst’s estimates of the total size
of the market in each year. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, and Panel B on venture capital, using the classifications
provided by the suppliers or authors. Only funds with a North American geographical focus are included.

                                                   Panel A : Buyout Funds
                Total Fund Commitments     Commitments to Funds with Performance      Funds with Performance Data as a
                 as Estimated by Private                Data ($bn)                   Fraction of Total Fund Commitments
                  Equity Analyst ($bn)        Burgiss       Venture         Preqin     Burgiss         Venture       Preqin
Vintage                                                  Economics                                  Economics
1984                       1.8                    1.1            1.7           1.2        0.64           0.94          0.68
1985                       2.4                    1.2            1.3           0.2        0.52           0.55          0.08
1986                       6.8                    2.0            1.9           1.4        0.29           0.28          0.21
1987                      14.7                    2.3           13.0           7.1        0.16           0.89          0.49
1988                      10.7                    2.8            8.7           5.8        0.26           0.82          0.55
1989                      11.9                    4.3            5.6           4.1        0.37           0.47          0.34
1990                       4.8                    2.6            2.5           2.1        0.55           0.53          0.43
1991                       5.6                    2.6            1.6           2.6        0.46           0.28          0.46
1992                       8.1                    1.6            4.6           6.5        0.19           0.56          0.81
1993                       9.9                    3.5            9.6           7.7        0.36           0.97          0.78
1994                      15.2                    6.6           11.3           8.6        0.44           0.75          0.57
1995                      22.5                   13.2           15.0          12.4        0.59           0.67          0.55
1996                      19.7                    5.1           10.2          13.1        0.26           0.52          0.67
1997                      41.5                   21.9           30.7          32.6        0.53           0.74          0.79
1998                      61.9                   43.6           49.1          44.8        0.70           0.79          0.72
1999                      43.4                   22.9           30.7          41.5        0.53           0.71          0.96
2000                      79.6                   42.5           57.6          79.5        0.53           0.72          1.00
2001                      51.5                   33.0           21.2          19.4        0.64           0.41          0.38
2002                      43.1                   19.1            8.0          22.6        0.44           0.19          0.52
2003                      28.4                   17.4           24.9          32.3        0.61           0.88          1.14
2004                      57.4                   37.2           27.4          29.8        0.65           0.48          0.52
2005                     110.8                   63.3           48.3          78.2        0.57           0.44          0.71
2006                     148.8                 124.0            68.2         161.2        0.83           0.46          1.08
2007                     244.6                 141.1            62.3         135.6        0.58           0.25          0.55
2008                     181.0                   99.2           45.5         117.3        0.55           0.25          0.65
Total                   1225.9                 714.2           561.1         867.8        0.58           0.46          0.71
Total 2000-08            945.2                 576.8           363.5         676.0        0.61           0.38          0.72
Total 1990-99            232.6                 123.7           165.3         172.0        0.53           0.71          0.74
Total 1984-89             48.2                   13.7           32.3          19.9        0.29           0.67          0.41
                                               Panel B : Venture Capital Funds
                Total Fund Commitments     Commitments to Funds with Performance      Funds with Performance Data as a
                 as Estimated by Private                Data ($bn)                   Fraction of Total Fund Commitments
                  Equity Analyst ($bn)        Burgiss       Venture         Preqin     Burgiss         Venture       Preqin
Vintage                                                  Economics                                  Economics
1984                       3.0                    1.2            2.6           1.2        0.41           0.85          0.38
1985                       1.8                    0.8            1.4           0.6        0.46           0.81          0.34
1986                       2.0                    0.9            2.8           0.7        0.46           1.40          0.32
1987                       3.1                    1.2            2.8           1.5        0.39           0.91          0.47
1988                       2.1                    1.4            2.4           1.4        0.70           1.16          0.67
1989                       2.8                    2.1            4.2           1.3        0.77           1.52          0.47
1990                       1.7                    0.8            1.3           1.1        0.51           0.77          0.65
1991                       1.4                    0.5            1.2           0.9        0.38           0.90          0.67
1992                       2.6                    1.8            2.4           1.6        0.71           0.95          0.64
1993                       2.9                    1.5            3.2           2.0        0.52           1.12          0.71
1994                       4.2                    2.2            4.6           2.4        0.52           1.11          0.58
1995                       6.1                    2.0            4.9           3.0        0.32           0.80          0.49
1996                       7.9                    3.0            4.7           5.1        0.38           0.60          0.64
1997                      14.3                    5.0            9.3           6.9        0.35           0.65          0.48
1998                      21.0                    9.1           18.3          11.9        0.44           0.87          0.56
1999                      48.6                   21.5           33.2          23.1        0.44           0.68          0.48
2000                      72.1                   35.4           50.0          41.8        0.49           0.69          0.58
2001                      39.4                   18.7           27.3          25.1        0.47           0.69          0.64
2002                      10.8                    5.0            5.6           8.7        0.47           0.52          0.80
2003                       9.2                    5.5            4.4           6.7        0.59           0.47          0.73
2004                      17.9                    7.2            8.1          10.9        0.40           0.45          0.61
2005                      25.7                   16.1            6.2          15.2        0.63           0.24          0.59
2006                      25.1                   22.6           19.4          28.4        0.90           0.77          1.13
2007                      33.1                   23.3            4.6          25.2        0.71           0.14          0.76
2008                      24.7                   17.2            7.8          22.1        0.69           0.32          0.90
Total                    383.3                 206.1           232.8         249.8        0.54           0.61          0.65
Total 2000-08            258.0                 151.0           133.4         184.1        0.59           0.52          0.71
Total 1990-99            110.6                   47.4           83.3          58.1        0.43           0.75          0.53
Total 1984-89             14.7                    7.8           16.2           6.6        0.53           1.10          0.45


                                                             33
                                                        Table 3: Private Equity Fund Internal Rates of Return
This table shows average Internal Rates of Return (IRR) by vintage year on the individual funds, for which performance data are available, for each data supplier and
author. Weighted averages use the capital committed for each fund as a proportion of the total commitments, as estimated by each source, for each vintage year. Kaplan-
Schoar do not report unweighted average or median IRRs. Robinson-Sensoy do not report median IRRs. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, and Panel B on venture
capital, using the classifications provided by the suppliers or authors. Only funds with a North American geographical focus are included.

                                                                                      Panel A : Buyout Funds
                                      Weighted Average IRR                                                     Average IRR                                           Median IRR
Vintage         Burgiss     Venture    Preqin Cambridge       Kaplan-    Robinson-       Burgiss     Venture      Preqin Cambridge       Robinson-    Burgiss     Venture     Preqin Cambridge
                          Economics             Associates     Schoar      Sensoy                  Economics               Associates      Sensoy               Economics              Associates
1984              15.8         28.0       30.9            .      29.0             .         10.6        32.5         32.9            .            .     10.6         18.0       23.7            .
1985              13.7         28.0       13.7            .      18.0             .         13.7        26.7          8.9            .            .     13.7         23.2            .          .
1986              16.0         20.8       30.6        12.8       18.0         13.2          13.6        18.0         31.1       13.3          13.2      16.8         15.0       24.0         11.1
1987              15.3         13.3       10.5        13.2       16.0         20.6          17.3         9.8         18.9       12.9          15.7      16.2          9.0       18.9        10.8
1988              18.4         10.1       14.9        14.0       13.0          8.7          14.4         9.9         20.1       14.4           9.3      10.1          9.8       13.5        12.3
1989              21.1         25.5       31.3        20.3       14.0         19.4          20.6        12.8         35.0       23.0          14.8      22.4         12.3       31.8        20.5
1990              52.9         11.4       23.4        15.0       20.0         27.6          31.9         5.1         20.5       14.9          21.5      31.9          7.0       16.3        15.1
1991              27.8         13.2       30.2        32.2       14.0         15.8          25.7        13.6         36.0       30.2           6.3      24.9         13.7       40.7        38.9
1992              15.0         23.8       34.0        27.5        9.0         37.3          11.2        20.0         18.9       26.2          30.5      10.7         18.3       21.2        19.8
1993              26.0         21.1       21.4        19.0       18.0         36.4          31.0        19.3         22.4       23.4          40.2      19.1         17.6       19.9        21.7
1994              34.5         15.8       25.8        11.2       19.0         25.7          29.6        13.9         22.6       10.1          22.8      25.7         11.2       19.8          9.7
1995              16.9         10.7       15.6        16.1        7.0         19.4          20.9        11.1         18.9       18.7          16.2      10.5          6.4       14.6         11.3
1996               2.4          6.6       10.8        10.0           .         8.3           6.0         8.4         16.0         9.1         10.2       5.7          3.6         9.3         8.3
1997               8.8          8.7        5.7          6.7          .        10.7           8.6         6.1          7.0         6.7          5.4       5.5          3.0         6.6         7.3
1998               3.6          1.0        2.6          9.3          .         3.9           6.4         4.4          6.3        11.4          4.8       8.0          3.0         7.0         9.7
1999               4.8          6.2        6.3        12.4           .        -4.1           3.3         1.0          7.3       13.1           2.1       4.3          1.6         9.2        11.5
2000              14.3         10.6       15.9        13.0           .         6.8          12.7        10.2         16.0       13.0           6.6      11.9          4.8       14.5        12.4
2001              15.1          9.3       28.4        25.5           .         3.6          13.7        10.3         25.3       24.9          12.0      14.6          6.9       21.2        22.3
2002              18.4         12.8       17.5        20.7           .        25.1          16.1        10.1         13.9       18.6          17.9      16.4         13.7       15.7        21.4
2003              22.5         17.4       22.6        15.8           .        48.2          19.5        10.7         12.9       15.6          37.5      16.2         10.0       13.7        14.4
2004              15.4         12.2       14.5          9.9          .        18.9          12.8        14.7         13.4       10.5          18.8      11.7          7.5       12.3          8.7
2005               7.1          2.4        5.7          7.1          .        -0.6           6.8         3.4          7.5         7.8         -1.1       7.6          3.5         8.0         7.0
2006               0.5         -3.9        1.5          4.5          .        -4.6           2.6        -0.1          2.4         4.6        -18.3       1.2          1.4         4.5         4.0
2007               4.4          2.4        2.2          3.4          .       -14.6           3.7         5.5          6.1         4.4        -17.6       6.2          7.3         5.6         5.9
2008               1.5          0.5        6.5          7.6          .       -30.3           3.2         6.3          6.3        -0.4        -17.7       2.8          5.8         3.4         0.1
Average           15.7         12.3       16.9        14.2       16.3         12.8          14.2        11.3         17.1       14.2          10.9      13.0          9.4       15.6        13.2
Average 2000s     11.0          7.1       12.8        11.9                     5.8          10.1         7.9         11.5        11.0          4.2       9.8          6.8        11.0       10.7
Average 1990s     19.3         11.8       17.6        15.9       14.5         18.1          17.5        10.3         17.6       16.4          16.0      14.6          8.5       16.5        15.3
Average 1980s     16.7         21.0       22.0        15.1       18.0         15.5          15.0        18.3         24.5       15.9          13.3      14.9         14.6       22.4        13.7




                                                                                               34
                                                Table 3: Private Equity Fund Internal Rates of Return, continued


                                                                                 Panel B : Venture Capital Funds
                                      Weighted Average IRR                                                    Average IRR                                           Median IRR
Vintage         Burgiss     Venture    Preqin Cambridge       Kaplan-    Robinson-      Burgiss     Venture      Preqin Cambridge      Robinson-    Burgiss     Venture      Preqin Cambridge
                          Economics             Associates     Schoar      Sensoy                 Economics               Associates     Sensoy               Economics             Associates
1984               7.9          6.0       16.7          7.7       7.0         10.2          8.2         5.0         14.7         8.1        10.6       6.9           3.6       12.8        6.3
1985               7.1          9.2       14.6        11.6       10.0         12.2          5.5         8.2         10.4       12.8         11.4       8.7           8.6       13.5      12.7
1986               9.4         11.9       14.3          8.8      10.0        -10.1          9.0         7.3         13.6         9.1       -27.7       9.3           6.3        8.9        9.4
1987              20.2         12.9       12.4        14.5       12.0          5.8         15.8         7.6         23.7       15.8          3.8      16.7           7.2       14.9      15.7
1988              24.4         19.8       28.6        14.3       20.0         15.3         17.9        12.3         21.5       14.7         12.0      21.6           9.5       23.1       11.9
1989              25.7         16.4       25.8        17.1       18.0         18.4         20.5        13.0         16.7       18.9         13.5      15.3         10.9        14.7      13.3
1990              29.5         24.8       20.3        24.3       29.0         14.9         25.3        18.5         55.7       26.5         14.9      21.7         14.3        19.3      21.9
1991              28.5         28.9       36.5        23.0       22.0             .        28.1        18.7         26.7       24.8             .     24.4         17.8        28.7      18.6
1992              24.8         31.5       25.1        28.7       32.0          8.5         21.0        27.8         33.3       37.3          6.8      14.2         13.4        21.5      21.0
1993              51.9         28.5       44.2        29.5       35.0         35.5         47.1        21.7         29.9       39.5         24.5      40.9         12.4        36.5      18.8
1994              41.4         42.9       47.0        34.6       48.0         62.5         41.7        26.9         55.9       45.2         61.8      31.8         23.7        27.1      26.5
1995              46.4         56.6       59.6        56.8       54.0         27.1         49.2        44.4         35.8       76.6         26.9      28.9         19.3        20.0      42.9
1996              76.7         61.2       22.7        61.2           .        24.2         64.5        67.0         48.6       89.2         22.7      25.2         28.2        14.8      37.1
1997              76.1         44.1       58.1        52.8           .        36.8         65.9        48.5         26.1       72.1         31.6      26.3         19.9        22.8        8.6
1998              15.5         24.4       19.8        18.2           .        18.9         16.3        25.8         -4.2       15.2         12.4      -1.2           2.0        4.9        0.4
1999              -4.5         -6.5       -4.4        -3.7           .       -22.6         -7.4        -4.6         -0.2        -1.4       -10.1      -5.6          -5.9       -4.9       -4.6
2000              -1.3          0.4       -0.4        -4.0           .        -9.4         -2.7        -1.5         -1.0        -2.2        -6.6      -2.1          -2.0       -0.5       -3.5
2001              -0.7          4.6        4.0        -1.8           .       -10.4         -1.7         2.0         -2.8         1.5        -8.8      -2.4           0.0        1.2       -0.2
2002               0.6         -0.8        2.1        -0.3           .         7.5         -1.1        -0.7         -1.5         0.4        37.0      -0.2          -1.2       -0.6       -0.4
2003               0.9          3.6        1.7          0.1          .            .        -2.1         3.1          1.5         1.9            .      0.1           1.3        0.1        0.9
2004               0.3          1.9        2.3          1.6          .            .        -1.5         0.7         -0.5         7.6            .     -1.0          -0.3       -0.2        0.8
2005               3.3          2.9        2.0        -1.4           .        -5.9          2.2         2.5         -1.6         1.5        -5.9       0.5          -0.4        0.8        0.8
2006               0.6          0.0        1.1        -1.5           .            .        -1.3        -3.7          3.8        -0.3            .     -2.4          -1.9       -1.4       -0.6
2007               3.2         -0.9        3.9          2.3          .        -6.4          1.7         1.3         -1.3         4.1        -8.9       2.6          -1.7        1.5        2.8
2008              -4.5         -5.2       -2.7        -1.7           .            .        -2.8        -7.1                      1.9            .     -1.6          -6.5       -3.9       -3.4
Average           19.3         16.8       18.2        15.7       24.8         11.7         16.8        13.8         16.9       20.8         11.1      11.1           7.1       11.0      10.3
Average 2000s      0.3          0.7        1.6        -0.7                    -4.9         -1.0        -0.4         -0.4         1.8         1.4      -0.7          -1.4       -0.3       -0.3
Average 1990s     38.6         33.6       32.9        32.5       36.7         22.9         35.2        29.5         30.8       42.5         21.3      20.7         14.5        19.1      19.1
Average 1980s     15.8         12.7       18.7        12.3       12.8          8.6         12.8         8.9         16.8       13.2          3.9      13.1           7.7       14.7       11.5




                                                                                               35
                          Table 4: Private Equity Fund Investment Multiples
This table shows the average multiple of total value to paid-in capital (TVPI), by vintage year, for each data
provider for which performance data are available. Total value is the sum of the cash returned to investors and the
remaining net asset value (NAV) as estimated by the private equity fund manager. Given the limited life of the
funds, for the early vintage funds the vast majority of the investments have been realized; whereas the opposite is
true for the later vintages, for which the reported multiples relate mainly to NAVs, with little cash having been
returned to investors. Weighted averages use the capital committed for each fund as a proportion of the total
commitments, as estimated by each source, for each vintage year. Cambridge Associates do not report weighted
average or median multiples. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, and Panel B on venture capital, using the
classifications provided by the suppliers or authors. Only funds with a North American geographical focus are
included.

                                                      Panel A : Buyout Funds
                Weighted Average Multiples                        Average Multiples                      Median Multiples
                Burgiss   Venture       Preqin        Burgiss     Venture      Preqin Cambridge     Burgiss   Venture       Preqin
Vintage                 Economics                               Economics              Associates           Economics
1984              3.28        4.10         5.56          2.44        3.61         3.38                2.44       2.37        3.33
1985              2.66        2.37         2.66          2.66        2.31         1.80                2.66       2.19
1986              3.27        3.46         8.77          2.40        3.01         4.87      0.96      2.36       2.24        2.71
1987              2.58        1.88         2.21          2.93        1.85         3.21      3.41      2.55       1.69        2.10
1988              2.32        1.72         1.87          2.03        1.74         2.54      1.86      1.74       1.61        1.89
1989              2.75        2.80         3.20          2.55        2.14         4.28      2.00      2.69       1.76        3.38
1990              3.37        1.81         3.03          3.03        1.39         2.72      2.58      3.03       1.42        2.43
1991              2.54        1.93         3.17          2.45        2.18         3.28      1.84      2.54       1.91        3.22
1992              1.88        1.94         1.79          1.68        2.07         1.84      3.27      1.41       1.94        1.89
1993              2.48        2.06         2.35          2.62        1.98         2.35      2.90      2.07       1.75        2.20
1994              3.29        1.54         1.93          2.73        1.55         1.90      2.34      2.18       1.46        1.84
1995              1.82        1.47         1.77          2.08        1.56         1.86      1.52      1.51       1.31        1.75
1996              1.17        1.29         1.45          1.46        1.34         1.81      1.95      1.30       1.24        1.71
1997              1.50        1.43         1.40          1.42        1.20         1.44      1.56      1.28       1.14        1.37
1998              1.28        1.09         1.24          1.42        1.27         1.44      1.37      1.39       1.24        1.42
1999              1.40        1.57         1.43          1.31        1.36         1.43      1.40      1.21       1.09        1.50
2000              1.75        1.54         1.80          2.66        1.48         1.83      1.81      1.58       1.35        1.81
2001              1.67        1.37         2.12          1.58        1.37         1.91      1.70      1.72       1.23        1.90
2002              1.84        1.51         1.73          1.72        1.38         1.57      1.91      1.79       1.44        1.68
2003              1.80        1.67         1.94          1.98        1.42         1.65      1.77      1.75       1.41        1.65
2004              1.64        1.44         1.55          1.53        1.42         1.52      1.66      1.50       1.29        1.45
2005              1.27        1.10         1.22          1.26        1.13         1.27      1.38      1.25       1.09        1.27
2006              1.02        0.91         1.05          1.08        1.01         1.09      1.17      1.03       1.04        1.11
2007              1.09        1.06         1.08          1.11        1.14         1.16      1.06      1.12       1.14        1.10
2008              1.04        1.01         1.09          1.07        1.10         1.13      1.09      1.04       1.09        1.08
Average           2.03        1.76         2.30          1.97        1.68         2.13      1.85      1.81       1.50        1.91
Average 2000s     1.46        1.29         1.51          1.55        1.27         1.46      1.51      1.42       1.23        1.45
Average 1990s     2.07        1.61         1.96          2.02        1.59         2.01      2.07      1.79       1.45        1.93
Average 1980s     2.81        2.72         4.05          2.50        2.45         3.35      2.06      2.41       1.98        2.68
                                                  Panel B : Venture Capital Funds
                Weighted Average Multiples                        Average Multiples                      Median Multiples
Vintage         Burgiss   Venture       Preqin        Burgiss     Venture      Preqin Cambridge     Burgiss   Venture     Preqin
                        Economics                               Economics              Associates           Economics
1984              1.73        1.59         2.74          1.78        1.57         2.35      1.76      1.71       1.37        1.99
1985              1.93        2.08         2.24          1.96        2.02         2.59      2.68      1.81       1.84        2.15
1986              1.82        2.79         2.19          1.83        1.72         1.85      2.90      1.93       1.54        1.67
1987              2.77        2.39         2.54          2.70        2.02         2.51      2.72      2.35       1.65        2.22
1988              2.88        2.59         2.98          2.45        2.04         2.58      2.49      2.55       1.86        2.57
1989              3.09        2.42         2.80          2.92        2.13         2.55      2.59      2.41       1.89        2.27
1990              3.30        2.82         2.81          2.96        2.32         2.50      3.21      2.48       1.81        2.22
1991              2.92        3.26         2.95          3.11        2.47         4.41      3.01      2.70       2.23        2.75
1992              2.72        3.45         2.84          2.69        3.46         3.26      3.13      2.07       2.18        2.07
1993              6.34        3.31         3.38          6.65        2.92         3.86      4.12      3.28       1.67        2.58
1994              6.58        4.65         7.19          5.27        3.32         3.98      5.33      3.05       2.23        2.08
1995              3.55        4.16         6.33          3.64        3.83         5.16      6.20      2.50       2.43        1.89
1996              6.33        4.78         2.81          5.92        4.68         3.49      5.03      2.06       2.14        1.87
1997              3.28        2.38         2.83          3.03        2.49         2.69      3.08      1.87       1.63        1.52
1998              1.60        1.74         1.77          1.55        1.68         1.67      1.48      0.93       1.10        1.08
1999              0.94        0.74         0.87          0.81        0.84         0.93      0.94      0.73       0.72        0.81
2000              0.97        1.06         1.04          0.91        0.94         1.14      0.95      0.88       0.88        0.99
2001              1.01        1.21         1.19          0.97        1.11         1.08      1.05      0.87       1.00        1.04
2002              1.07        0.96         1.12          1.01        0.98         0.98      1.01      0.99       0.93        0.96
2003               1.11       1.16         1.07          0.99        1.13         1.01      1.19      1.00       1.06        1.02
2004              1.07        1.08         1.19          1.01        1.04         1.22      1.30      0.97       0.99        0.98
2005              1.31        1.14         1.11          1.37        1.13         1.04      1.08      1.02       0.98        1.04
2006              1.04        1.01         1.05          1.01        0.93         1.02      1.06      0.95       0.96        0.98
2007              1.09        1.01         1.06          1.06        1.05         1.12       1.11     1.06       0.96        1.01
2008              0.97        0.94         1.00          0.99        0.93            1      1.14      0.98       0.92        0.95
Average           2.46        2.19         2.36          2.34        1.95         2.24      2.42      1.73       1.48        1.63
Average 2000s     1.07        1.06         1.09          1.03        1.03         1.07      1.10      0.97       0.96        1.00
Average 1990s     3.76        3.13         3.38          3.56        2.80         3.20      3.55      2.17       1.81        1.89
Average 1980s     2.37        2.31         2.58          2.27        1.92         2.41      2.52      2.13       1.69       2.15




                                                                 36
            Table 5: Private Equity Fund Public Market Equivalent Ratios (PMEs)
This table shows the average Public Market Equivalent ratios, comparing private equity returns to equivalent timed
investments in the S&P 500. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, and Panel B on venture capital, using the
classifications used by the suppliers or authors. Only funds with a North American geographical focus are included.

                                             Panel A: Buyout Funds
                                     Burgiss                         Kaplan-Shoar              Robinson-Sensoy
Vintage            ! Funds     Average    Median Weighted         ! Funds Weighted            ! Funds Weighted
                                                      average                average                    average
1984                      2       0.87        0.87       1.09           6       1.30                3      1.56
1985                      1       0.91        0.91       0.91          12       1.00                5      1.27
1986                      5       1.00        1.11       1.11          16       1.13                1      0.93
1987                      7       1.25        1.21       1.20          22       0.84                9      1.28
1988                      7       0.98        0.80       1.13          21       0.79               14      0.77
1989                      8       1.26        1.28       1.22          22       1.00               15      1.15
1990                      2       1.57        1.57       2.34          14       1.05                7      1.35
1991                      4       1.23        1.23       1.32           6       0.87                2      0.84
1992                      5       0.79        0.87       0.89          17       0.79                4      1.31
1993                     11       1.35        1.11       1.24          11       0.84                6      1.49
1994                     13       1.48        1.34       1.75           6       0.89               22      1.28
1995                     17       1.34        1.00       1.20           7       0.62               24      1.33
1996                      9       1.13        1.01       0.90                                      36      1.07
1997                     30       1.23        1.16       1.30                                      30      1.41
1998                     38       1.35        1.32       1.21                                      54      1.25
1999                     28       1.19        1.06       1.27                                      37      1.20
2000                     39       1.42        1.39       1.47                                      60      1.14
2001                     26       1.31        1.43       1.38                                      22      1.03
2002                     21       1.42        1.47       1.53                                       6      1.25
2003                     13       1.75        1.56       1.58                                       7      1.43
2004                     46       1.40        1.35       1.51                                       2      1.04
2005                     57       1.20        1.19       1.23                                       2      1.04
2006                     67       1.03        0.97       0.99
2007                     74       1.03        1.03       1.02
2008                     68       0.91        0.88       0.90
Average                 598       1.22        1.16       1.27         160       0.93              368        1.20
Average 2000s           411       1.27        1.25       1.29            .          .              99        1.16
Average 1990s           157       1.27        1.17       1.34          61       0.84              222        1.25
Average 1980s            30       1.04        1.03       1.11          99       1.01               47        1.16
                                           Panel B: Venture Capital
                                     Burgiss                         Kaplan-Shoar              Robinson-Sensoy
Vintage            ! Funds     Average    Median Weighted         ! Funds Weighted            ! Funds Weighted
                                                      average                average                    average
1984                     18       0.70        0.63       0.69          57       0.54                6      0.78
1985                     20       0.71        0.70       0.73          37       0.73                5      0.92
1986                     12       0.75        0.73       0.80          36       0.76                3      0.78
1987                     17       1.18        1.09       1.29          63       0.98                6      0.73
1988                     16       1.18        1.31       1.44          42       1.16                9      1.02
1989                     18       1.34        0.95       1.52          45       1.03               10      1.17
1990                     13       1.50        1.18       1.66          20       1.53                1      1.01
1991                      6       1.37        1.26       1.35          11       1.13                0
1992                     17       1.27        0.94       1.34          18       1.31                3      0.84
1993                     13       2.79        1.54       2.74          45       1.65                5      1.19
1994                     20       2.40        1.43       2.86          49       1.81                6      1.87
1995                     18       2.16        1.48       2.09          43       2.05               11      1.22
1996                     20       3.79        1.75       4.17                                       6      1.27
1997                     33       2.43        1.45       2.65                                      16      1.80
1998                     46       1.43        0.93       1.48                                      26      1.54
1999                     65       0.76        0.65       0.90                                      30      0.61
2000                     80       0.79        0.77       0.85                                      34      0.71
2001                     48       0.80        0.71       0.84                                       8      0.67
2002                     18       0.82        0.79       0.88                                       6      0.85
2003                     25       0.88        0.90       0.99                                       0
2004                     32       0.90        0.85       0.96                                       0
2005                     48       1.27        0.95       1.23                                       1      0.80
2006                     62       0.93        0.85       0.97
2007                     65       0.97        0.96       0.99
2008                     45       0.84        0.81       0.84
Average                 775       1.36        1.02       1.45         466       1.22              192        1.04
Average 2000s           423       0.91        0.84       0.95            .          .                .           .
Average 1990s           251       1.99        1.26       2.12         186       1.58              104        1.26
Average 1980s           101       0.98        0.90       1.08         280       0.87               39        0.90
                                                        37
            Table 6: Private Equity PMEs Using Alternative Public Market Indices
This table shows vintage-year average, average and median Public Market Equivalent ratios calculated with
alternative market indices and using Burgiss data. The Russell 3000 index is based on the largest 3000 U. S.
companies. The Russell 2000 measures the performance of small-cap stocks and is based on a 2000 company
subset of the Russell 3000. The Russell 2000 Growth and 2000 Value indices are subsets of the Russell 2000
chosen on the basis of forecasted growth rates and price-to-book ratios.

                                             Panel A:Buyout Funds (N=598), relative to…
                            S&P 500       Russell 3000       Nasdaq         Russell 2000         Russell 2000 Value
1984                          0.87            0.90               0.97              1.15                1.07
1985                          1.09            0.94               0.98              1.18                1.09
1986                          1.00            1.02               1.02              1.18                1.10
1987                          1.25            1.27               1.20              1.43                1.32
1988                          0.98            0.99               0.90              1.05                0.99
1989                          1.26            1.27               1.15              1.34                1.23
1990                          1.57            1.57               1.48              1.58                1.43
1991                          1.23            1.25               1.15              1.40                1.31
1992                          0.79            0.82               0.78              0.97                0.92
1993                          1.35            1.38               1.33              1.62                1.56
1994                          1.48            1.52               1.45              1.78                1.70
1995                          1.34            1.35               1.30              1.50                1.43
1996                          1.13            1.12               1.26              1.02                0.83
1997                          1.23            1.19               1.30              1.01                0.88
1998                          1.35            1.30               1.56              1.01                0.81
1999                          1.19            1.15               1.36              0.92                0.74
2000                          1.42            1.38               1.48              1.18                1.05
2001                          1.31            1.28               1.27              1.15                1.12
2002                          1.42            1.39               1.34              1.28                1.29
2003                          1.75            1.72               1.66              1.63                1.66
2004                          1.40            1.38               1.30              1.32                1.36
2005                          1.20            1.19               1.10              1.12                1.17
2006                          1.03            1.02               0.94              0.96                0.99
2007                          1.03            1.02               0.95              0.94                0.97
2008                          0.91            0.91               0.86              0.85                0.87
Average                       1.22            1.21               1.20              1.22                1.16
Average 2000s                 1.27            1.25               1.21              1.16                1.16
Average 1990s                 1.27            1.27               1.30              1.28                1.16
Average 1980s                 1.07            1.07               1.04              1.22                1.13
Average - Overall Sample      1.20            1.18               1.17              1.11                1.07
Median - Overall Sample       1.11            1.09               1.05              1.02                0.99

                                          Panel B: Venture Capital Funds (N=775), relative to...
                            S&P 500       Russell 3000        Nasdaq          Russell 2000       Russell 2000 Growth
1984                          0.70            0.73               0.80              0.92                1.01
1985                          0.71            0.73               0.76              0.91                0.98
1986                          0.75            0.76               0.73              0.86                0.95
1987                          1.18            1.18               1.10              1.32                1.42
1988                          1.18            1.18               1.07              1.26                1.34
1989                          1.34            1.35               1.18              1.45                1.57
1990                          1.50            1.50               1.32              1.55                1.68
1991                          1.37            1.40               1.23              1.64                1.75
1992                          1.27            1.32               1.24              1.56                1.68
1993                          2.79            2.92               2.38              3.88                3.90
1994                          2.40            2.50               2.10              3.23                3.35
1995                          2.16            2.21               1.89              2.59                2.67
1996                          3.79            3.85               3.01              4.46                4.34
1997                          2.43            2.42               2.05              2.45                2.42
1998                          1.43            1.38               1.52              1.15                1.37
1999                          0.76            0.73               0.89              0.57                0.72
2000                          0.79            0.77               0.83              0.64                0.73
2001                          0.80            0.78               0.76              0.69                0.72
2002                          0.82            0.80               0.76              0.73                0.73
2003                          0.88            0.87               0.82              0.82                0.80
2004                          0.90            0.89               0.82              0.83                0.80
2005                          1.27            1.26               1.16              1.18                1.13
2006                          0.93            0.92               0.85              0.85                0.82
2007                          0.97            0.95               0.89              0.88                0.86
2008                          0.84            0.83               0.78              0.77                0.75
Average                       1.36            1.37               1.24              1.49                1.54
Average 2000s                 0.91            0.90               0.85              0.82                0.82
Average 1990s                 1.99            2.02               1.76              2.31                2.39
Average 1980s                 0.98            0.99               0.94              1.12                1.21

Average - Overall Sample      1.20            1.19               1.12              1.21                1.25
Median - Overall Sample       0.88            0.87               0.86              0.83                0.85


                                                      38
                  Table 7: The Relationship Between PME, IRR and Multiples
This table reports regressions where PME is the dependent variable. Panel A includes all vintage years; Panel B
includes vintages from 1993 onwards. Ordinary standard errors are reported in brackets, and standard errors
clustered by vintage year are in curly brackets. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively using standard errors clustered by vintage.


                                             Panel A: All Vintage Years, 1984 - 2008
                                    Buyout Funds                                     VC Funds
IRR                    2.57***                  0.76**                  3.50***                  1.23***
                       [0.07]                   [0.08]                 [0.09]                    [0.06]
                       {0.42}                   {0.32}                 {0.52}                    {0.23}
Multiple                             0.66***      0.52***                           0.55***      0.43***
                                     [0.01]       [0.02]                            [0.01]       [0.01]
                                     {0.05}       {0.08}                            {0.06}       {0.06}
1985                   -0.04         -0.10        -0.09                0.10         -0.09        -0.04
1986                   0.06          0.16         0.13                 0.03         0.03         0.02
1987                   0.21          0.06         0.08                 0.21         -0.03        -0.01
1988                   0.02          0.39         0.30                 0.14         0.11         0.07
1989                   0.13          0.32         0.26                 0.21         0.01         -0.01
1990                   0.16          0.32         0.24                 0.20         0.15         0.08
1991                   -0.03         0.36         0.25                 -0.03        -0.06        -0.15
1992                   -0.09         0.44         0.32                 0.12         0.07         0.02
1993                   -0.04         0.37         0.24                 0.73         -0.59        -0.50
1994                   0.13          0.42         0.32                 0.53         -0.21        -0.22
1995                   0.20          0.71         0.58                 0.02         0.44         0.15
1996                   0.38          0.92         0.81                 1.12         0.81         0.60
1997                   0.41          1.04         0.91                 -0.29        1.05         0.48
1998                   0.59          1.16         1.04                 0.44         0.86         0.73
1999                   0.51          1.08         0.97                 0.60         0.59         0.67
2000                   0.50          1.07         0.94                 0.47         0.57         0.60
2001                   0.36          1.02         0.87                 0.45         0.55         0.58
2002                   0.41          1.03         0.88                 0.44         0.54         0.56
2003                   0.65          1.19         1.05                 0.54         0.61         0.65
2004                   0.47          1.14         0.99                 0.54         0.63         0.66
2005                   0.43          1.12         0.98                 0.78         0.80         0.83
2006                   0.37          1.07         0.93                 0.56         0.66         0.68
2007                   0.34          1.05         0.91                 0.49         0.66         0.66
2008                   0.24          0.96         0.82                 0.52         0.57         0.62
Constant               0.59          -0.75        -0.48                0.41         -0.28        -0.17
N                      598           598          598                  775          775          775
R-squared              0.75          0.88         0.90                 0.72         0.91         0.94
                                               Panel B: Vintage Years 1993 - 2008
Sample:                             Buyout Funds                                     VC Funds
IRR                    2.52***                  0.43                   3.47***                   1.21***
                       [0.07]                   [0.07]                 [0.11]                    [0.07]
                       {0.43}                   {0.25}                 {0.55}                    {0.25}
Multiple                             0.71***      0.62***                           0.56***      0.44***
                                     [0.01]       [0.02]                            [0.01]       [0.01]
                                     {0.06}       {0.10}                            {0.07}       {0.07}
Dummies Included       Y             Y            Y                    Y            Y            Y
N                      557           557          557                  638          638          638
R-squared              0.75          0.92         0.92                 0.71         0.91         0.94


                                                      39
          Table 8: The Relationship Between PME, IRR and Multiples, by Vintage Year
This table reports regressions for each vintage year where PME is the dependent variable. Given the small sample
sizes in early vintages, only funds raised from 1993 onwards are included. Separate regressions are estimated for
buyout funds and venture capital funds. Standard errors are reported in brackets. ***, ** and * denote significance
at the 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.


Vintage                            Buyout Funds                                           VC Funds
                   IRR       Multiple Constant     N         R2       IRR      Multiple     Constant   N      R2
1993               1.08**    0.32***    0.18       11        0.99     1.43*** 0.30***       0.11       13     0.99
                   [0.22]    [0.04]     [0.05]                        [0.31] [0.02]         [0.10]
1994               0.80**    0.37***    0.22       13        0.99     1.07*** 0.36***       0.05       20     0.99
                   [0.30]    [0.05]     [0.06]                        [0.16] [0.01]         [0.06]
1995               1.04**    0.37***    0.34       17        0.99     0.58*** 0.48***       0.14       18     0.99
                   [0.45]    [0.08]     [0.08]                        [0.10] [0.02]         [0.05]
1996               3.04      0.38       0.39       9         0.89     1.44*** 0.46***       0.13       20     0.99
                   [2.84]    [0.38]     [0.18]                        [0.26] [0.03]         [0.12]
1997               -0.53     0.95***    -0.08      30        0.98     0.26*** 0.72***       0.09       33     0.99
                   [0.33]    [0.09]     [0.10]                        [0.09] [0.03]         [0.04]
1998               0.08      0.91***    0.05       38        0.95     -0.13*** 0.96***      -0.03      46     0.99
                   [0.50]    [0.10]     [0.12]                        [0.04] [0.01]         [0.02]
1999               0.25      0.81***    0.13       28        0.99     -0.20** 1.03***       -0.09      65     0.99
                   [0.34]    [0.07]     [0.08]                        [0.09] [0.02]         [0.02]
2000               -1.11**   1.03***    -0.16      39        0.96     0.22     0.84***      0.03       80     0.96
                   [0.45]    [0.09]     [0.10]                        [0.45]   [0.10]       [0.10]
2001               0.56      0.70***    0.14       26        0.98     0.19     0.79***      0.04       48     0.99
                   [0.42]    [0.11]     [0.11]                        [0.30]   [0.07]       [0.07]
2002               0.28      0.76***    0.07       21        0.98     1.33**   0.42**       0.41       18     0.95
                   [0.34]    [0.08]     [0.09]                        [0.60]   [0.15]       [0.16]
2003               0.13      0.94***    -0.14      13        0.97     0.30     0.80***      0.09       25     0.98
                   [0.64]    [0.09]     [0.11]                        [0.25]   [0.07]       [0.08]
2004               -0.52*    1.04***    -0.12      46        0.98     0.30     0.79***      0.11       32     0.99
                   [0.27]    [0.07]     [0.07]                        [0.25]   [0.07]       [0.07]
2005               0.04      1.00***    -0.06      57        0.96     0.14     0.92***      0.01       48     0.99
                   [0.29]    [0.08]     [0.08]                        [0.09]   [0.01]       [0.01]
2006               -0.25     1.00***    -0.03      67        0.93     -0.10    1.00***      -0.08      62     0.98
                   [0.14]    [0.14]     [0.14]                        [0.16]   [0.06]       [0.06]
2007               -0.34*** 1.12***     -0.20      74        0.94     -0.36*   1.07***      -0.16      65     0.97
                   [0.12]   [0.06]      [0.07]                        [0.19]   [0.10]       [0.10]
2008               -0.01     0.72***    0.14       68        0.87     -0.16    0.96***      -0.12      45     0.86
                   [0.10]    [0.08]     [0.08]                        [0.24]   [0.19]       [0.20]




                                                        40
                                  Table 9: Actual PMEs and Implied PMEs
This table reports, by vintage year, average actual PMEs for Burgiss and Robinson-Sensoy and implied PMEs for
Venture Economics, Preqin and Cambridge Associates, using the regressions reported in Table 8. Weighted
averages use as weights fund capital commitments, as a proportion of total commitments for funds reporting
performance data, in each vintage. Capital commitments at the fund level are not reported by Cambridge
Associates.

                                                             Panel A: Buyout Funds
                                   Weighted Average                                       Unweighted Average
Vintage           Actual PME    Actual PME Implied PME Implied PME           Actual PME Implied PME Implied PME Implied PME
                      Burgiss    Robinson-       Venture     Preqin              Burgiss     Venture      Preqin  Cambridge
                                    Sensoy    Economics                                   Economics               Associates
1984                     1.09          1.56                                         0.87
1985                     0.91          1.27                                         0.92
1986                     1.11          0.93                                         1.00
1987                     1.20          1.28                                         1.27
1988                     1.13          0.77                                         0.99
1989                     1.22          1.15                                         1.26
1990                     2.34          1.35                                         1.53
1991                     1.32          0.84                                         1.23
1992                     0.89          1.31                                         0.73
1993                     1.24          1.49         1.07       1.16                 1.35        1.02         1.17       1.36
1994                     1.75          1.28         0.91       1.14                 1.30        0.91         1.10       1.17
1995                     1.20          1.33         1.00       1.16                 1.34        1.04         1.23       1.10
1996                     0.90          1.07         1.08       1.27                 1.12        1.15         1.56       1.41
1997                     1.30          1.41         1.23       1.22                 1.22        1.03         1.25       1.37
1998                     1.21          1.25         1.04       1.18                 1.33        1.21         1.37       1.31
1999                     1.27          1.20         1.42       1.30                 1.16        1.23         1.31       1.30
2000                     1.47          1.14         1.31       1.52                 1.40        1.25         1.55       1.56
2001                     1.38          1.03         1.15       1.78                 1.28        1.16         1.62       1.47
2002                     1.53          1.25         1.25       1.43                 1.39        1.15         1.30       1.57
2003                     1.58          1.43         1.46       1.71                 1.73        1.21         1.43       1.54
2004                     1.51          1.04         1.31       1.42                 1.37        1.28         1.39       1.55
2005                     1.23          1.04         1.04       1.16                 1.20        1.07         1.21       1.32
2006                     0.99                       0.89        1.02                1.03        0.98         1.05       1.13
2007                     1.02                       0.98        1.00                1.03        1.06         1.08       0.97
2008                     0.90                       0.87        0.92                0.92        0.93         0.95       0.92

Average 2000s            1.29         1.16         1.14             1.33             1.26      1.12         1.29        1.34
Average 1993-99          1.27         1.29         1.11             1.21             1.26      1.08         1.29        1.29
                                                          Panel B: Venture Capital Funds
                                   Weighted Average                                       Unweighted Average
Vintage           Actual PME    Actual PME Implied PME Implied PME           Actual PME Implied PME Implied PME Implied PME
                      Burgiss    Robinson-       Venture     Preqin              Burgiss     Venture      Preqin  Cambridge
                                    Sensoy    Economics                                   Economics               Associates
1984                     0.69          0.78                                         0.70
1985                     0.73          0.92                                         0.71
1986                     0.80          0.78                                         0.75
1987                     1.29          0.73                                         1.18
1988                     1.44          1.02                                         1.18
1989                     1.52          1.17                                         1.34
1990                     1.66          1.01                                         1.50
1991                     1.35                                                       1.29
1992                     1.34         0.84                                          1.29
1993                     2.74         1.19         1.51             1.76            2.82        1.30        1.70        1.91
1994                     2.86         1.87         2.18             3.14            2.44        1.53        2.08        2.45
1995                     2.09         1.22         2.47             3.52            2.17        2.24        2.82        3.56
1996                     4.17         1.27         3.21             1.75            3.89        3.25        2.44        3.73
1997                     2.65         1.80         1.92             2.28            2.41        2.01        2.09        2.50
1998                     1.48         1.54         1.61             1.64            1.43        1.55        1.58        1.37
1999                     0.90         0.61         0.69             0.81            0.77        0.79        0.87        0.88
2000                     0.85         0.71         0.92             0.90            0.80        0.82        0.98        0.82
2001                     0.84         0.67         1.00             0.99            0.81        0.92        0.89        0.87
2002                     0.88         0.85         0.80             0.91            0.84        0.81        0.80        0.84
2003                     0.99                      1.03             0.95            0.89        1.00        0.90        1.05
2004                     0.96                      0.97             1.06            0.91        0.94        1.07        1.16
2005                     1.23         0.80         1.07             1.03            1.27        1.05        0.96        1.01
2006                     0.97                      0.93             0.97            0.93        0.86        0.94        0.98
2007                     0.99                      0.93             0.96            0.97        0.96        1.04        1.01
2008                     0.84                      0.85             0.89            0.87        0.78                    0.97

Average 2000s            0.95                      0.94             0.96             0.92      0.90         0.95        0.97
Average 1993-99          2.41         1.36         1.94             2.13             2.28      1.81         1.94        2.34




                                                               41
        Table 10: The Relationship Between Aggregate Flows into Private Equity and
                                       Performance
This table reports regressions where the dependent variable is fund performance – as measured by IRR, Multiple or
PME – and the explanatory variable is an estimate of capital flows into private equity. We measure capital flows by
summing the capital commitments (as estimated by Private Equity Analyst, see Table 2) in the current and previous
vintage years, and then take the ratio of this sum to the aggregate U.S. stock market value at the start of the current
vintage year. This provides a measure of the amount of capital available to fund private equity deals. The
performance measures are weighted averages from Burgiss, where the weights are the proportion of capital
committed in each vintage year to the total capital committed over the vintages including in the regression. Panel A
includes all vintages, from 1984 to 2008. Given the small sample sizes in early vintages, Panel B restricts the
sample to funds raised from 1993 onwards. See Tables 3, 4 and 5 for explanations of the performance measures.
Separate regressions are estimated for buyout funds and venture capital funds. Standard errors are reported in
brackets. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% respectively

                                                      Panel A: All Vintages from 1984-2008
                                           Buyout Funds                                     VC Funds
Dependent variable:                IRR       Multiple             PME             IRR        Multiple            PME

Capital Commitments to       -12.49***       -101.9***            -18.8        -65.2**      -542.3***         -191.7*
Total Stock Market Value         [4.27]          [25.6]          [13.2]          [27.0]        [191.4]        [100.8]

Constant                           0.26            2.83            1.42            0.37           3.93            1.97
                                 [0.04]          [0.23]          [0.12]          [0.08]         [0.60]          [0.32]

N                                    25              25              25             25              25             25
R-squared                          0.27            0.41            0.08           0.20            0.26           0.14
                                                      Panel B: Vintages from 1993 to 2008
                                           Buyout Funds                                     VC Funds
Dependent variable:                IRR       Multiple             PME             IRR        Multiple            PME

Capital Commitments to       -12.23***        -71.9***         -31.7***         -75.0*       -625.8**        -278.9**
Total Stock Market Value         [3.97]          [23.9]            [9.9]         [37.9]        [268.8]         [128.6]

Constant                           0.24            2.30            1.58            0.43           4.39            2.48
                                 [0.04]          [0.25]          [0.10]          [0.14]         [0.98]          [0.47]

N                                    16              16              16             16              16             16
R-squared                          0.40            0.39            0.42           0.22            0.28           0.25




                                                          42
       Table 11: The Relationship Between Private Equity Fund Size and Performance
This table examines whether fund size affects performance. In Panel A, funds are classified into size quartiles by
decade. The cut off points for each quartile, by decade, are reported. The performance – as measured by IRR,
Multiple and PME – is then analyzed for these size quartiles. Buyout funds and venture capital funds are considered
separately. Panel B reports regressions where the dependent variable is performance, and the explanatory variables
are time quartiles. Vintage years are not included in the Panel B regressions but are included in the regressions in
Panel C. Standard errors are reported in brackets. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively


                                                      Panel A: Average Performance by Fund Size Quartile
                                              Buyout Funds                                      Venture Capital Funds
                              Bottom                 Top                           Bottom                  Top
                              quartile   Median Quartile      Mean           N     quartile    Median quartile      Mean         N

Size Cutoffs ($ Millions)
1980s                              85       215       425       390         30          34          55         90         77    101
1990s                             200       485       998       782        157          81         137        250        191    251
2000s                             284       700      1530      1420        411         137         278        475        358    423

IRR (%)
Small Funds                      -1.4        6.5     15.1        7.5       151        -7.5          2.1      12.1        5.4    195
2nd Quartile Funds                2.8        8.9     19.5       11.1       150        -8.5          2.8      15.6       12.8    196
3rd Quartile Funds                2.2        9.2     15.0        9.3       149        -5.2          3.4      16.0       13.4    192
Large Funds                       0.3        8.5     16.6        9.0       148        -4.7          2.1       9.5        8.7    192

Multiple
Small Funds                      0.95      1.23      1.75      1.47        151        0.76        1.08       1.73       1.67    195
2nd Quartile Funds               1.07      1.34      1.78      1.51        150        0.76        1.07       1.74       1.91    196
3rd Quartile Funds               1.06      1.26      1.71      1.49        149        0.84        1.10       2.14       1.90    192
Large Funds                      1.01      1.26      1.70      1.44        148        0.84        1.06       1.36       1.59    192

PME
Small Funds                      0.80      1.02      1.37      1.16        151        0.57        0.78       1.08       1.03    195
2nd Quartile Funds               0.90      1.16      1.49      1.23        150        0.61        0.90       1.24       1.25    196
3rd Quartile Funds               0.93      1.14      1.40      1.21        149        0.69        0.96       1.30       1.34    192
Large Funds                      0.91      1.14      1.43      1.19        148        0.70        0.90       1.14       1.18    192
                                         Panel B: Regressions of Performance Measures, without Vintage Year Dummies

                                                        Buyout Funds                              Venture Capital Funds
Dependent variable:                                   IRR Multiple        PME                      IRR Multiple       PME
2nd Size Quartile                                   0.036*     0.048      0.065                0.074**      0.235      0.219
                                                   [0.020]   [0.093]    [0.059]                 [0.037]   [0.266]    [0.149]
3rd Size Quartile                                    0.018     0.024      0.042                0.080**      0.229    0.314**
                                                   [0.020]   [0.093]    [0.059]                 [0.037]   [0.267]     [0.150]
4th (Highest) Size Quartile                          0.015    -0.029      0.027                  0.033     -0.078      0.149
                                                   [0.020]   [0.093]    [0.059]                [0.037]    [0.267]    [0.150]
N                                                     598       598        598                     775        775        775
R-squared                                            0.01      0.00       0.00                    0.01       0.00       0.01
                                         Panel C: Regressions of Performance Measures, including Vintage Year Dummies

                                                       Buyout Funds                               Venture Capital Funds
Dependent variable:                                  IRR Multiple         PME                      IRR Multiple       PME
2nd Size Quartile                                   0.035*     0.026      0.039                 0.053*      0.251      0.138
                                                   [0.019]   [0.080]    [0.057]                [0.032]    [0.239]    [0.140]
3rd Size Quartile                                   0.034*     0.099      0.059               0.090***     0.439*    0.318**
                                                   [0.019]   [0.080]    [0.057]                 [0.032]   [0.242]     [0.141]

4th (Highest) Size Quartile                          0.028     0.036      0.031               0.106***    0.518**    0.349**
                                                   [0.019]   [0.080]    [0.057]                 [0.033]    [0.248]    [0.145]
N                                                     598       598        598                     775        775        775
R-squared                                            0.18      0.33       0.15                    0.32       0.27       0.21




                                                                   43
                                   Figure 1: Number of funds with performance data

This figure shows the numberoffunds in the various private equity datasets forwhich performance data are
available.PanelA focuses on buyoutfunds,and PanelB on venturecapital,using theclassifications provided by
thesuppliers orauthors.Onlyfunds withaNorthAmericangeographicalfocus areincluded.

                                                            Panel A: Buyout funds

 &!"




 %!"




 $!"




 #!"




  !"
       '(&$" '(&)" '(&%" '(&*" '(&&" '(&(" '((!" '(('" '((#" '((+" '(($" '(()" '((%" '((*" '((&" '(((" #!!!" #!!'" #!!#" #!!+" #!!$" #!!)" #!!%" #!!*" #!!&"

                                                     ,-./011"         23"       4.5607"         89"         :;"     <;"




                                                                Panel B: VC funds

'%!"



'$!"



'#!"



'!!"



 &!"



 %!"



 $!"



 #!"



  !"
       '(&$" '(&)" '(&%" '(&*" '(&&" '(&(" '((!" '(('" '((#" '((+" '(($" '(()" '((%" '((*" '((&" '(((" #!!!" #!!'" #!!#" #!!+" #!!$" #!!)" #!!%" #!!*" #!!&"

                                                      ,-"       ./"         012345"       67"         891:4;;"    <-"




                                                                                 44
                                                       Figure 2: Buyout fund IRRs

This figureshows averageInternalRates ofReturn(IRRs)byvintageyearforbuyoutfunds forwhichperformance
data are available,for each data supplier and author.PanelA displays weighted averages using the capital
committed foreach fund as aproportion ofthetotalcommitments,as estimated by each source,foreach vintage
year.PanelB provides un-weighted averages.Kaplan-Schoardo notreportan un-weighted average.Thedatause
theclassifications provided by thesuppliers orauthors.Only funds with aNorth American geographicalfocus are
included.
                                 Panel A: Buyout fund IRRs,capital weighted average

 )#$




 (#$




 '#$




 &#$




 %#$




 "#$




   #$
        "*+'$ "*+($ "*+)$ "*+,$ "*++$ "*+*$ "**#$ "**"$ "**%$ "**&$ "**'$ "**($ "**)$ "**,$ "**+$ "***$ %###$ %##"$ %##%$ %##&$ %##'$ %##($ %##)$ %##,$ %##+$



 !"#$

                                                       -./0122$        34$         5/6718$        9:$         ;<$         =<$




                                     Panel B: Buyout fund IRRs,unweighted average

 )#$




 (#$




 '#$




 &#$




 %#$




 "#$




   #$
        "*+'$ "*+($ "*+)$ "*+,$ "*++$ "*+*$ "**#$ "**"$ "**%$ "**&$ "**'$ "**($ "**)$ "**,$ "**+$ "***$ %###$ %##"$ %##%$ %##&$ %##'$ %##($ %##)$ %##,$ %##+$



 !"#$

                                                            -./0122$         34$        5/6718$         9:$         ;<$




                                                                                   45
                                                          Figure 3: VC fund IRRs

This figure shows average InternalRates ofReturn (IRRs)by vintage yearforventure capitalfunds forwhich
performancedataareavailable,foreach datasupplierand author. PanelA displays weighted averages using the
capitalcommitted foreach fund as aproportion ofthetotalcommitments,as estimated by each source,foreach
vintage year.PanelB provides un-weighted averages.Kaplan-Schoardo notreportan un-weighted average.The
datausetheclassifications provided by thesuppliers orauthors.Only funds with aNorth American geographical
focus areincluded.
                                    Panel A: VC fund IRRs,capital weighted average

 (##$




  '#$




  &#$




  "#$




  %#$




   #$
        ()'"$ ()'*$ ()'&$ ()'+$ ()''$ ()')$ ())#$ ())($ ())%$ ()),$ ())"$ ())*$ ())&$ ())+$ ())'$ ()))$ %###$ %##($ %##%$ %##,$ %##"$ %##*$ %##&$ %##+$ %##'$



 !%#$




 !"#$

                                                       -./0122$        34$         5/6718$        9:$         ;<$         =<$




                                        Panel B: VC fund IRRs,unweighted average

 (##$




  '#$




  &#$




  "#$




  %#$




   #$
        ()'"$ ()'*$ ()'&$ ()'+$ ()''$ ()')$ ())#$ ())($ ())%$ ()),$ ())"$ ())*$ ())&$ ())+$ ())'$ ()))$ %###$ %##($ %##%$ %##,$ %##"$ %##*$ %##&$ %##+$ %##'$



 !%#$




 !"#$

                                                            -./0122$         34$        5/6718$         9:$         ;<$




                                                                                   46
                                           Figure 4: Buyout and VC fund multiples

This figure shows average investmentmultiples by vintage yearforprivate equity funds forwhich performance
data are available,foreach data supplierand author. PanelA displays un-weighted averages forbuyoutfunds.
PanelB provides un-weighted averages forventure capitalfunds.Kaplan-Schoardo notreportan un-weighted
average.Thedatausetheclassifications provided by thesuppliers orauthors.Only funds with aNorth American
geographicalfocus areincluded.

                       Panel A: Buyout fund investment multiples,unweighted average

 '"




 &"




 %"




 $"




 #"




 !"
      #()&" #()'" #()*" #()+" #())" #()(" #((!" #((#" #(($" #((%" #((&" #(('" #((*" #((+" #(()" #(((" $!!!" $!!#" $!!$" $!!%" $!!&" $!!'" $!!*" $!!+" $!!)"

                                                               ,-./011"     23"      4.5607"      89"




                          Panel B: VC fund investment multiples,unweighted average

 )"




 ("




 '"




 &"




 %"




 $"




 #"




 !"
      #*+&" #*+'" #*+(" #*+)" #*++" #*+*" #**!" #**#" #**$" #**%" #**&" #**'" #**(" #**)" #**+" #***" $!!!" $!!#" $!!$" $!!%" $!!&" $!!'" $!!(" $!!)" $!!+"

                                                               ,-./011"     23"      4.5607"      89"




                                                                             47
                                                       Figure 5: Buyout and VC fund PM Es

This figure shows average Public M arketEquivalentratios (PM Es)by vintage year,comparing private equity
returns to equivalently timed investments in the S&P 500.PanelA focuses on buyoutfunds,and PanelB on
venture capital,using the classifications used by the suppliers orauthors.Only funds with a North American
geographicalfocus areincluded.

                                          Panel A: Buyout fund PM Es from various sources

 ("#$



 ("!$



 '"#$



 '"!$



 &"#$



 &"!$



 %"#$



 %"!$



 !"#$
        %)*($$$$$$$
               %)*#$$$$$$$
                      %)*+$$$$$$$
                             %)*,$$$$$$$
                                    %)**$$$$$$$
                                           %)*)$$$$$$$
                                                  %))!$$$$$$$
                                                         %))%$$$$$$$
                                                                %))&$$$$$$$
                                                                       %))'$$$$$$$
                                                                              %))($$$$$$$
                                                                                     %))#$$$$$$$
                                                                                            %))+$$$$$$$
                                                                                                   %)),$$$$$$$
                                                                                                          %))*$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                 %)))$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                        &!!!$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                               &!!%$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                      &!!&$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                             &!!'$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                                    &!!($$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                                           &!!#$$$$$$$&!!+$ &!!,$ &!!*$

                                                                                -./0122$          34$         54$



                                              Panel B: VC fund PM Es from various sources

 ("#$



 ("!$



 '"#$



 '"!$



 &"#$



 &"!$



 %"#$



 %"!$



 !"#$
        %)*($$$$$$$
               %)*#$$$$$$$
                      %)*+$$$$$$$
                             %)*,$$$$$$$
                                    %)**$$$$$$$
                                           %)*)$$$$$$$
                                                  %))!$$$$$$$
                                                         %))%$$$$$$$
                                                                %))&$$$$$$$
                                                                       %))'$$$$$$$
                                                                              %))($$$$$$$
                                                                                     %))#$$$$$$$
                                                                                            %))+$$$$$$$
                                                                                                   %)),$$$$$$$
                                                                                                          %))*$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                 %)))$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                        &!!!$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                               &!!%$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                      &!!&$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                             &!!'$$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                                    &!!($$$$$$$
                                                                                                                                                           &!!#$$$$$$$&!!+$ &!!,$ &!!*$

                                                                                -./0122$           34$        54$




                                                                                           48
                                        Figure 6: Actual and simulated PM Es

This figure shows,by vintage year,average Public M arketEquivalentratios (PM Es)from differentcommercial
data sets.PM Es for Burgiss are calculated using underlying cash flow data for funds. PM Es for Venture
Economics,Preqin and CambridgeAssociates,arethePM Es implied by using theregressions results reported in
Table 8.PanelA focuses on buyoutfunds,and PanelB on venture capital,using the classifications used by the
suppliers orauthors.Onlyfunds withaNorthAmericangeographicalfocus areincluded.

                                                Panel A: Buyout fund PM Es

 ("#$



 ("!$



 '"#$



 '"!$



 &"#$



 &"!$



 %"#$



 %"!$



 !"#$
        %))'$   %))($   %))#$   %))*$   %))+$   %)),$   %)))$   &!!!$   &!!%$   &!!&$   &!!'$   &!!($   &!!#$   &!!*$   &!!+$   &!!,$

                                                    -./0122$     34$      5/6718$       9:$



                                                 Panel A: VC fund PM Es

 ("#$



 ("!$



 '"#$



 '"!$



 &"#$



 &"!$



 %"#$



 %"!$



 !"#$
        %))'$   %))($   %))#$   %))*$   %))+$   %)),$   %)))$   &!!!$   &!!%$   &!!&$   &!!'$   &!!($   &!!#$   &!!*$   &!!+$   &!!,$

                                                    -./0122$     34$      5/6718$       9:$




                                                                   49
