NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES THE CURRENT ACCOUNT STILL MATTER?
Maurice Obstfeld
Working Paper 17877
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17877
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

I thank Claudio Borio, Ralph Bryant, Jörg Decressin, Linda Goldberg, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas,
Robert Kollmann, Perry Mehrling, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Hélène Rey for helpful discussions.
I also thank Philip Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Feretti for sharing their updated data on international
asset and liability positions. Vladimir Asriyan and Gewei Wang provided expert research assistance.
Financial support from the International Growth Centre, London School of Economics, and the Center
for Equitable Growth, UC Berkeley, is acknowledged with thanks. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Maurice Obstfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Does the Current Account Still Matter?
Maurice Obstfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 17877
March 2012
JEL No. F32,F34,F36
ABSTRACT
Do global current account imbalances still matter in a world of deep international financial markets
where gross two-way financial flows often dwarf the net flows measured in the current account? Contrary
to a complete markets or “consenting adults” view of the world, large current account imbalances,
while very possibly warranted by fundamentals and welcome, can also signal elevated macroeconomic
and financial stresses, as was arguably the case in the mid-2000s. Furthermore, the increasingly big
valuation changes in countries’ net international investment positions, while potentially important
in risk allocation, cannot be relied upon systematically to offset the changes in national wealth implied
by the current account. The same factors that dictate careful attention to global imbalances also imply,
however, that data on gross international financial flows and positions are central to any assessment
of financial stability risks. The balance sheet mismatches of leveraged entities provide the most direct
indicators of potential instability, much more so than do global imbalances, though the imbalances
may well be a symptom that deeper financial threats are gathering.
Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu

Are discrepancies between national exports and imports ever a legitimate cause for
government concern or intervention? The question is as old as economic theory itself.
Sixteenth-century English writers deplored the drainage of precious metals implied by
deficits in foreign trade; as a result, the term “balance of trade” had entered into public
discourse by the early seventeenth century.1 David Hume’s account in 1752 of the pricespecie-flow mechanism, arguably the greatest set piece of classical monetary economics,
vanquished for many years the mercantilist position that the perpetual accumulation of
external wealth was both desirable and feasible. More than 250 years later, however, the
foreign trade imbalances of national units – including even some that share common
currencies – still figure prominently in debates over economic policy.
We should not be surprised. Even in an ideal world free of economic frictions,
foreign demand and supply conditions are constraints on the maximal welfare attainable
by the national unit. Its government therefore faces incentives to manipulate those
constraints. In simple neoclassical theory all countries gain from free trade, including
balanced trade, but in a real world permeated with economic and political distortions, a
government’s perceived short-run advantage may be enhanced by policies that enlarge
the trade surplus. Such policies necessarily affect trading partners because a bigger
surplus for one country requires correspondingly smaller ones for all the others. Of
course, it is also quite common that government policies lead to larger deficits, and in
theory, different distortions could result in absolute current account imbalances that are
too small, rather than too big, compared to an efficient benchmark.

1

See Price (1905). On the evolving interpretation of the phrase, and its relation to what we now call the
current account, see Fetter (1935).

1

Policies motivated by purely national advantage may well be collectively
counterproductive if widely undertaken, which is why countries have sought to
coordinate their trade and sometimes macroeconomic and financial policies. Economic
frictions in goods markets and financial markets potentially increase the gains from
policy cooperation, and they also can raise each country’s vulnerability to a range of
internal and external shocks, as well as the strength of spillover effects abroad. While
profitable to the private parties involved, some transactions between sovereign
jurisdictions may exacerbate systemic vulnerabilities, and therefore are legitimate targets
for policymakers’ attention.
The recent global crisis and its troubled sequel have brought these possibilities
into sharp relief. Some but not all observers link the origin of the crisis to the rapid
increase in economic globalization that preceded it, especially financial globalization.
Nearly everyone, however, acknowledges that stronger financial and trade linkages
helped propagate the crisis across borders.
Much contentious debate harks back to the debates of Hume’s day by focusing on
the current account balance as a potential conduit for international shock transmission, or
as a carrier of financial vulnerability. A country’s current account is the difference
between its saving and its domestic investment, or, equivalently, between its exports of
goods and services (including income receipts on assets held abroad) and its imports.2
The circumstantial evidence is that the crisis was preceded by historically large “global
imbalances” in current accounts, including big deficits run by a number of industrial
2

This formula corresponds to Meade’s (1951, p. 7) definition of the “balance of trade.” Strictly speaking,
any balance of unrequited transfers is added to this trade balance to compute the current account balance.
The current account gets its name from its coverage of “current” as opposed to “capital” transactions. Its
position today in United States balance of payments statistics owes to the recommendations of the Review

2

economies that subsequently came to grief (including the United States). Figure 1 shows
how the dispersion of global current account imbalances grew from the late 1990s
through 2006, the year before the onset of the global crisis.
But is concern about current account imbalances still warranted in the twenty-first
century? Policymakers certainly seem to think that it is. In 2006 the International
Monetary Fund launched a multilateral consultative process that aimed to promote an
orderly unwinding of large global imbalances. Similar issues have remained on the
agenda of the Group of Twenty countries in the wake of the crisis. And in July 2010 the
European Commission proposed an enhanced surveillance framework for EU members
based on a broad range of indicators of potential macroeconomic imbalances, including
current accounts.3 The latter, unlike the public finances and inflation, figured nowhere in
the Maastricht Treaty’s macroeconomic criteria for entry into the single European
currency.
What these high-level discussions seem to miss when they focus on currentaccount imbalances is the spectacular evolution and integration of international financial
markets over the past quarter century. Global imbalances are financed by complex
multilateral patterns of gross financial flows, flows that are typically much larger than the
current account gaps themselves. These financing patterns raise the question of whether
the generally much smaller net current account balance matters much any more, and, if
so, when and how. They also draw attention to the implications for asset prices and
financial stability of the much larger gross flows, which are intermediated through the

Committee for Balance of Payments Statistics (1965), a group that also stressed the linkage of the concept
to the national income and product accounts, as noted by Cooper (1966).
3
See European Economy News, October 2010, available online at:
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/een/019/article_88106_en.htm

3

financial markets of current account deficit and surplus countries alike. Some economists
suggest that the current account is much less important nowadays than policymakers’
continuing attention to global imbalances would suggest.
Ironically, the two main lines of attack on the importance of the current account
balance both rely on the increasing fluidity and depth of global financial markets, but
they take diametrically opposite views of those markets. To highlight the contrast, I state
both arguments in their most extreme forms.
The first argument assumes that countries have extensively diversified their
idiosyncratic risks in sophisticated, well-functioning markets for contingent securities. In
this world of virtually complete Arrow-Debreu asset markets, extensive global financial
markets allow countries to pool their risks to the maximum feasible extent. Except when
current account imbalances arise because of excessive government deficits, they
represent optimizing household and firm decisions that support intertemporally efficient
resource allocations and thus do not raise policy concerns.
The second argument against the continuing relevance of the current account is
less optimistic (to say the least). It is based on the view that risk sharing is inherently
imperfect and that high volumes of international financial activity often reflect skewed
incentives and expectations, tax avoidance or evasion, regulatory arbitrage, implicit
government guarantees, and other distortions. On this view, financial market
imperfections can reinforce each other so as to magnify systematic risks, which
themselves are endogenous to the financial system. This second argument maintains that
the stability impact of current account balances per se is small compared to that of the
gross asset flows that ultimately finance international financial transactions. The bulk of

4

these flows spread interconnected counterparty risks that become acute in a crisis. In any
case, the impact of net current account flows on a country’s net external wealth are
dwarfed by capital gains and losses on increasing gross foreign asset and liability
positions.
This lecture presents the case that even in today’s world of deep and globalized
financial markets, the national current account balance remains a policy-relevant variable
on both financial and macroeconomic grounds. Nonetheless, I will also argue that while
policymakers must continue to monitor global current accounts, such attention is far from
sufficient to ensure global financial stability. In line with the second view of current
accounts sketched above, large gross financial flows entail potential stability risks that
may be only distantly related, if related at all, to the global configuration of savinginvestment discrepancies. Adequate surveillance requires not only enhanced information
on the nature, size, and direction of gross global financial trades, but better understanding
of how those flows fit together with economic developments (including current account
balances) in the world’s economies, both rich and poor.

I. International Flows, Stocks, and Budget Constraints

A basic fact about financial globalization since the early 1990s is that gross
financial flows and gross stocks of foreign assets and liabilities have grown rapidly and
for some countries, explosively. The evolution of gross flows is illustrated by the
experience of the United States, which is a relatively closed economy compared to many
others. The two panels of Figure 2 show the gross payments flows underlying the U.S.

5

current account balance, as well as those that have financed it. Panel (a) shows U.S.
residents’ net purchases of foreign assets and (with a negative sign) foreign residents’ net
purchases of U.S. assets. The algebraic sum of the two series in panel (a) is the net
increase in U.S. foreign assets less the net increase in U.S. foreign liabilities. It equals the
U.S. current account balance (plus the usually small capital account balance) in principle
but not in practice, because of inevitable errors and omissions in the data.4 Panel (b) of
figure 2 shows U.S. exports and imports, together with gross investment income flows
and net transfers. The algebraic sum of the five series shown in the lower panel yields the
current account balance.
In the mid-1970s, gross financial flows were much smaller than trade flows, but
the former have grown over time and on average now are of comparable magnitude to
trade flows. Of course, international flows of investment income have grown over time as
gross foreign asset and liability stocks positions have grown. Figure 3 illustrates the
explosive growth of those stocks for a selection of countries and country groups, using
the position data assembled by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), and extended by the
authors through 2010. Let A denote the economy’s gross foreign assets and L its gross
foreign liabilities (both aggregates encompassing the domestic public as well as private
sectors). The data in Figure 3 represent the average of external assets and liabilities,
divided by GDP, or (A + L)/2GDP; for country groups I show the GDP-weighted
average.
The data indicate a rapid buildup in external positions, especially since the late
1990s, in the wealthier countries. On this measure, Japan’s “financial openness” merely

4

The capital account is reserved for a relatively small class of items, such as debt forgiveness.

6

doubles since the late 1990s, while that of the U.S. triples, to about 1.5 times GDP. The
euro zone’s is higher still, whereas for the countries of Newly Industrialized Asia (Hong
Kong, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan), average openness is about 3 times GDP. Most striking
are the very high numbers for rich European financial hubs such as the Netherlands,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. For emerging markets (represented here by the
BRIC countries), financial openness remains much lower, and its growth rate so far is
more moderate.
What is the relation between the international flows of asset sales and purchases
reported in balance of payments data and the stocks of foreign assets and liabilities? The
conventions governing the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) dictate that
the correspondence is imperfect, and increasingly so as financial globalization has
proceeded. Let CA denote the current account surplus, equal (apart from the generally
insignificant capital account balance) to domestic residents’ net purchases of foreign
assets less foreign residents’ net purchases of domestic assets (the level of financial flows
abroad). Let KGA and KGL be changes in the nominal market values of foreign assets and
liabilities (capital gains terms due to exchange rate and other asset price movements).
Then the overall change in the net international investment position or NIIP, defined as A
− L, is equal to the current account plus net capital gains on the NIIP:

A − L = CA + KGA − KGL .……………………………… (1)
Notice that the net capital gain KGA − KGL is part of income as commonly
conceptualized by economists, but not as measured in the national accounts, just as other
capital gains on wealth do not enter into the NIPA concepts of income or saving. Because
the U.S. external portfolio is long foreign currencies and short U.S. dollars, long foreign
7

equities and short U.S. debt, weakness in the dollar or strength in world equity markets
tends to flatter the NIIP of the United States. But the gains will not be recorded in the
U.S. national income accounts or current account balance.
Alongside the expanding volume of financial flows shown in Figure 1, an
expanding amplitude of valuation changes on external assets and liabilities has also
driven the dynamics of those stocks. The panels of Figure 4 illustrate the trends since the
early 1970s for six selected countries. The plots display both current account balances
(flow changes) and the changes in national NIIPs that are not attributable to current
account flows (both expressed as percentages of GDP). The increasing volatility trend in
the non-flow changes is exactly what one expects given the steadily expanding ratios to
GDP of gross assets and liabilities, although time variation in the variance of asset-price
shocks also plays a role.5
The key economic significance of the NIIP is that at any point in time, it limits the
present value of a country’s future net export deficits (not including international
investment income). This national constraint, which governs a country’s feasible
transactions with foreigners, can be viewed as an implication derived from three more
basic relationships.
The household budget constraint, written in domestic nominal terms, is

5

For some earlier references on the role of valuation changes, see Obstfeld (2004). As is discussed further
below, it is not in general correct to attribute the non-flow change in the NIIP entirely to asset-price
movements that are not captured in national income statistics. The procedures generally followed by
national statistical agencies do not always enforce consistency between the NIIP numbers (which can be
subject to large periodic revisions) and the current account numbers, so some part of the non-flow change is
likely to reflect measurement error.

8

 ∞ Ω( s )

V (t ) + D(t ) + A(t ) − L(t ) = Et  ∫
[C (s) + T (s) − W (s)]ds  ,……………… (2)
t Ω(t )



where V denotes the nominal market value of the claims to capital resident in the home
economy, D the domestic government’s net outstanding debt in nominal terms
(accounting for foreign exchange reserve assets), Ω(s)/Ω(t) is the stochastic discount
factor for money, C is nominal consumption, T is nominal tax payments, and W is
nominal wage income of resident workers.6 The government’s budget constraint is

 ∞ Ω( s )

D(t ) = Et  ∫
T ( s ) − G ( s ) ]ds  ,……………………………… (3)
[
 t Ω(t )


where G is nominal government consumption. Finally, we have the following equilibrium
relation between V and the present value of future profits Y − W − I generated by
domestic capital,

 ∞ Ω( s )

V (t ) = Et  ∫
[Y ( s) − W (s) − I ( s)]ds  ,……………………………… (4)
t Ω(t )



where Y is nominal GDP and I is nominal spending on investment.7 Combining these
three, we conclude that the NIIP limits the present value of future net export deficits:

6

In this and the subsequent government budget constraint I ignore the role of money and seigniorage.
Seigniorage can be significant – for example the Federal Reserves recent operating profits – but I leave it
aside because it will enter the national intertemporal budget constraint [equation (5) below] only when
foreign residents are willing to hold significant quantities of a country’s cash. This is the case mostly for
currencies that play a big role in underground transactions, notably the U.S. dollar, which is dominant in
global black markets as it is in the legitimate sphere.
7
The fiscal theory of the price level interprets the government budget constraint, in analogy with the capital
valuation equation, as an equilibrium condition.

9

 ∞ Ω( s )

 ∞ Ω( s )

A(t ) − L(t ) = Et  ∫
C ( s ) + G ( s ) + I ( s ) − Y ( s )]ds  = − Et  ∫
NX ( s )ds  .… (5)
[
t Ω(t )
t Ω(t )





Calculated at world prices, this derived national solvency constraint bites
regardless of the exchange-rate regime. It covers the consolidated public and private
sectors. For example, A comprises foreign exchange reserves that the government
acquires through currency-market interventions, just as L includes domestic sovereign
debt held by foreigners. The constraint shows what is needed for a current account deficit
to be sustainable. If deficits are driving the NIIP downward, then in the absence of
windfall capital gains on national foreign positions, expenditure has to fall or output to
rise in order that the private and public sectors both remain solvent. If sufficient
adjustments in those directions are not politically or technologically feasible, then further
borrowing is simply not sustainable, in the sense that it will ultimately lead to a solvency
crisis somewhere in the economy.
The role of the NIIP as a limit on the present value of net export surpluses also
shows that its sign, positive or negative determines how a general rise in global rates of
return will impact domestic welfare. When A − L > 0, a rise in global rates of return
generally makes room for larger future net export deficits. When A − L < 0, future net
export surpluses generally must be increased when global rates of return rise in order to
service the negative NIIP.
The reality of financial globalization requires care in interpreting the national
implications of measured gross positions, however. Several economies host foreign
headquartered financial institutions that have substantial balance sheets. Ireland is a
leading example. But balance of payments data are based on a residence rather than a

10

nationality principle, so potentially large fractions of gross external assets and liabilities
(and the corresponding net positions) may belong to foreign nationals, and be only
tangentially relevant to domestic nationals’ welfare. Furthermore, the national
government may not find it necessary or desirable to intervene in support of resident
institutions of foreign nationality that encounter financial problems. Nonetheless, in most
cases the NIIP will still offer a reasonably good indicator of national consumption
possibilities.

II. Arguments for Neglecting Current Account

The current account is one component of the overall change in the NIIP, and as such, its
direction and absolute size imply changes in the economy’s overall consumption and
investment opportunities, other things equal. Furthermore, because an opposite balance
elsewhere in the world economy must match a given country’s balance, national current
account developments necessarily imply opposite adjustments abroad. Several lines of
argument contend that current account imbalances are essentially self-correcting à la
Hume, or are of second-order policy importance compared to other aspects of
international financial flows.

A. Complete Markets

In economic models with complete international asset markets, the scope for current
account imbalances is likely to be much reduced, while potential negative interactions
between international asset flows and financial market imperfections are absent. In a

11

canonical endowment economy with international borrowing and lending only, a country
experiencing a temporary fall in output will borrow abroad to smooth its consumption,
thereby running a temporary current account deficit. But with complete markets the
adjustment process is entirely different.
Consider, for example, the famous two-country endowment model of Lucas (1982).
In that (ex ante symmetric) model, two countries swap exactly half the claims on their
stochastic endowments, so that residents of both end up holding identical perfectly
pooled portfolios. In that case, people share the consequences of any endowment shock,
and since these shocks create no ex post wealth asymmetry between the countries, there
is no ex post international asset trade either.
Complete market models with investment can result in current account deficits or
surpluses, but they are likely to be smaller than in the incomplete market case, sometimes
much smaller. For example, Coeurdacier, Kollmann, and Martin (2010) analyze a model
with equity claims and real consols, an asset structure sufficient to reproduce complete
markets up to a first-order approximation in a model with two shocks, shocks to
productivity and to investment efficiency. In that model (again up to a first-order
approximation), optimal portfolio behavior implies a zero current account as bond flows
always offset equity flows. Other complete-markets models with investment may,
however, imply nonzero current accounts. For example, when new firms are born in a
country, equity shares in them must be distributed to foreign investors via a net financial
inflow, or current account deficit.

12

Clearly such scenarios, with or without investment, provide no basis for
efficiency-enhancing policy intervention. On the other hand, empirical support for the
complete-markets hypothesis is, to put it charitably, weak.

B. “Consenting Adults”: The Lawson Doctrine and the Pitchford Thesis

An alternative case for neglect holds that optimizing, forward-looking households and
firms – of the type that Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), for example, model – will generate
current account balances consistent with efficient resource allocation, provided the
public-sector deficit is not excessive. Such imbalances can be expected to adjust toward
moderate levels over time, and in an orderly fashion, as firms exhaust the most
productive investment projects and as households shrink spending consistent with
declining wealth. This natural adjustment process echoes Hume’s vision of inherently
self-limiting trade imbalances, although it is more complex. In general, proponents of this
vision focus on the possibility of excessive deficits, which are most likely to be at risk of
abrupt reversal.
The argument that profit-maximizing firms and utility-maximizing households,
unlike the government, are unlikely to over-borrow has been advanced in many cases of
large current account deficits. Chile in the early 1980s is a classic case in which a huge
current account deficit (peaking at 14.5 percent of GDP in 1981) was justified by Chilean
officials as reflecting “exclusively the saving/investment gap of the private sector” and
“by definition self-adjusting….”8 As famously chronicled by Díaz-Alejandro (1985), the

8

Boughton (2001, p. 349n). Also see the discussion by Edwards (2002, p. 28).

13

episode ended in a devastating crash, with Chile’s government massively socializing
private-sector debts.
Despite this and similar experiences in the developing world, perhaps the bestknown enunciation of the case for neglect was offered subsequently by British Chancellor
of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson. At the 1988 annual meetings of the IMF and World
Bank, as the U.K. current account deficit was rising from below 1 percent of GDP in
1986 to just under 5 percent in 1989, Lawson asserted that an external deficit originating
in private-sector behavior should be of no concern. This view became knows as the
“Lawson Doctrine.” 9 Around the same time a similar doctrine, knows as the Pitchford
Thesis (after Pitchford 1989) or the “consenting adults” view of the current account,
became influential in Australia, a country that has run oftentimes large deficits in every
year since 1974 without encountering a serious crisis.10
One can appreciate the intellectual underpinnings of the Lawson Doctrine by
reviewing equations (2) – (4) above and their relationship to equation (5), the national
solvency constraint. For the purpose of this discussion I define P as the home price level
and rewrite the government budget constraint (3) in real terms as
 ∞ P ( s )Ω( s )

D(t )
= Et  ∫
[τ ( s) − g ( s)]ds  .
t
P(t )
 P(t )Ω(t )


Suppose that the government is expected to follow policies consistent with market
valuation of its debt at par, given the price-level path desired by the central bank.
9

IMF (1988, pp. 78-85). Lord Lawson’s current views are summarized in his inaugural Adam Smith
Lecture, given at Pembroke College, Cambridge in November 2010; see Lawson (2011).
10
An early advocate of the “consenting adults” view was W. Max Corden. For a discussion of the
Australian debate over the significance of the external deficit, see Belkar, Cockerell, and Kent (2007), who
also advance possible reasons for Australia’s positive experience of dependence on foreign capital. A
summary of Corden’s more recent views is Corden (2007).

14

Suppose further that the aggregate of households is expected to respect equation (2),
given that the value of their equity assets is rationally assessed according to (4). Then the
national intertemporal constraint (5) holds automatically. It is a derivative concept,
however, because while equations (2)-(4) refer to basic economic units, equation (5)
refers to the geographical unit within which those economic units reside. The Lawson
Doctrine admits that the government may manage its affairs badly – the result being
undesired inflation, a haircut on government debt, or both – but it does not recognize the
private sector as a source of trouble. Thus, if the government finances are well managed,
there is no further need to worry about the country’s external deficits or debts.
A key problem with the Lawson argument is that the dividing line between public
and private debts becomes hazy precisely in crisis situations. This problem, once thought
to apply most starkly to developing countries, is now manifestly a major issue for rich
countries as well. And when the government intervenes, it does so to achieve a national
objective, and with national effects.
Government improvidence may adversely affect private-sector budget constraints,
of course, as when domestic holders of government debt take losses. But, conversely,
private sector difficulties may adversely affect the government’s budget, as when the
liabilities of failing banks receive public guarantees. (And of course, the expectation of
such guarantees undermines the efficient functioning of markets.) Particularly in systemic
crises, the budget constraints of the private and public sectors are inescapably
intertwined, so that the national unit effectively does become an economic unit itself. In
extreme cases, the government might even have to erect barriers between domestic and
foreign financial markets. It is the possibility that such events could occur, and the

15

resulting market expectations, that make national current account deficits and external
positions relevant. Again, one must add a caveat concerning economies that extensively
host foreign-owned financial institutions. As noted above, their assets and liabilities may
have little connection with domestic nationals and a foreign government may be their
primary recourse for financial support in periods of financial stress.
Some claimed in the past that, thanks to the common currency issued by a systemwide central bank, national current accounts would no longer matter in the euro zone. But
the continuing fiscal and regulatory responsibilities of national euro zone governments to
maintain national financial stability explain why member countries’ individual external
accounts remain a cause for concern. In particular, the absence of system-wide euro zone
fiscal and regulatory authorities to oversee a highly integrated bond market has proved to
be a huge liability, and has contributed to market segmentation in the crisis – even before
the threat that some countries could depart the common currency. The contrast with the
fiscal and regulatory arrangements in currency unions such as the United States – where
sub-unit current account data are not even collected – could not be starker.
Aside from these important considerations relating to the role of governments,
any number of factors, not all government imposed, may distort the behavior of firms and
households, leading to current account deficits that are too large to be sustained. Suppose
markets overestimate the value of equities. If foreigners largely hold these, it is they who
will take the loss when the crash comes. In the case of home bias in equity holdings,
however, the result is a fall in domestic wealth and consumption, including imports.

16

C. The Case for Focusing on Gross Flows and Positions

As I have noted, gross flows two-way financial flows now eclipse the net flows measured
by the current account. Gross foreign asset and liability positions likewise have grown
rapidly. But aren’t these gross quantities the ones policymakers should worry about? A
country with a gross short-term debt position may be vulnerable to a run, just as banks
are. And even if the country as a whole holds a large net foreign asset stock, it does not
follow that the particular agents with short-term foreign liabilities hold enough liquid
assets to pay them off should lenders refuse to renew their credits. A focus on net
positions does not recognize that my fellow citizens’ assets are not available to pay off
my debts – unless the government steps in, which generally happens only after a crisis
has occurred. It is thus gross exposures that would seem to carry the risks of financial
instability – of a balance-sheet crisis – regardless of whether the country has a current
account deficit or surplus, or is a net international creditor or debtor. Financial actors
engage in maturity and liquidity transformation within different currencies, regardless of
their home lender of last resort, and this opens the door to financial fragility.11
Furthermore, the portfolio shifts reflected in gross flows can have big effects on asset
prices, even in the absence of current account imbalances. Johnson (2009), Borio and
Disyatat (2011), and Shin (2012) present this view forcefully.12
Another implication of expanding gross asset and liability positions, noted above,
is the increasing role of asset-price changes – the capital gains terms in equation (1) – in

11

An early model of balance-sheet crises is Calvo (2000).
In a world of complete asset markets, of course, gross asset flows are of no more concern than are net
flows.

12

17

explaining the variance of the NIIP. If the NIIP can jump wildly because of valuation
changes that swamp the current account’s effect, why put so much emphasis on the
current account? Let me expand on these arguments in turn.
For the rich industrial countries, much of the expansion of gross external asset and
liability stocks has necessarily taken the form of debt instruments. There is considerable
trade in equity too, as in the Lucas (1982) model, but the fact of home bias in equity
ownership remains (although it is declining over time). Furthermore there is only so
much real capital to underlie equity claims. The extreme ratios of external asset stocks to
GDP that some countries display are not feasible except on the basis of extensive twoway trade in debt or debt-like instruments, including derivatives.
Figure 5 illustrates this fact for the United States’ external assets and liabilities.
The figure documents the well-know fact (see Gourinchas and Rey 2007a) that the U.S.,
on balance, issues debt in order to hold equity. The prevalence of debt on the asset and
liability sides is even more pronounced for the United Kingdom, as is shown in Figure 6.
For the U.K. in 2010, debt assets amounted to about 3.5 time GDP and debt liabilities to
about 4 times GDP.
The motivations for such huge two-way debt flows, many of which are
international banking flows of short maturity, are only partially understood. There are
several microeconomic rationales for a positive effect of debt contracts on incentives, and
the availability of safe debt instruments is essential for market liquidity. But as
Gourinchas (2001) emphasizes, while debt may sometimes enhance the efficiency of
bilateral deals between individual agents, and even be essential to smooth market
functioning, liquidity can evaporate quickly and upward spikes in counterparty risk are

18

highly destabilizing at the systemic, macro level. Unfortunately, also, tax shifting and
regulatory arbitrage are certainly important motivations for two-way debt transactions.
The pyramiding of debt claims between counterparties often carries financial stability
risks for the countries involved, regardless of their current account positions. Short-term
liabilities are subject to rollover risk, and liquidity problems easily can spread,
threatening the solvency of a range of financial institutions. When the assets of one
institution become impaired, those that have lent to it, or are suspected of having done so,
can lose credit themselves. The resulting contagion can spread rapidly across national
borders. Of course, this picture of globalized finance, while downplaying the importance
of net financial flows, is very far from the one underlying the complete-markets or
“consenting adults” view of the world!
The prevalence of debt or debt-like instruments in international finance is
therefore potentially worrisome. Unlike equity, these instruments feature a predetermined
contractual payment (perhaps contingent) that is subject to default. When many financial
players are themselves leveraged, the phenomenon raises significant systemic dangers.
For this reason, countries such as India have actively discouraged debt inflows while
permitting inflows of portfolio equity and FDI.
Johnson's (2009, pp. 13-14) summary makes the case well: "Current account data
are too partial (because of netting in the statistics) to give useful information on the
associated financial flows. The netting embedded in current account data can be
misleading because the assets acquired by some domestic residents are not necessarily
available to meet the liabilities of other domestic residents and because the composition
of claims acquired on the rest of the world, and hence their risk characteristics, may be

19

quite different from the composition of claims on the domestic economy acquired by
foreign residents." For purposes of assessing vulnerability to financial crisis, there is no
substitute for information on the composition of each individual institution's gross assets
and gross liabilities. Crises are crises precisely because of financial markets' inability to
allocate liquidity where it is most needed, when it is most needed.
A prime example of how two-way financial flows helped lay the groundwork for
the 2007-09 global crisis comes from the large position in AAA-rated United States
asset-backed securities (ABS) taken by European banks, as documented by Johnson
(2009), Bernanke et al. (2011), Borio and Disyatat (2011), Bertaut et al. (2011), and Shin
(2012), among others. To summarize broadly, many banks invested in ABS, in many
cases through special purpose conduits, funding their acquisitions of these dollar assets
with wholesale dollars often borrowed from U.S. money-market funds. For the European
banks, such transactions offered relatively high net returns as well as some relief from
regulatory capital requirements.13 For the money market funds, the transactions offered
apparently high liquidity as well as favorable interest rates. The transactions were thus
privately, if not always socially, profitable. Although extensive, this business received
relatively little attention in policy circles compared with the flows of emerging markets’
excess savings into U.S. Treasury securities and agency obligations. But the flows from
Europe played a key role in U.S. credit growth, including housing finance. Banking
inflows to the U.S. originated in current-account deficit countries (the United Kingdom)
and surplus countries (Germany, Switzerland) alike. Data from the Bank for International
Settlements on bank holdings by nationality show that by 2007, non-U.S. banks (mostly

13

Acharya and Schnabl (2009, 2010) discuss incentives for regulatory arbitrage.

20

European but also Japanese) held more than $6 trillion in claims on the United States –
compared to a total nominal U.S. GDP of about $14 trillion (Borio and Disyatat 2011).
A first observation is that the transactions just described simultaneously raise
gross foreign debt assets and debt liabilities in both Europe and the U.S. The U.S. money
market fund acquires a gross claim on a European bank, which acquires an equal-valued
ABS issued in the U.S., a U.S. gross liability. The mirror image shows up on the
European external balance sheet.
A second observation is that these transactions, although believed to be virtually
risk-free when undertaken in the frothy environment of the mid-2000s, actually involved
dangerous liquidity and currency mismatches that were unexpectedly exposed starting in
August 2007. At several points, European banks faced difficulty rolling over the shortterm dollar credits that funded their holdings of suddenly toxic American ABS. For these
banks, heavily reliant on wholesale funding, this amounted to a run on their dollar
liabilities. Selling dollar assets to repay the loans would have forced the banks to book
losses, while also contributing to fire-sale dynamics in U.S. financial markets. On the
other hand, borrowing euros (say) from the ECB and selling them for spot dollars would
have left the banks dangerously long dollars and short euros. Foreign exchange swap
markets, which normally would have been used to cover that risk, were simultaneously
dysfunctional. Some non-U.S. banks had access to Federal Reserve lending, and held
eligible collateral, but many did not. The situation was stabilized thanks to the
willingness of the Fed to provide dollars to the ECB, eventually in unlimited amounts.14

21

Table 1

Correlations ρ(∆NIIP/GDP,CA/GDP) by Period and Country Group

Country Group

1971-90

1991-2010

High-income

0.61

0.26

Emerging

0.54

0.46

Developing

0.46

0.34

A third and last observation is that these tensions, like many others in financial
markets in recent years, were felt by banks in current-account surplus and deficit
countries alike simply because the banks’ intrinsic vulnerability originated in the gross
positions on their balance sheets.
Let me turn next to the second reason suggested above for de-emphasizing the
current account balance. This perspective admits the importance of the NIIP, but points to
equation (1) and argues that the current account is an increasingly minor component of
the overall change in the NIIP, which from year to year can easily offset the current
account entirely.
Table 1 illustrates the increasingly loose relationship between current accounts
and changes in the NIIP. The table uses the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti data to compute the
simple average correlation coefficients ρ(∆NIIP/GDP,CA/GDP) over two periods, 19711990 and the later period of more intense financial globalization, 1991-2010.15 For all
country groups the correlation coefficient drops between the two periods, but the change
14

On the ad hoc central bank swap network initiated in December 2007, see, for example, McGuire and
von Peter (2009) and Goldberg, Kennedy, and Miu (2011). Fed support was renewed and remains in place
as a result of the European sovereign debt crisis.
15
Because of insufficient data availability, over the first subperiod the high-income sample is 20 countries,
the emerging sample 56 countries, and the developing sample 81 countries. The respective sample sizes for

22

is most striking, naturally, for the high-income countries, which have generated the
largest gross foreign asset and liability positions.
In the case of the United States, the correlation coefficient drops from 0.83 before
1991 to only 0.13 afterward. Figure 8 plots both the cumulated current account balance
data and the measured NIIP for the United States, both relative to GDP (taking the 1970
NIIP as an initial benchmark for the cumulated current account series). On face value,
these data seem to indicate that, for a lengthy period after 2002, the U.S. was apparently
able to borrow historically large amounts without any deterioration in its NIIP.
Because capital gains and losses on net international positions result in such large
wealth transfers between countries, it is natural to ask whether these play any positive
risk sharing role. Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot (2010) suggest that the U.S. may
effectively provide global crisis insurance to the world, in return for a low foreign
borrowing rate. The dollar has been a safe haven currency, appreciating in the face of
negative global shocks. This fact and the fact of declines in world stock markets during
crises result in outward wealth transfers from the U.S. during periods of global stress.
The patterns of such transfers across countries deserve further study, as does the general
question of the role of NIIP capital gains and losses in the global allocation of risk.16

the second subperiod are 21, 56, and 99. The correlations are relatively low for emerging and developing
countries over the first subperiod due to both poor data and to episodes of external debt restructuring.
16
Simple representative-agent models of efficient international risk sharing with plausible relative risk
aversion imply that U.S. consumption spending should rise relative to foreign consumption spending in
states of nature where the dollar appreciates in real terms. In contrast, the structure of the U.S. external
portfolio dictates that (unexpected) dollar appreciation transfers wealth to foreigners from the U.S.; see
Obstfeld (2007). That pattern is consistent with efficient aggregate risk sharing (as is the Gourinchas-ReyGovillot idea) if, even after the international wealth transfer, U.S. spending is high relative to foreign

23

III. So Why Worry about Current Account Balances?

The arguments that current account deficits are self-correcting, that huge cross-border
financial flows promote efficient risk sharing, and that private-sector self interest leads to
socially efficient allocations absent government-imposed distortions all look increasingly
implausible in light of recent experience.17 Even if one rejects those doctrines, however,
one might still argue that the current account balance itself is of little significance,
especially for the advanced economies that reside increasingly in an ocean of two-way
financial flows and routinely experience large capital gains and losses on their gross
international assets and liabilities.
So why continue to worry about the current account? To my mind, one can group
the answers under three main categories: the current account as a symptom of related
problems; the macro implications, both at home and abroad, of significant changes in
current account imbalances; and the likelihood that, over the long run, the current account
actually does do a reasonable job of tracking the NIIP.18
Before proceeding, I have to emphasize that just as the “consenting adults”
framework claims, some current account imbalances, even very large ones, can be
justified in terms of economic fundamentals and do not pose threats either to the national
or international economy. Such imbalances need not be a symptom of economic
distortions elsewhere in the economy, but instead reflect reasonably forward-looking
decisions of households and firms, based on realistic expectations of the future. Not all
spending in states of the world where the dollar is relatively strong. But this pattern is not consistent with
the data, as a large literature in international macroeconomics documents.
17
Which is not to say that government-related distortions such as “too big to fail” guarantees are
unimportant – just that they are not the exclusive source of inefficiencies.

24

fall into this category, however, and the facts of the case are typically amenable to
different interpretations – witness the debate over the global imbalances of the mid2000s, notably the U.S. deficit, as summarized by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2010). It is
precisely the uncertainty whether a given imbalance is benign that underlies
policymakers’ stance of continuing concern.

A. Large Current Account Imbalance as a Symptom

Numerous crises have been preceded by large current account deficits – Chile in
1981, Finland in 1991, Mexico in 1994, Thailand in 1997, the United States in 2007,
Iceland in 2008, and Greece in 2010, to name just a few. But temporal priority does not
establish causality, and the empirical literature of the last two decades has not established
a robust predictive ability of the current account for subsequent financial crises
(especially where the richer economies are concerned). There are cases in which even
large current account deficits have not led to crises, as noted above, and furthermore,
several notable financial crises were not preceded by big deficits, including some of the
banking crises in industrial countries during 2007-09 (for example, Germany and
Switzerland).
Frankel and Rose (1996), in a pioneering study, argued that large external deficits
did not significantly raise the odds of a subsequent currency crisis in emerging markets,
whereas Edwards (2002) argued that their result was somewhat sensitive to the definition
of “crisis” and the region being studied. In a recent survey, Frankel and Saravelos (2010)

18

For a complementary discussion, see Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti (2011).

25

conclude that the current account has some predictive power for currency crashes but less
so than other indicators, such as international reserves and real exchange rates.
Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) distinguish among currency, banking, and default crises
and find that while larger current account deficits often appear to proceed past crises, the
current account generally does not play a statistically significant role in helping to predict
various types crises. On the other hand, Catão and Milesi-Ferretti (2011) study a sample
including advanced as well as developing economies over 1970-2010 and find that bigger
current account deficits and bigger net external debt liabilities both raise the probability
of debt crises, defined to include large disbursements from multilateral support programs
as well as external default. So the evidence is somewhat mixed.
A growing body of evidence, however, including the paper by Gourinchas and
Obstfeld (2012) but also including Borio and Lowe (2002), Mendoza and Terrones
(2008), Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2011), Schularick, and Taylor (2012), and many
others, does indicate that rapid increases in domestic credit plays an economically and
statistically significant role in predicting subsequent crises. Gourinchas and Obstfeld
attribute the relative resilience of many emerging markets in the 2007-09 crisis in part to
their avoidance of credit booms in the preceding years, and show that this was not the
case in Central and Eastern Europe, where the effects of the crisis were especially harsh.
The ability to borrow abroad generally will allow a country to borrow at lower
interest rates, and with less pressure on the exchange rate and therefore on inflation, than
if it was financially closed. So it is natural to suspect some systematic relationship among
current account deficits, domestic credit growth, and financial crises. In reality the
relationship seems to be complex. As Hume and Sentance (2009) point out, several large

26

emerging markets have experienced credit booms without net inflows of capital. Japan’s
epic boom-bust cycle starting in the late 1980s occurred despite a current account surplus
(although the surplus did decline during the Japanese bubble period).
Despite such counterexamples, there is evidence (stronger for emerging countries)
that net inflows of private capital may help generate credit booms and, in the presence of
potentially fragile financial systems, raise the probability of a crash. For example, Ostry
et al. (2011, p. 21) study panel data for an emerging-market sample over 1995-2008, and
(based on specific definitions of credit booms and crises, of course) they conclude, “onehalf of credit booms are associated with a capital inflow surge, and of those that ended in
a crisis, about 60 percent are associated with an inflow surge.” Mendoza and Terrones
(2008) find that most emerging-market crises involve domestic credit booms and that
elevated financial inflows often precede credit booms. An IMF study of 19 advanced and
28 emerging market economies over the years 1960-2010 concludes similarly that
financial inflows help predict credit booms (IMF 2011, pp. 47-50).
Studies such as these do not directly address the link between credit booms and
the current account because the net inflow of private capital and the current account
deficit need not coincide: even a country with a current account surplus may experience a
net inflow of private capital if it is accumulating a sufficient volume of foreign exchange
reserves. Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2011, p. 372) examine the question more
directly, utilizing fourteen decades of data for a sample of advanced countries, and
conclude that “The current account deteriorates in the run-up to normal crises, but the
evidence is inconclusive in global crises, possibly because both surplus and deficit
countries get embroiled in the crisis.” Reinhart and Reinhart (2009) study a broad sample

27

of emerging and advanced economies, differentiating among different types of financial
crisis. They argue that large current account deficits make emerging-market economies
more crisis-prone, while the evidence for advanced economies is mixed. The general
question merits further research.
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2010) argue that for the United States, the big current
account deficit of the mid-2000s was not a cause of the crisis, but instead an endogenous
response to domestic and external factors, including credit and housing booms, that
indeed were unsustainable and that ended in tears.19 Indeed, a global credit boom
occurred in the years preceding the crisis, and it cannot be directly attributed to external
developments such as higher saving by Asian emerging markets and oil producers. As
Hume and Sentance (2009) observe, the net inflow of capital from emerging to advanced
economies is quantitatively far less than the amount of domestic credit those economies
generated in the run up to the global crisis. Empirically, bigger housing booms were
associated with bigger current account deficits. And where current account deficits were
large, they generally were a symptom of brewing financial instability.
External deficits may not be the true source of a problem – nor is the problem
necessarily addressed most effectively by seeking directly to reduce the external deficit –
but it is nonetheless prudent to be vigilant. Looking at the current predicament of the euro
zone, it is easy to argue (unfortunately, with hindsight), that its members’ external
imbalances after 1999 were symptomatic of unsustainable trends – Greece’s government
deficit, housing and construction booms in Spain and Ireland, and excessive private

19

The United States’ ability to borrow large amounts abroad on favorable terms, however, facilitated the
domestic asset boom. Otherwise, the dollar’s foreign exchange value would have been lower and domestic
interest rates higher.

28

borrowing in Portugal, with finance provided in large measure by European banks
(including banks in surplus countries) that now find themselves in trouble. A cautious
interpretation of the track record, it seems to me, is that large, persistent unexplained
deficits warrant careful policymaker scrutiny.
This is not to say that large surpluses in current accounts may not also be
symptomatic of financial and economic distortions. China’s high surplus, for example, is
certainly linked to low levels of social insurance, to financial repression that keeps the
return to savings low, and to a corporate governance framework that encourages
excessive saving by firms.

B. Macroeconomic Implications

Being highly correlated with net exports, the current account also plays a role as a key
component of a country’s aggregate demand. Since current accounts throughout the
world necessarily sum to zero in theory – which is to say that world saving must equal
world investment absent measurement problems – shifts in patterns of current accounts
are also likely to be correlated with shifts in global real interest rates, especially at the
longer maturities where monetary policies presumably have less influence. Such shifts
also affect terms of trade and real exchange rates, with impacts on resource allocation
throughout the world. Bernanke’s (2005) celebrated (if sometimes disputed) account of
the “global saving glut” is a prime example of this implication of global imbalances.
According to this view, bigger surpluses by emerging market countries such as China

29

pushed world real interest rates down, with repercussions in advanced-country asset and
housing markets.
One obvious danger of running a large current account deficit is that in the
aggregate, an excess of spending over income necessarily must be sustained by sales of
foreign assets (privately owned or official reserves) or finance provided by foreigners. If
foreigners suddenly become unwilling to provide that finance, and if only limited
liquidity can be generated through domestic residents’ sales of their foreign assets, then
the current account necessarily must adjust abruptly through a collapse in domestic
demand. This is the “sudden stop” scenario discussed by Calvo and Reinhart (2000). It
can imply abrupt and painful adjustments in relative prices and resource allocation, along
with negative balance-sheet effects when foreign-currency liabilities are widespread.
Current-account surplus countries have a much milder dependence on foreign
financial inflows. The individuals in surplus countries who are borrowing abroad could in
principle find domestic credit sources if foreign supply were cut off, all at an unchanged
aggregate current account surplus. Thus a strike by foreign lenders, other things equal,
does not necessarily force a current-account surplus country to increase its surplus.
Nonetheless, an abrupt collapse of gross foreign inflows is likely in practice to
have significant economic effects even on a surplus country, including an increase in the
trade balance. A sharp global portfolio shift away from a surplus country’s assets requires
adjustments in rates of return and the exchange rate. Domestic rates of return need to rise
to divert domestic savings to domestic borrowers, while real currency depreciation
reduces imports and spur exports. But the size of the resulting trade balance increase is
perforce much smaller than the increase that a current-account deficit country must

30

generate in the face of a complete sudden stop. Accordingly, the degree of
macroeconomic dislocation is much smaller for a surplus country as well. And naturally,
the surplus country’s lower vulnerability to disappearing gross foreign inflows also
makes it much less likely that those inflows do disappear.
For a deficit economy, the nature of aggregate gross asset and liability positions,
and the distribution of different assets and liabilities among individuals, plainly affects
the way a sudden stop scenario plays out. Initial portfolio positions can make the
outcome less bad (if agents hold liquid foreign assets, or assets useful as collateral for
foreign loans), or much worse (if agents have extensive short-term foreign liabilities).
Figure 7 illustrates the example of the United States over the two quarters of
intensive global deleveraging following the Lehman Brothers collapse in September
2008. (Figure 1 shows annual data.) Gross capital inflows, which in previous years had
been sufficient to more than cover even a 2006 net current account deficit of 6 percent of
GDP, went into reverse, as foreigners liquidated $198.5 billion in U.S. assets.20 In
addition, the U.S. financed a current account shortfall of $231.1 billion (down sharply
from the current account deficit of $371.4 billion over the previous two quarters). Where
did the total of nearly $430 billion in external finance come from? It came from U.S.
sales of $428.4 billion of assets held abroad – a volume so big that the dollar actually
appreciated sharply through March 2009. Had these resources not been available (as a
result of past gross financial outflows from the U.S.), foreigners would have been able to
liquidate fewer of their U.S. assets, the U.S. current account deficit would have been
compressed further, and the dollar would have slumped in currency markets. Of course,

31

financial intermediation between U.S. resident individuals was disrupted during this
period, making it more difficult for those with foreign liabilities but not assets to finance
repayments. Hence the need for extensive intervention by central banks.21
For a country with few liquid foreign assets, but substantial short-term liabilities
that foreigners refuse to roll over, a sudden stop in financial inflows opens up an external
financing gap even larger than the current account deficit, leading to a sharp and much
more painful adjustment. Emerging markets in the past were more likely to be in this
category, though they have been accumulating higher volumes of gross private foreign
assets these days, alongside copious international reserves. The results of such sudden
stop episodes can be quite painful.22 A current account deficit creates a basic
vulnerability to a sudden stop in financial inflows, but as noted above, the nature of gross
foreign asset and liability positions will be a critical determinant of the denouement.
Gross currency, liquidity, and maturity exposures determine which actors will encounter
financial stress, in turn stressing their creditors, their creditors’ creditors, and so on.
Some argue that euro zone peripheral countries have been suffering a sudden stop
of gross financial inflows during the currency union’s debt crisis, with finance for the

20

These data, from the Bureau of Economic Analysis website (accessed December 2011), are not
seasonally adjusted. Fortunately for my example, large errors and omissions in each of the two quarters I
discuss cancel when flows over the two quarters are summed.
21
It is useful to keep in mind that all of the flows being discussed are endogenous. Some foreign
liquidations of U.S. assets were prompted by U.S. repayment demands on foreigners, and vice versa.
22
Empirical studies suggest that the output and exchange rate effects of current-account reversals differ
across countries and need not always bring a sharp slowdown. See, for example, Milesi-Ferretti and Razin
(2000), Edwards (2002), and Freund and Warnock (2007). For a theoretical model of a sudden stop leading
to economic collapse, see Mendoza (2010). Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2011) argue that countries with initial
current account deficits adjusted more sharply in the 2007-09 crisis, and in particular, that a key correlate of
the extent of demand and output compression was the degree to which the deficit exceeded an empirical
benchmark based on economic and demographic fundamentals. Recognizing the growing divergences
between gross and net financial flows even for emerging economies, Forbes and Warnock (2011) develop a
50-country database and analyze extreme financial capital movements over the 1980-2009 period.

32

current account and financial outflows coming from IMF and EU lending and the ECB.23
The euro zone peripherals have, however, also been able to draw down stocks of foreign
assets. Furthermore, within the euro zone, a further source of finance (at least from euro
zone partners) is cash, net cross-border flows of which have given rise to the muchdiscussed net national positions within the TARGET payment system.24
A theoretical argument that current account deficits (as well as the surpluses of
creditor countries) may generally be too large comes from considering the externalities
that can arise when financial markets are incomplete (Korinek 2011). A sudden stop can
lead to a currency depreciation that, in turn, raises the real value of foreign liabilities and
thereby tightens financial constraints. Because individuals do not internalize this
pecuniary externality, borrowers borrow too much and lenders lend too much, so there is
a (global) welfare argument for reducing the size of external imbalances.
Creditors can impose a sharp reduction in the current account deficit, but the
reduction also can arise from a fall in domestic demand, for example, due to household
deleveraging or a collapse in investment. In either case, the resulting fall in aggregate
demand is likely to have exchange rate implications, of the type modeled by Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2007). An unusually (and possibly unsustainably) large current account deficit
therefore will signal an empirical range of possible exchange-rate effects. However, a
sustainable level of the current account, like that of the public deficit, is difficult to define
in any objective way. Clearly some of the past euro zone current account imbalances
have raised repayment issues, with Greece, for example, borrowing to fund high levels of
government consumption, and Spain borrowing to finance investment in largely

23
24

Wolf (2011).
See, for example, Buiter, Rahbari, and Michels (2011).

33

nontraded goods such as housing, which cannot be used to pay off external creditors
through net exports as demanded by constraint (5).25
Within a monetary union, an internal constellation of large current account
deficits driven by domestic spending can be especially problematic. Real currency
appreciation emerges as a deficit opens up, depressing the domestic real interest rate and
encouraging the deficit to grow even further. Eventually, however, the currency will have
to depreciate in real terms -- beyond even its intial, pre-shock level -- to generate net
exports sufficient to service a much high net external debt. (See Fagan and Gaspar 2007
for a formal model.) But how is the needed real depreciation to take place when the
nominal exchange rate cannot change? The process requires painful internal devaluation
unless there is substantial domestic real growth or substantial foreign inflation. In other
words, a national current account deficit can look like a major “asymmetric shock,”
precisely the type of development that makes currency union a bad idea. The experience
of the euro zone peripheral countries after 1999 illustrates the danger.
Any problems associated with a given country’s external imbalance may
primarily hurt its home economy. But negative consequences from changes in one
country’s current account can also spill over into the global system. Blanchard and
Milesi-Ferretti (2011) emphasize the distinction between national and systemic
repercussions. In the latter category, a crisis in one deficit country, sparked by a sudden
stop in its own financial inflows, can spread through contagion effects (think of Mexico
in 1994, Thailand in 1997, or the euro zone now). Another example is related to the inherent
asymmetry between the pressures on surplus countries to move toward external balance and

25

See the analyses of Giavazzi and Spaventa (2010) and Lane and Pels (2011).

34

the greater pressures facing deficit countries. If countries collectively target a pattern of
global imbalances that sums to a positive number rather than zero, world output and
employment will suffer, a possibility that has inspired recent calls for global policy
coordination. Proponents of the “global saving glut” account of the 2007-09 crisis hold
that bigger surpluses by China had adverse effects on richer countries’ current accounts
and financial markets.
Debate over “currency wars” between recession-mired rich countries and fastergrowing emerging markets highlight another possibility. As rich countries such as the
U.S. seek export-led growth through loose monetary policies and currency depreciation,
emerging markets face a tradeoff between losing export competitiveness if they allow
their currencies to appreciate, and higher domestic inflation if they intervene to resist
appreciation. For many, the tradeoff is harsher because of China’s reliance on capital
controls to manage its own currency in the interest of export promotion. Over the longer
term, these international conflicts threaten to spread protectionism, which is yet another
reason to be wary of large and persistent global imbalances.
Sometimes it is argued that the governments of countries with current account
surpluses – countries that do not depend on foreign economies for finance – are in a
better position to sustain large public deficits and debts. Japan is held up as an example.
If such a country adopted financial repression as in the historical episodes analyzed by
Reinhart and Sbrancia (2011), perhaps retracting capital exports so as to mobilize
national savings, then theory tells us that its real domestic interest rate would fall toward
its autarky level. This possibility is not open to deficit countries. Even if the Lawson

35

Doctrine is false, perhaps its converse has some plausibility: government deficits and
debt are less of a concern if the current account is in surplus.

C. The Current Account and the Dynamics of the NIIP

Market assessments of solvency are to some degree subjective and an entity with liquid
liabilities may be pushed into bankruptcy even if it would be solvent in other states of the
world. Nonetheless, the NIIP is a key ingredient in the national solvency constraint, and a
deteriorating NIIP could well be the trigger for a sudden stop. To the extent that the
NIIP’s evolution is decoupled from the current account balance, however, the case for
considering the latter to be a key policy variable is weakened. As observed above, recent
data suggest a very loose relationship for the U.S. (recall Figure 8).
Is it plausible that such decoupling occurs more generally over the long term? As
a lens on the issue I rewrite equation (1). Let lower-case versions of the symbols in
equation (1) denote ratios to nominal GDP, let g be the growth rate of nominal GDP, and
let the superscripts p and u refer, respectively, to predictable and unpredictable changes
(based on lagged information). Then the evolution of the NIIP, expressed as a ratio to
nominal GDP, is:

a − l = ca − g × (a − l)
+ kg

A , p

− kg

L , p

+ kg

A ,u

− kg

L ,u

...........................................( 6 )

On the other hand, the ratio of cumulated current accounts to nominal GDP, c, follows:

c = c a − g × c .............................................( 7 )
36

Comparing equations (6) and (7), we see that unpredictable capital gains cannot
systematically drive the NIIP/GDP ratio and the cumulated current account c apart. Only
predictable capital gains can do so. But the likelihood that these are substantial is slim.
Devereux and Sutherland (2010) argue that it is difficult to generate large
expected capital gains within a reasonably calibrated model based on individual portfolio
choice. In the case of the U.S., Gourinchas and Rey (2007b) show empirically that a
higher net export deficit predicts a relative return differential in favor of U.S. foreign
assets over liabilities, operating in part through capital gains due to exchange-rate and
other asset-price movements. These changes appear to play a significant long-term role in
mitigating the effects of net export deficits on the U.S. NIIP. For other industrial
countries, however, valuation changes appear much less important in the long-term
external adjustment to trade imbalances, and for emerging markets these effects play no
role at all (International Monetary Fund 2005, chapter 3).26
A very important caveat about the U.S. case is that a sizable part of the
discrepancy in Figure 8 between the NIIP and the cumulated current account probably
results from inaccuracies in the data on financial flows across U.S. borders.27 NIIP data
for the U.S. are periodically updated based on surveys, yet the financial flow (and current
26

Again, this is not to deny that valuation effects may play a role in international risk sharing. The question
whether the valuation changes in equation (6) are systematic or purely random is related to, but distinct
from, the question whether the U.S. systematically earns more on its foreign assets than it pays on its
foreign liabilities. The latter question concerns overall asset returns (including interest and dividend
payments, which are included in the current account), not just the capital gains components of returns.
(Overall returns are also the focus in the Gourinchas and Rey 2007b study.) Because U.S. foreign assets are
more heavily allocated to equity than are U.S. foreign liabilities, as noted earlier, an equity risk premium
should raise the relative return on the portfolio of U.S. foreign assets. However, it has also been conjectured
that even within asset classes the U.S. pays out less on foreign liabilities than it earns on foreign assets.
Curcuru, Thomas, and Warnock (2011) survey the evidence and conclude that there is a significant
discrepancy in this direction only for direct investments. They attribute it in part to tax considerations.

37

account) data are revised only slightly in the light of new information. For the U.S., the
trend of NIIP revisions has been upward, suggesting that existing data on financial flows
might overstate net financial inflows into the U.S. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009)
contend that over the past 25 years, existing BEA data may overstate U.S. net external
borrowing by up to 0.6 percent of GDP per year.
All countries face challenges, of course, in accurately measuring international
transactions and positions. But the problems have generally received less intensive
scrutiny outside the United States. It is nonetheless striking that in the admittedly
imperfect data that are available to us, many major countries apart from the United States
display a visible long-run coherence between NIIP ratios to GDP and ratios of cumulated
current accounts to GDP. Figure 9 offers some examples. The biggest and most
protracted divergence occurs in the case of safe-haven Switzerland (panel c), where the
cumulated current account falls after 1970 and remains below the NIIP (all relative to
GDP) until the early 2000s.
If national risks are being shared efficiently, the valuation gains in Figure 9 may
be arriving just when countries need them the most. Whether that is so is an open
question for future research (as is the question how, precisely, “efficient risk sharing”
would look in reality). It would not necessarily follow, however, that countries
persistently running down their external positions through current account deficits are
systematically rewarded with capital gains at foreigners’ expense. My take-home from
Figure 9 is that net windfall gains on gross foreign assets and liabilities cannot be relied
upon to offset the external wealth effects of the current account.

27

See Curcuru, Dvorak, Warnock (2008), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009), and Gohrband and Howell
(2012).

38

IV. Conclusion

To my mind, a lesson of recent crises is that globalized financial markets present
potential stability risks that we ignore at our peril. Contrary to a complete markets or
“consenting adults” view of the world, current account imbalances, while very possibly
warranted by fundamentals and welcome, can also signal elevated macroeconomic and
financial stresses, as was arguably the case in the mid-2000s. Historically large and
persistent global imbalances deserve careful attention from policymakers, with no
presumption of innocence. They need not be the benign result of advances in market
efficiency, as is sometimes claimed. Valuation changes in NIIPs, while possibly
important in risk allocation, cannot be relied upon systematically to offset the changes in
national wealth implied by the current account.
The same factors that dictate careful attention to global imbalances also imply that
data on gross international financial flows and positions are central to any assessment of
financial stability risks. The balance sheet mismatches of leveraged entities provide the
most direct indicators of potential instability, much more so than global imbalances,
though the imbalances may well be a symptom that deeper financial threats are gathering.
Thus, Germany itself experienced neither a current account deficit nor a housing boom in
the 2000s, yet flows from German banks to economies that did display those symptoms
led to problems later on. Unfortunately, the ways in which gross financial positions
propagated the recent global crisis across borders became obvious only after the fact.
Recent proposals for international financial and monetary reform seek to limit the
global proliferation of hazardous gross financial positions and to contain the resulting

39

damage when accidents nonetheless occur. A minimally effective financial “architecture”
would include further global cooperation in official liquidity facilities, in financial
regulation, in resolution (of both insolvent banks and sovereign debtors), in the
informational infrastructure for decision making, and in the fiscal resources needed to
back up these initiatives. Together, such changes would imply a higher level of global
economic government than currently exists. The political obstacles are daunting. But in
light of the recent financial turmoil, one must ask how far we can safely push globalized
markets beyond the perimeter of globalized governance.

40

References

Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl. “How Banks Played the Leverage Game.” In
Viral V. Acharya and Matthew Richardson, editors, Restoring Financial Stability: How
to Repair a Failed System. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl. “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances?
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-09.” IMF Economic
Review 58 (1, 2010): 37-73.
Belkar, Rochelle, Lynne Cockerell, and Christopher Kent. “Current Account Deficits:
The Australian Debate.” Research Discussion Paper 2007-02, Reserve Bank of Australia,
March 2007.
Bernanke, Ben S. “Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke: The Global Saving Glut and the
U.S. Current Account Deficit.” The Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists,
Richmond, VA (March 10, 2005).

Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin.
“International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 20032007.” Financial Stability Review (Banque de France) 15 (February 2011): 13-26.
Bertaut, Carol, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steven Kamin, and Ralph Tryon. “ABS
Inflows to the United States and the Global Financial Crisis.” International Finance
Discussion Papers 1028, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August
2011.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti. “(Why) Should Current Account
Imbalances Be Reduced?” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/03, March 2011.
Boughton, James R. Silent Revolution: The International Monetary Fund, 1979-1989.
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 2001.
Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat. “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Link or
No Link?” BIS Working Papers No. 346, Bank for International Settlements (May 2011).
Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe. “Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises.” BIS Quarterly
Review (December 2002): 43-54.
Buiter, Willem H., Ebrahim Rahbari, and Juergen Michels. “TARGETing the Wrong
Villain: TARGET2 and Intra-Eurosystem Imbalances in Credit Flows.” Citi Global
Economics View, June 9, 2011.
Calvo, Gullermo A. “Balance-of-Payments Crises in Emerging Markets.” In Paul
Krugman, ed., Currency Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.

41

Calvo, Gullermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart. “When Capital Inflows Suddenly Stop:
Consequences and Policy Options.” In Peter B. Kenen and Alexander K. Swoboda, eds.,
Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System. Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund, 2000.
Catão, Luis and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. “External Liabilities and Crises.”
Manuscript, International Monetary Fund, 2011.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Robert Kollmann, and Philippe Martin. “International Portfolios,
Capital Accumulation, and Foreign Assets Dynamics.” Journal of International
Economics 80 (January 2010): 100-112.
Cooper, Richard N. “The Balance of Payments in Review.” Journal of Political Economy
74 (August 1966): 379-395.
Corden, W. Max. “Those Current Account Imbalances: A Sceptical View.” World
Economy 30 (March 2007): 363-382.
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E, Warnock. “Cross-Border Returns
Differentials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (November 2008): 1495-1530.
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Charles P. Thomas, and Francis E, Warnock. “On Returns
Differentials.” Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and
University of Virginia, January 2012.
Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland, “Valuation Effects and the Dynamics of Net
External Assets.” Journal of International Economics 80 (January 2010): 129-143.
Díaz-Alejandro, Carlos F. “Good-Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash.”
Journal of Development Economics 19 (February 1985): 1-24.
Edwards, Sebastian. “Does the Current Account Matter?” In Sebastian Edwards and
Jeffrey A. Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2002.
Fagan, Gabriel and Vitor Gaspar. “Adjusting to the Euro.” Working Paper Series No.
716, European Central Bank (January 2007).
Fetter, Frank Whitson. “The Term ‘Favorable Balance of Trade’.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 49 (August 1935): 621-645.
Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight,
and Retrenchment.” Working Paper 17351, National Bureau of Economic Research,
August 2011.

42

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew K. Rose. “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
Empirical Treatment.” Journal of International Economics 41 (November 1996): 351366.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and George Saravelos. “Are Leading Indicators of Financial Crises
Useful for Assessing Country Vulnerability? Evidence from the 2008-09 Global Crisis.”
Working Paper 16047, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2010.
Freund, Caroline and Frank Warnock. “Current Account Deficits in Industrial Countries:
The Bigger They Are, the Harder They Fall?” In Richard H. Clarida, ed., G7 Current
Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2007.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Luigi Spaventa. “Why the Current Account May Matter in a
Monetary Union: Lessons from the Financial Crisis in the Euro Area,” Discussion Paper
8008, Centre for Economic Policy Research (September 2010).
Gohrband, Christopher A. and Kristy L. Howell. “U.S. International Financial Flows and
the U.S. Net Investment Position: New Perspectives Arising from New International
Standards.” In Charles Hulten, Michael Palumbo, and Marshall Reinsdorf, eds., Wealth,
Financial Intermediation, and the Real Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2012, forthcoming.
Goldberg, Linda S., Craig Kennedy, and Jason Miu. “Central Bank Dollar Swap Lines
and Overseas Dollar Funding Costs.” Economic Policy Review (Federal Reserve Bank of
New York) 17 (May 2011): 3-20.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier. “Global Imbalances and Global Liquidity.” Paper presented
at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Asia Economic Policy Conference,
November 28-30, 2011.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Maurice Obstfeld. “Stories of the Twentieth Century for
the Twenty-First.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (January 2012): 226265.
Gourinchas Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. “From World Banker to World Venture
Capitalist: U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege.” In Richard H.
Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2007a.
Gourinchas Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. “International Financial Adjustment.”
Journal of Political Economy 115 (August 2007b): 665-703.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. “Exorbitant Privilege and
Exorbitant Duty.” Paper presented at the Institute of Monetary and Economic Studies
International Conference, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, May 2010.

43

Hume, Michael and Andrew Sentance. “The Global Credit Boom: Challenges for
Macroeconomics and Policy.” Journal of International Money and Finance 28 (8, 2009):
1426-1461.
International Monetary Fund. Summary Proceedings of the Forty-Third Annual Meeting
of the Board of Governors, September 27-29, 1988. Washington, D.C.: International
Monetary Fund, 1988.
International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook: Globalization and External
Imbalances. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, April 2005.
International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks.
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, September 2011.
Johnson, Karen H. “Gross or Net International Financial Flows: Understanding the
Financial Crisis.” Working Paper, Council on Foreign Relations, Center for
Geoeconomic Studies, September 2009.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. “Financial Crises, Credit Booms,
and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review 59 (2, 2011):
340-378.
Korinek, Anton. “The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls.” IMF Economic
Review 59 (August 2011): 523-561.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti. “The External Wealth of Nations, Mark
II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004.”
Journal of International Economics 73 (November 2007): 223-250.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. “Where Did All the Borrowing Go? A
Forensic Analysis of the U.S. External Position.” Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies 23 (June 2009): 177-199.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria and Milesi-Ferretti. “External Adjustment and the Global
Crisis.” IMF Working Paper WP/11/197, August 2011.
Lane, Philip R. and Barbara Pels. “Current Account Imbalances in Europe.” Manuscript,
Trinity College, Dublin, and Union Bank of Switzerland, November 2011.
Lawson, Nigel. “Five Myths and a Menace.” Standpoint, January/February 2011.
Available at: http://www.standpointmag.co.uk/features-janfeb-11-five-myths-and-amenace-ligel-lawson-adam-smith-economics
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. “Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country World.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 10 (November 1982): 335-360.

44

McGuire, Patrick and Götz von Peter. “The US Dollar Shortage in Global Banking and
the International Policy Response.” BIS Working Papers No. 291, Bank for International
Settlements (October 2009).
Meade, James E. The Balance of Payments. London: Oxford University Press, 1951.
Mendoza, Enrique G. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage.” American
Economic Review 100 (December 2010): 1941-1966.
Mendoza, Enrique G. and Marco E. Terrones. “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence
from Macro Aggregates and Micro Data.” Working Paper 14049, May 2008.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. “Current Account Reversals and Currency
Crises: Empirical Regularities.” In Paul Krugman, ed., Currency Crises. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Obstfeld, Maurice. “External Adjustment.” Review of World Economics 140 (4, 2004):
541-568.
Obstfeld, Maurice. “International Risk Sharing and the Costs of Trade.” Ohlin Lecture
notes, May 2007. Available at: http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~obstfeld/Ohlin_show.pdf
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. Foundations of International Macroeconomics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. “The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account
Position Revisited.” In Richard H. Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account Imbalances:
Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:
Products of Common Causes. In Reuven Glick and Mark M. Spiegel, eds., Asia and the
Global Financial Crisis. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2010.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Luc Laeven, Marcos Chamon,
Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Annamaria Kokenyne. “Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools
to Use?” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/06, April 2011.
Pitchford, John. “A Sceptical View of Australia’s Current Account and Debt Problem.”
Australian Economic Review 86 (Winter 1989): 5-14.
Price, W. H. “The Origin of the Phrase ‘Balance of Trade’.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 20 (November 1905): 157-67.

45

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vincent R. Reinhart. “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An
Encompassing View of the Past and Present.” In Jeffrey A. Frankel and Christopher
Pissarides, eds., International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2009.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and M. Belen Sbrancia. “The Liquidation of Government Debt.”
Working Paper 16893, National Bureau of Economic Research, March 2011.
Review Committee for Balance of Payments Statistics. The Balance of Payments
Statistics of the United States: Review and Appraisal. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1965.
Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008.” American Economic Review 102
(2012), forthcoming.
Shin, Hyun Song. “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium.” IMF Economic
Review 60 (2012), forthcoming.
Wolf, Martin. “Merkozy Failed to Save the Euro Zone.” Financial Times, December 6,
2011. Available at: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/396ff020-1ffd-11e1-866200144feabdc0.html#axzz1g4jmAqQG

46

Figure 1: Global Current Account Imbalances

Current account balance (percent of world GDP)

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

US and UK
Asia including Japan and newly industrialized Asia
Other advanced economies
Middle East and North Africa
Global discrepancy (sum of balances with sign reversed)

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

-2.5

Central and Eastern Europe
Commonwealth of Independent States
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America and the Carribbean

Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Economic Outlook Database, September 2011. Figures for
2011 and 2012 are IMF staff forecasts. Newly industrialized Asia refers to Hong Kong, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, and Taiwan.

47

Figure 2: United States Gross Balance of Payments Flows, Financial and
Current Accounts (Percent of GDP)
(a) Financial Account Gross Flows
Percent of GDP
15
10
5

-5

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

0

-10
-15
-20
Foreign net purchases of US assets

US net purchases of foreign assets

(b) Current Account Gross Flows
Percent of GDP
15
10
5

-5

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

0

-10
-15
-20
Exports
Imports

Income received on foreign assets
Income paid on liabilities to foreigners

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

48

Figure 3: Average of Gross Foreign Assets (A) and Liabilities (L) as a Ratio to
Gross Domestic Product
(A+L)/2*GDP
7

6

5
US
4
Japan
3

Euro Area
BRIC

2

UK+ND+SW
1
NIA

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

0

Note: BRIC denotes Brazil, Russia, India, and China. NIA denotes Newly Industrialized Asia and consists of
Honk Kong, Republic of Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan. UK + ND + SW consists of the United Kingdom,
Switzerland, and the Netherlands.
Source: Updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) data, provided by the authors.

49

Figure 4: Flow and Non-flow Changes in the Net International Investment
Position: Selected Countries (Percent of GDP)

(a) United States
20
15
10
5

-10
-15
-20
Flow change

50

Non-flow change

09

07

20

05

20

03

20

01

20

99

20

97

19

19

95

19

93

91

19

89

19

87

19

85

19

83

19

81

19

79

19

77

19

75

19

73

19

19

-5

19

71

0

19
71
19
73
19
75
19
77
19
79
19
81
19
83
19
85
19
87
19
89
19
91
19
93
19
95
19
97
19
99
20
01
20
03
20
05
20
07
20
09

(b) United Kingdom

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20
Flow change

51
Non-flow change

Flow change

52

-10

-15

-20
Non-flow change

20

20

20

20

20

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

09

07

05

03

01

99

97

95

93

91

89

87

85

83

81

79

77

75

73

71

-5

19

19

(c) Australia

20

15

10

5

0

Flow change

53

-10

-15

-20
Non-flow change

20

20

20

20

20

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

09

07

05

03

01

99

97

95

93

91

89

87

85

83

81

79

77

75

73

71

-5

19

19

(d) Germany

20

15

10

5

0

Flow change

54

-10

-15

-20
Non-flow change

20

20

20

20

20

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

09

07

05

03

01

99

97

95

93

91

89

87

85

83

81

79

77

75

73

71

-5

19

19

(e) Brazil

20

15

10

5

0

(f) India
20
15
10
5

-10
-15
-20
Flow change

Non-flow change

Source: Updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) data, provided by the authors.

55

09

07

20

05

20

03

20

01

20

99

20

97

19

19

95

19

93

19

91

89

19

87

19

85

19

83

19

81

19

79

19

77

19

75

19

73

19

19

-5

19

71

0

Figure 5: Composition of United States Gross External Assets and Liabilities
(Ratio to GDP)

(a) Assets
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Debt assets (stock)/GDP

Portfolio equity assets (stock)/GDP

56

0

8

20
1

6

20
0

4

20
0

2

20
0

0

20
0

8

20
0

6

19
9

4

19
9

2

19
9

0

19
9

8

19
9

6

19
8

4

19
8

2

19
8

0

19
8

8

19
8

6

19
7

4

19
7

2

19
7

19
7

19
7

0

0

FDI assets (stock)/GDP

(b) Liabilities

0

8

20
1

6

20
0

4

20
0

2

20
0

0

20
0

8

20
0

6

19
9

4

19
9

2

19
9

0

19
9

8

19
9

6

19
8

4

19
8

2

19
8

0

19
8

8

19
8

6

19
7

4

19
7

2

19
7

-0.2

19
7

19
7

0

0

-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
-1.2
-1.4
Debt liabilities (stock)/GDP

Portfolio equity liabilities (stock)/GDP

Source: Updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) data, provided by the authors.

57

FDI liabilities (stock)/GDP

Figure 6: Composition of United Kingdom Gross External Assets and
Liabilities (Ratio to GDP)

(a) Assets
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06
20
08
20
10

0

Debt assets (stock)/GDP

Portfolio equity assets (stock)/GDP

58

FDI assets (stock)/GDP

(b) Liabilities

10

08

20

06

20

20

04

02

20

20

00

98

20

19

96

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

80

19

78

19

76

19

74

19

72

19

-1

19

19

70

0

-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

Debt liabilities (stock)/GDP

Portfolio equity liabilities (stock)/GDP

Source: Updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) data, provided by the authors.

59

FDI liabilities (stock)/GDP

Figure 7: United States International Trasactions in 2008:IV and 2009:I
(Billions of U.S. Dollars)

500
400

300
200
100
0
U.S. sales of foreign assets

Foreign sales of U.S. assets

-100
-200
-300

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

60

U.S.current account balance

Figure 8: Cumulated Current Account and Net International Investment
Position, United States (Percent of GDP)

Percent of GDP

20.0
10.0

-20.0
-30.0
-40.0
-50.0
-60.0
Cumulated current account

Source: Updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) data, provided by the authors.

61

NIIP

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

-10.0

1970

0.0

Figure 9: Cumulated Current Account and Net International Investment
Position, Selected Countries (Percent of GDP)

(a) United Kingdom

30.0
20.0
10.0

09

06

20

20

03

20

00

97

20

19

94

91

19

19

88

85

19

19

82

19

79

76

19

19

-20.0

19

19

70

-10.0

73

0.0

-30.0
-40.0
Cumulated current account

NIIP

(b) Australia

-40.0
-60.0
-80.0
-100.0
Cumulated current account

62

NIIP

2009

2006

2003

2000

1997

1994

1991

1988

1985

1982

1979

1976

1973

-20.0

1970

0.0

(c) Switzerland

19
70
19
73
19
76
19
79
19
82
19
85
19
88
19
91
19
94
19
97
20
00
20
03
20
06
20
09

160.0
140.0
120.0
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0

Cumulated current account

NIIP

(d) Germany
50.0
45.0
40.0
35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0

19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06
20
08
20
10

0.0

Cumulated current account

63

NIIP

(e) Brazil

19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06
20
08
20
10

0.0
-10.0
-20.0
-30.0
-40.0
-50.0
-60.0
-70.0

Cumulated current account

NIIP

(f) Chile
20.0
0.0
19
70
19
73
19
76
19
79
19
82
19
85
19
88
19
91
19
94
19
97
20
00
20
03
20
06
20
09

-20.0
-40.0
-60.0
-80.0

-100.0
-120.0
-140.0
-160.0
Cumulated current acccount

NIIP

Source: Updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) data, provided by the authors.

64

