NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOLLOW THE MONEY:
QUANTIFYING DOMESTIC EFFECTS OF FOREIGN BANK SHOCKS IN THE GREAT RECESSION
Nicola Cetorelli
Linda S. Goldberg
Working Paper 17873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17873

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012

This paper is forthcoming in the American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, May 2012.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Address correspondences to Linda S. Goldberg, Federal Reserve Bank
of NY, Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New York, N.Y. 10045. email: Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org
or Nicola.Cetorelli@ny.frb.org . We thank Lindsay Mollineaux for excellent research assistance, and
thank Jeromin Zettelmeyer and participants at the ASSA 2012 meetings for their insightful comments.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Follow the Money: Quantifying Domestic Effects of Foreign Bank Shocks in the Great Recession
Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 17873
February 2012
JEL No. E44,F36,G32
ABSTRACT
Foreign banks pulled significant funding from their U.S. branches during the Great Recession. We
estimate that the average-sized branch experienced a 12 percent net internal fund “withdrawal,” with
the fund transfer disproportionately bigger for larger branches. This internal shock to the balance sheets
of U.S. branches of foreign banks had sizable effects on their lending. On average, for each dollar
of funds transferred internally to the parent, branches decreased lending supply by about 40 to 50 cents.
However, the extent of the lending effects was very different across branches, depending on their pre-crisis
modes of operation in the United States.

Nicola Cetorelli
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
nicola.cetorelli@ny.frb.org
Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

Follow the Money. Quantifying Domestic Effects of Foreign Bank Shocks in
the Great Recession
Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg
The financial crises have focused considerable academic and policy attention on the roles of
foreign banks in transmitting shocks and creating vulnerability for host or parent countries.
Adverse consequences are presumed and a premise of their destabilizing behavior, in particular
surrounding the branches of foreign banks, has taken hold.
Global banks actively allocate funds across their banking organizations, in normal times
and in stress periods (Cetorelli and Goldberg forthcoming). During the Great Recession, some
foreign locations of U.S. banks were “core investment markets” that continued as destinations
for funding, while other foreign locations served as “core funding markets” that would send even
larger net flows to their parent banks following parent balance sheet disturbances (Cetorelli and
Goldberg 2011b). In this paper we provide complementary evidence focusing on the perspective
of a host country. We analyze the activity of foreign banks in the United States through the
operations of their local branches. Honing in on this particular set of banks we have access to a
level of data detail on foreign banking activity otherwise unavailable. Taking advantage of this
rich information we identify a funding shock to branch parents and then trace the impact on the
U.S. branches’ balance sheet, quantifying the potential internal fund transfer in support of the
parent, and then the related dollar effect on their lending activity. We confirm our previous
finding that internal capital markets are at play in response to parent bank funding shocks and
find evidence of a sizeable impact on branch lending supply.2 However, the data also indicates
that the balance sheet adjustments of such branches are highly heterogeneous. Branch size
2

Peek and Rosengren (1997) earlier identified the transmission of Japanese shocks to U.S. borrowers by examining
U.S. localities with different degrees of Japanese bank penetration.

0

matters significantly for both the intensity of the internal capital market response of the branch to
a parent shock and for the intensity of the subsequent contraction of loan supply to branch
customers. Moreover, ex ante indicators of the level of parent bank "commitment" to the local
market matter substantially in how much a parent bank shock gets transmitted to internal and
external branch lending.

I. Foreign bank branches in the United States
We use regulatory reporting data3 filed quarterly by U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks4
for the period 2006q2 through 2009q4. Over this period there are 162 independent bank families,
with a total of 241 branches filing regulatory reports (Table 1). They account together for about
one fifth of total U.S. banking assets, but the asset size distribution of these branches is wide, with
the median size under $1 billion and the mean over $7 billion. About 40 percent of their balance
sheets are comprised of loans, although branches differ substantially in how much of this lending
is, for instance, to commercial and industrial (C&I) activity and how much is directed to U.S.
domestic customers. Branches also differ in balance sheet liquidity, with smaller banks less
liquid, and differ in the degree to which they borrow and lend internally with their affiliates in the
United States and abroad.5 Prior to the crisis, about 20 percent of the foreign families with U.S.
branches also were present in the U.S. with one or more locally chartered bank subsidiaries.

3

This is the Federal Financial Institutions Examinations Council (FFIEC) Report of Assets and Liabilities of U.S.
Branches and Agencies of Foreign Banks (FFIEC 002).
4
Foreign bank branches and agencies are legal extensions of their parent companies, and they do not have any
regulatory capital of their own. Foreign banks' U.S. subsidiaries instead are freestanding legal entities with U.S. or
state charters and their own capital (http://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/fedpoint/fed26.html).
5
Internal capital market transactions are captured by reported data on “Net Due From” related depository
institutions (a branch asset) or “Net Due To” (a branch liability).

1

II. Tracing local balance sheet exposure to a foreign parent bank shock
Our proxy for the funding shock to the parent bank is the degree to which each parent had
accumulated exposure to asset backed commercial paper (ABCP) conduits prior to the crisis. This
exposure as a percentage of equity capital is presented in Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez
(Forthcoming) and shown to be a very good ex ante indicator of the subsequent funding
difficulties experienced in the aftermath of the crisis.6 As displayed in Table 1, the population of
foreign families exhibited substantial differences in their ex ante ABCP exposure.
Using foreign families’ ABCP exposure as the starting point, we first estimate the degree
to which U.S. branches contributed to support the parents’ funding needs. The analysis takes the
form of a difference-in-difference identification strategy: we compare the pre-post crisis balance
sheet adjustments but and look for a differential response across branches, depending on their
parent’s pre-crisis exposure to ABCP conduits. The prior is that parents with higher ex ante
ABCP exposure would withdraw more funds from their U.S. branches. The basic testing
specification is therefore the following:
(1)  Net DueToijt   0  1  X ijt   2  ABCP Exposureit   3  ABCP Exposureit  X ijt   ijt
where  Net DueToijt is the change in branch j net internal borrowing from parent organization i
over the pre-post interval t. It is measured as the change from pre-crisis quarters – where we
smooth out quarterly variability by taking an average, calculated over 2006Q2 through 2007Q2 –
and post crisis quarters – as averages over the period 2008Q3 through 2009Q4.7 A negative
number expresses the dollar amount of net internal funding “withdrawal” by the parent from the
6

Likewise, it is shown as an effective indicator of funding shock and subsequent driver of internal funding dynamics
for U.S. global banks (Cetorelli and Goldberg, 2011b).
7
This type of specification is used in Khwaja and Mian (2008) and is similar to Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011a). We
exclude the in-between quarters from 2007Q3 and 2008Q2 to obtain a clean cut definition of the post period, to start
right after the Lehman Brother’s collapse, while still maintaining a likewise clean definition of the pre-crisis period,
ending before August 2007.

2

branch. ABCP Exposureit is the ratio of exposure to equity as of December 31, 2006 for each
parent i (and is therefore common across j branches for multi-branch parents).8 The level of
ABCP exposure accumulated in the pre-crisis quarters, especially its level compared to total
equity, is considered as determined by the parent on the basis of broad organization-wide
strategic considerations and not driven by balance sheet characteristics of the U.S.-based
branches. This implies we can consider the parent exposure ratio as a legitimate treatment and
any differential ex-post balance sheet effects we may find are unlikely to be driven by
confounding simultaneous changes in local (U.S.) market conditions. The X ijt vector includes
branch control pre-determined variables, calculated as quarterly averages between 2006Q2 and
2007Q2. We focus on branch size, arguing that size should be a main factor determining the
contribution to liquidity management of the global banking organization.
The subsequent step is to trace the potential transmission to the asset side of branches’
balance sheet of the specific change in branch net internal liabilities driven by the parents’
funding needs. The second stage estimates are derived from the model specification
(2) Lijt   0   1  Net Dueijt (Predicted)   2  Net Dueijt (Predicted)  Z ijt   3  Z ijt   ijt
where Lijt is the change in lending pre-post crisis, calculated with the same criterion as for the
previous dependent variable. In order to account for potential systematic differences in lending
investment across branches, we use three distinct loan aggregates: total loans, commercial and
industrial loans, and loans to domestic addressees. Net Dueijt (Predicted) is the series of
predicted values from the estimation of equation (1). This series should capture that component
of the broader observed change in branch net internal liabilities specifically tied to the parent’s

8

We thank Philipp Schnabl and Viral Acharya for kindly providing the ABCP exposure data.

3

funding need.9 The vector Z ijt includes both size controls and other variables that should capture
the differential mode of operation of each branch.
More specifically, we conjecture that the extent to which a local branch in the United
States is used for active global liquidity management by the foreign parent is likely to depend on
the degree to which the parent is committed – from an investment perspective – to the local
market. To test this conjecture, we identify four proxies of business model. The first three
proxies are derived directly from the balance sheet of the branches. First, on the funding side,
we look at the relative reliance by the branch – in normal times – on internal borrowing from the
rest of the organization. A branch that has a high proportion of its total liabilities represented by
internal borrowing may operate with weaker funding ties to the local market in which it is
established. A smaller focus on raising local funds may indicate a branch mainly used for global
liquidity management purposes. Second, and now from the asset side of the balance sheet, we
look at the ratio of liquid assets to total assets. Irrespective of the source of borrowing, the choice
of a branch to keep funds “idle” rather than immobilized long term may indicate a strategy where
more funds remain available to accommodate the liquidity needs of the rest of the organization.
A third measure is the ratio of domestic lending to total assets. A high ratio of lending to U.S.
addressees may be an indication of a branch that is more committed to local investments and
therefore would have funds that are less available to the rest of the organization. However, a
higher ratio may also indicate a higher degree of immobilization of funds, which may imply
stronger transmission in the event of a shock on the liability side.

9

Hence, equation (2) is estimated as the second stage of a 2SLS regression where the right hand side of equation (1)
are the instruments for  Net DueToijt . Recall that a positive change in this internal capital markets measure
reflects either an increase in branch borrowing from the parent organization or a reduction in branch lending to the
rest of the organization.

4

Our final business model consideration compares foreign banks operating in the United
States exclusively using branches with those operating in the United States with both branches
and bank subsidiaries. The decision to operate with a subsidiary as well as a branch may indicate
a higher overall commitment to the local market. As such, the balance sheet of local branches
may be less sensitive to the needs of the parents. On the other hand, it is possible that the foreign
parent may treat the subsidiary as its “committed leg” for local investment, while using the
branches’ balance sheets more actively for purposes of global liquidity management.

III. Results
Column 1 of Table 2 reports the results of a regression based on specification (1), including total
branch assets and assets squared as size controls. Internal capital market transfers are stronger for
the branches of parents with higher ex ante ABCP exposure, although with disproportionately
larger effects found among the biggest branches. These effects are quantitatively important. For
example, an average sized branch ($7 billion) with a parent ABCP exposure ratio of 1 would
experience an average net internal fund withdrawal of about $343 million. If that branch had ex
ante the average level of internal balances ($2.8 billion), that withdrawal would correspond to
about 12 percent of ex ante internal capital market balances of the branch.
Columns 2 through 4 of Table 2 show the results of regressions from specification (2).
These regressions can be considered as providing baseline results before turning to the
importance of the business model variables. The dependent variables of these regressions are,
respectively, the changes in total lending, C&I lending, and lending to U.S. addressees only. The
reported results show patterns of lending response to internal capital market transfers to the
parent shock that are noisier for the first two lending categories compared with those on lending

5

to U.S. addresses only. However, all of the results indicate overall a positive and significant link
between a change in net internal borrowing and a change in external lending by the branch. We
calculate that for each dollar of decrease in internal borrowing (or increase in internal lending to
the parent), the total and domestic lending of the median-sized branch decreases, on average,
between 40 and 50 cents. The effects on C&I lending for the median-sized branch are somewhat
smaller, at 30 to 40 cents for each dollar of decrease in internal borrowing.
In general, the marginal lending transmission of the parent funding shock is smaller for
the very largest branches in the United States, suggesting that size affords these branches a
degree of access to alternative adjustment mechanisms or funding markets that are not as readily
available to the smaller bank branches. This finding is consistent with other research on
differences in the lending channel across large and small banks. For example, Kashyap and Stein
(2000) argue that larger banks have better access to replacement sources of funds when
confronted with a liquidity shock on their balance sheet.

Heterogeneity across branches in lending response.

As a final exercise, we run the same

specification (2) regressions using total loans as dependent variable and then adding separately
the four additional business model indicators described earlier.10 Within the specifications, the
business model variables are allowed to interact with the range of Net Dueijt (Predicted) terms,
making feasible a comparison of the lending effects for branches with or without related
subsidiaries, with high versus low domestic loan shares, liquid assets shares, or related liability
shares. As shown in the first data row of Table 3, the addition of the business model variables

10

With the addition of the business model variables, the regressions have triple interaction terms that do not lend
themselves to immediate interpretation without calculation of full marginal effects. We report a summary of such
calculations in Table 3. The full set of regression results display statistically significant effects of the business model
variables and are available from the authors upon request.

6

improves significantly the overall fit of the model. The bottom two rows of this table capture the
importance of the four business model proxies, but also continue to capture the importance of
branch size itself. We separately report the marginal importance for branches that are in the
lower 90th percentile of the size distribution and those in the upper 10th percentile of the size
distribution.
[insert Table 3 here]
Among the smaller branches, those in the lower 90th percentile by asset size, the
existence of a related subsidiary implies that, for every dollar of funds transferred to the parent,
the contraction in lending is 35 cents larger compared to branches without subsidiaries.
Similarly, branches that had ex ante high domestic investment, as proxied by domestic loan
share, exhibit a much stronger lending response to transfers of funds to their parent banks. An
analogous effect arises for those branches with high ex ante reliance on internal funding from the
parent bank. A high liquid asset ratio does not seem to be as important in capturing
heterogeneous lending effects.
These differential responses are however smaller for the largest branches (bottom row of
Table 3), suggesting that a specific business model orientation is less relevant in capturing
balance sheet transmission once size is above a certain threshold.

IV. Conclusions
Global banking is a well-recognized vehicle of international shock transmission. The
management of liquidity on a global scale, with funds flowing internally among bank affiliates
located across borders, is one important factor determining such global propagation of local

7

balance sheet adjustments.

This article contributes to further our understanding of global

banking funding dynamics by taking a closer view from the perspective of a host country.
Using data on the operations of U.S.-based foreign bank branches, we confirm the
existence of an active cross-border, internal capital market. We also demonstrate the quite
heterogeneous balance sheet adjustments of such branches and consequences for the local
lending markets in which they operate. Branch size matters significantly for both the intensity of
the internal capital market response to a parent bank shock and for the intensity of the subsequent
adjustment on the investment side of the balance sheet. The choice of the mode of operation in
the host country, as reflected by various levels of "commitment" to the local market, also matters
substantially in assessing how much a foreign shock gets transmitted internally and to lending in
the host country market.
Hence, from the perspective of a host country, macroeconomic transmission may be less
a function of overall “openness” to international banking and more of the specific characteristics
of individual foreign banks engaged in its economy. These types of insights are relevant in the
normative debate around regulation of global banking.

8

References:
Acharya, Viral, Philipp Schnabl and Gustavo Suarez, forthcoming. “Securitization without Risk
Transfer”, in Journal of Financial Economics.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda Goldberg, forthcoming. “Banking Globalization, Monetary
Transmission, and the Lending Channel,” in the Journal of Finance.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda Goldberg, 2011a. “Global Banks and International Shock
Transmission: Evidence from the Crisis,” International Monetary Fund Economic Review,
vol. 59, pages 41-76.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda Goldberg, 2011b. “Liquidity Management of U.S. Global Banks:
Internal Capital Market in the Great Recession,” NBER working paper 17355 (August).
Dudley, William. 2011. Financial Stability and Economic Growth, Remarks at the 2011 Bretton
Woods Committee International Council Meeting, Washington, D.C. September 23 2011.
Kashyap, Anil, and Jeremy Stein, 2000. “What do a million observations on banks say about the
transmission of monetary policy?, American Economic Review 90, 407-28.
Khwaja, Asim and Atif Mian, 2008. “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence
from an Emerging Market,” American Economic Review, vol. 98(4), pages 1413-1442.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren, 1997. "Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on
Real Activity in the United States", The American Economic Review, March 2000, 30-45.

9

Table 1: Statistics on US Branches or Agencies of Foreign Parents
2006Q2-2007Q2
median mean
Branch asset size (in billions USD)
0.6
7.2
Total Loans / Assets (percent)
37
41.6
Commercial & Industrial Loans / Total Assets (percent)
15.2
23
Domestic Loans / Total Assets (percent)
9.2
18.4
Liquid Assets / Total Assets (percent)
13.6
24.8
Liabilities to Related Parties / Total Assets (percent)
14.6
31.3
Liabilities to Related parties / Total Assets (percent, by head 30.9
39.6
ABCP Exposure / Equity (percent, by foreign family)
0
18.2
Number of branches
241
Number of foreign bank families
162
Number of foreign families with banking subsidiaries in US
32

2008Q3-2009Q4
median mean
0.7
8.9
39.3
44.8
21.1
26.3
10
21.4
16.4
27.8
26.2
36.8
46
48.4
0
19.9
232
152
31

Notes: Liquid assets are defined as the sum of cash and balances due from depository institutions, US government
and non-US government securities, fed funds sold and securities repurchased under agreements to resell. Domestic
loans are constructed as the sum of total real estate loans, and all loans to depository institutions and C & I loans
specifically made to US addresses. Liabilities to related parties are calculated as absolute values.

10

Table 2: Net Due and Loan Response to Funding Shock
Δ Net Due To Δ Loans
(1)
(2)
ABCP Exposure
-0.785
(1.95)
Assets
-0.337**
0.193**
(0.13)
(0.06)
2
0.009**
-0.002**
Assets
(0.00)
(0.00)
Exposure · Assets
0.213
(0.17)
2
-0.007**
Exposure · Assets
(0.00)
Constant
0.122
0.162
(0.59)
(0.25)
Net Due To (predicted)

Assets · Net Due To (predicted)
2

Assets · Net Due To (predicted)

# Observations
2

Adjusted R

223
0.13

ΔC&I
(3)

Δ Domestic
(4)

0.145**
(0.03)
-0.001**
(0.00)

0.138**
(0.03)
-0.002**
(0.00)

0.073
(0.14)

0.057
(0.13)

0.600

0.395

0.465*

(0.46)
-0.02
(0.01)
1.26E-04
(0.00)
223
0.08

(0.25)
-0.01
(0.01)
8.10E-05
(0.00)
223
0.18

(0.23)
-0.014*
(0.01)
1.04E-4*
(0.00)
223
0.18

Notes: Coefficient and standard errors reported, ‫ ככ‬p <0.01 ‫ כ‬p <0.05. Domestic loans are constructed as
the sum of total real estate loans, and all loans to depository institutions and C & I loans specifically
made to US addresses. Net Due To is constructed as the difference between net due to and net due from
related depository institutions and of the reporting branch or agency. All dependent variables and
assets are in billions USD. Assets are averaged over the period 2006Q2 -2007Q2.

11

Table 3: Estimated Economic Significance
X Business Model Variable
Share of
Has
Share of
Liquid
subsidiary Domestic Loans
Assets
2

Share of
Related
Liabilities

Incremental Adjusted R

0.14

0.35

0.12

0.25

"High" - "Low" in X
Average differential change in total loans
for branches <90 percentile in total assets
for branches >90 percentile in total assets

0.35
0.11

0.53
0.27

-0.04
-0.20

0.59
0.21

Notes: Share of related liabilities is the ratio of own internal borrowing from the rest of the organization to
total liabilities Share of liquid assets is the ratio of liquid assets to total assets. Share of domestic loans is
the ratio of lending to US addressees to total assets. The numbers in the bottow two rows are estimates
of the differential change in total loan supply between branches with "high" and "low" values in each
of the four business model variables in response to a one dollar change of net internal borrowing driven
by the parent funding shock. For the subsidiary variable, high/low is a 1/0 dummy. For the other three
variables, it refers to 75th and 25th percentile values in each distribution.

12

