                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ARE CHINESE TRADE FLOWS DIFFERENT?

                                          Yin-Wong Cheung
                                           Menzie D. Chinn
                                           XingWang Qian

                                        Working Paper 17875
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17875


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012




We thank Joshua Aizenman, Robert Dekle, Reuven Glick, Michael Hutchison, Andy Rose, Willem
Thorbecke, Zhiwen Zhang, and participants of the Fourth Journal of International Money and Finance
conference at the Santa Cruz Center for International Economics for their comments and suggestions.
We also thank Shaghil Ahmed, Daniel Riera, and Shang-Jin Wei for sharing data with us. Faculty
research funds of the University of California, Santa Cruz and the University of Wisconsin are gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and XingWang Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Chinese Trade Flows Different?
Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and XingWang Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 17875
March 2012
JEL No. F4

                                            ABSTRACT

We find that Chinese trade flows respond to economic activity and relative prices – as represented by
a trade weighted exchange rate – but the relationships are not always precisely or robustly estimated.
Chinese exports are generally well-behaved, rising with foreign GDP and decreasing as the Chinese
renminbi (RMB) appreciates. However, the estimated income elasticity is sensitive to the treatment
of time trends. Estimates of aggregate imports are more problematic. In many cases, Chinese aggregate
imports actually rise in response to a RMB depreciation and decline with Chinese GDP. This is true
even after accounting for the fact a substantial share of imports are subsequently incorporated into
Chinese exports. We find that some of these counter-intuitive results are mitigated when we disaggregate
the trade flows by customs type, commodity type, and the type of firm undertaking the transactions.
However, for imports, we only obtain more reasonable estimates of elasticities when we allow for
different import intensities for different components of aggregate demand (specifically, consumption
versus investment), or when we include a relative productivity variable.


Yin-Wong Cheung                                    XingWang Qian
Department of Economics                            Economics and Finance Department
University of California                           SUNY Buffalo State
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                               1300 Elmwood Ave
and City University of Hong Kong                   Buffalo, NY 14222
cheung@ucsc.edu                                    qianx@buffalostate.edu

Menzie D. Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu
1.     Introduction


China’s growing role in the world economy has sparked both envy and enmity. Her exporting
prowess and ballooning trade surplus over the past decade have elicited charges of unfair
competition. In some interpretations, China’s current account surplus has been identified as the
cause of the global financial crisis of 2008 (e.g., CEA, 2009). An often heard proposed remedy is
that China should adjust its exchange rate policy to alleviate global imbalances. Policymakers of
several countries, including the US, openly urge China to allow the Chinese currency, the
renminbi (RMB), to appreciate at a faster rate in order to reduce its large trade surplus.
       China, on the other hand, has resisted that pressure and has asserted that the RMB
undervaluation is not a (main) cause of the recent global finance crisis and furthermore
accelerated currency appreciation would do little to reduce trade imbalances. Even though the
RMB has been allowed to appreciate since 2005 and – after a hiatus – again since 2010, China
has maintained a policy of relatively stable exchanges rates over the last few decades.
       Would an appreciation of the Chinese currency have mitigated the effects of global
imbalances and averted the crisis? The answer depends a lot on the behavior of China’s trade
flows and whether these flows conform to the usual prescription that a more valuable currency
implies a lower trade balance. Even when unattended by such concerns, there is a natural interest
in the determinants of Chinese trade flows. This interest was only heightened when trade
surpluses expanded in the mid-2000s, and once again as they rose again in the wake of the Great
Recession.
       The Chinese trade phenomenon poses a number of distinct questions. The first is whether
Chinese exports have behaved in a distinctly odd manner; have they risen in line with foreign
economic activity as expected, or have they risen more rapidly than expected? How have
exchange rate changes, which many policymakers in the West have pinned their hopes of
expenditure switching on, affected Chinese exports in the past, and how are they expected to
affect exports going forward? Even more challenging questions relate to Chinese imports. First,
why don’t Chinese imports rise with GDP, as they would in an advanced economy? Second, why
is it so difficult to find evidence that currency appreciation increases imports in China. In other
words, why don’t the usual rules apply to China?



                                                  1
       Several hypotheses have been suggested in the literature. First, the large amount of
processing trade obscures the usual effects; when a large share of the imported goods is used in
exports, the usual activity variables, like GDP, might not be appropriate. In addition, exchange
rates might have a muted effect if the share of domestic value added in Chinese exports is small.
       Second, with a rapidly changing economic structure and different import intensities,
aggregate import elasticities might exhibit instability. A similar argument could be applied to a
changing structure of trade; different types of trade might respond differently to exchange rates.
Once again, stable aggregate elasticity estimates might be difficult to obtain in such instances.
       While these conjectures are not new, we believe a new study is justified by the recent
drop off and resumption in Chinese imports and exports. The additional variation gives us hope
that one can obtain more precise estimates of the relevant trade elasticities. Armed with these
estimates, policymakers will be able to better calibrate their policies.
       Looking backwards, this study can inform the question of whether policy could have
mitigated the size of capital flows from China that fueled, according to some observers (CEA,
2009), the excesses that led to the financial crisis of 2008. If Chinese trade flows don’t respond
to exchange rate changes as normal flows do, then even a substantially appreciated RMB might
not have resulted in smaller current account surpluses.
       Looking forward, these empirical challenges motivate our analysis of Chinese trade
flows. We examine the aggregate trade flows that others have examined, but in addition to
disaggregating along the lines other have, we check other means of classification, in order to
identify divergent behaviors.
       To anticipate our results, we obtain several interesting findings. We find that Chinese
multilateral trade flows do respond to relative prices – as represented by a trade weighted
exchange rate – but that that relationship is not always precisely estimated. In addition, the
direction of effects is different than expected a priori. For instance, we find that Chinese ordinary
imports rise in response to a RMB depreciation. However, Chinese exports do appear to respond
to RMB depreciation in the expected manner, as long as a supply variable is included. So, in this
sense, Chinese trade is not exceptional.




                                                  2
2.      Descriptive Analysis


Before embarking upon the formal data analysis, it’s useful to review some of the data. The trade
balance, expressed in US dollars, is shown Figure 1. The Chinese RMB trade weighted real
exchange rate is also included in the figure (An increase in the real rate implies a RMB
appreciation). It is quite evidenced that the trade balance expands remarkably around 2003, and
rises in absolute terms and as a share of GDP until the Great Recession. There is a remarkably
steep drop off during the recession, and then a resumption of the trade surplus. Also, note that
after 2003, the RMB real exchange rate moves together with China’s trade surplus.
        Note over this period, there are a number of other important events, including the
unification of separate exchange rates at the end of 1993, sharp declines in the import tariff rates
starting in 1995, the East Asian crisis in 1997, and finally WTO accession in 2002.
        Figure 2 illustrates the evolution of the aggregate import and export flows. It’s clear that
while both trade flows start growing rapidly in the 2000’s, exports start pulling away from
imports in 2005.
        Figure 3 shows the breakdown between exports for processing and for ordinary trade;
figure 4 presents the corresponding data for imports. This breakdown has often been used to
account for the potentially different determinants of trade used for differing purposes. For
exports, it is difficult to detect any noticeable breaks in the shares. However, for imports, there is
a clear jump in the processing share in mid-1998; and in mid 2005, the processing share begins
to rise steadily. The latter is notable in that it coincides with the widening in the trade balance.
        Figures 5 and 6 display exports and imports by commodity type – but only at a very
coarse level, namely manufactured goods versus primary products. While the value of primary
exports has inched up, the primary export share has experienced a long and gradual decline of
the 15 year period. On the other hand, primary goods have accounted for an increasing share of
imports, with a pronounced trend appearing in 2002. There is a temporary jump in 2008, likely
due to rising oil prices.
        Finally, Figures7 and 8 exhibit the trade activity breakdown by type of firm. For both
exports and imports, as expected, the state owned enterprise share declines, albeit more markedly
for exports. And as expected, private firms become more important over time, but more
substantially so for exports. Finally Foreign invested enterprises, while accounting for similar

                                                   3
shares by 2010, experienced much more of an increase in importance for exports. In other words,
foreign owned enterprises have been particularly important in export growth.
        With these observable changes in the magnitude and nature of Chinese trade, it would be
unsurprising to find changes in the behavior of aggregate Chinese trade. Hence, studies based on
earlier data, from the 1980’s and early 1990’s, would likely have little relevance for assessing the
current responsiveness of Chinese trade to external and internal factors.


3.      Trade Elasticities – Total Trade Data


3.1     The Exchange Rate Effect
        Conventional wisdom holds that a trade surplus could be curbed by raising the value of
the associated currency. However, standard economic analyses suggest that the exchange rate
effect is more complicated than that laid out in the conventional wisdom. For instance, consider
the elasticity approach that illustrates real exchange rate effects on trade balance.
        Typically, the elasticities approach takes the exchange rate as exogenous to the trade
flows. Then there are two effects emanating from an exchange rate change. One is the volume
effect that captures the effect of revaluation on export and import volumes. Under normal
circumstances, a revaluation discourages exports and promotes imports, and, thus, reduces trade
surplus. The second effect is the value (price) effect, which measures the decrease in the
domestic value of the initial import volume due to revaluation. A revaluation could reduce trade
balance if the volume effect dominates the value effect, which is the Marshall-Lerner condition.
When the Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfied, a revaluation results a deterioration of the trade
balance and devaluation improves it.
        The anecdotal evidence given in Figure 1, for example, suggests that the appreciation of
the RMB may not lead to a reduction in China’s trade balance. That is, the Marshall-Lerner
condition may not hold for the China case. To be fair, the Marshall-Lerner condition is typically
derived under specific assumptions – including the implicit assumption that the output is
constant, and import and export supply elasticities are constant are perfectly elastic (the latter
equivalent to saying the resource allocation can adjust according to the change in the trade
pattern). Several of these assumptions are unlikely to hold for the Chinese economy in
transition.

                                                  4
       In the case of the Chinese trade flows, there is some reason to believe that the
conventional elasticities approach is insufficient. An oft cited characteristic of the Chinese
economy is its position in the global production chain. Since China plays an important role at the
final phrase of the international production process, its trade flows might not be responsive to
exchange rate changes.1 Given the high degree of production fragmentation, an appreciation
raises the relative price of exports, but lowers the price of inputs. The appreciation thus only
affects the value added component of Chinese exports, and the net effect of a RMB appreciation
on global imbalances could be ambiguous. Devereux and Genberg (2007), for example, use an
analytical model to illustrate that an RMB depreciation will have an immediate perverse effect
and little short-run effect on the current account balance.


3.2    Selected Chinese Trade Elasticity Estimates


There is a paucity of formal statistical analyses analyzing Chinese trade.2 Kwack et al. (2007)
uses a gravity model augmented with a CPI deflated real exchange rate to estimate elasticities
over the 1984 to 2003 period. Using a panel of 29 developed and developing countries, he
obtains a Chinese multilateral import price elasticity of 0.50 and an income elasticity of 1.57.3
       Thorbecke and Smith (2007) do not directly examine the implications for both imports
and exports, but do focus on the impact of RMB appreciation on exports, taking into account the
integration of the production chain in the region. Using a sample of 33 countries over the 1994-
2005 period, and a trade-weighted exchange rate that measures the impact of how bilateral
exchange rates affect imported input prices, they find that a 10% RMB appreciation in the
absence of changes in other East Asian currencies would result in a 3% decline in processed



1
  For real exchange rate movements and intermediate product trade, see Parsley and Popper
(2010). See Wang and Wei (2010) for relatively high Chinese value added shares in Chinese
exports.
2
 We review only studies published in the past five years. A survey of earlier studies is in
Cheung, Chinn and Fujii (2010).
3
 Wang and Ji (2006) adopt a related approach, and find essentially zero effect of nominal
exchange rates on Chinese imports and exports.

                                                  5
exports and an 11% decline in ordinary exports. If other East Asian currencies appreciated in line
with the RMB, then the resulting change in the processed exports would be 9%.
        Marquez and Schindler (2007) argue that the absence of useful price indices for Chinese
imports and exports requires the adoption of an alternative model specification. They treat the
variable of interest as world (import or export) trade shares, broken down into “ordinary” and
“parts and components”. Using monthly Chinese imports data from 1997 to July 2006, they find
ordinary trade-share income “elasticities” ranging from -0.021 to -0.001 (i.e., the coefficients are
in the wrong direction), and price “elasticities” from 0.013 to 0.021.4 The parts and components
price elasticities are in the wrong direction, and statistically significantly so. Interestingly, the
stock of FDI matters in almost all cases. Since the FDI stock is a smooth trend, it is not clear
whether to attribute the effect explicitly to the effect of FDI, or to other variables that may be
trending upward over time, including productive capacity.
        For export shares (ordinary goods), they find income elasticities ranging from 0.08 to
0.09, and price elasticities ranging from 0.08 to 0.068. For parts and components export share,
the income coefficient ranges from a 0.042 to 0.049. Their preferred specification implies that a
ten-percent real appreciation of the Chinese RMB reduces the Chinese trade balance between
$75 billion and $92 billion.
        Garcia-Herrero and Koivu (2007) come close to our approach. They examine data over
the 1995-2005 period, breaking the data into ordinary and processing/parts imports and exports.
They relate Chinese exports to the world imports and the real effective exchange rate, augmented
by a proxy measure for the value-added tax rebate on exports, and a capacity utilization variable.
In both import and export equations, the stock of FDI is included. One notable result they obtain
is that for Chinese imports, the real exchange rate coefficient has a sign opposite of anticipated in
the full sample.
        One particularly interesting result they obtain is that post-WTO entry, Chinese income
and price elasticities for exports rise considerably. On the import side, no such change is obvious
with respect to the pre- and post-WTO period.



4
  Marquez and Schindler (2007) conjecture that this counterintuitive result arises from the role of
state owned enterprises. They also observe that this result can occur under certain configurations
of substitutability between imported and domestic goods.

                                                   6
        In the bilateral vein, Mann and Plück (2007) investigate China-US trade. Using an error
correction model specification applied to disaggregate bilateral data over the 1980-2004 period,
they find extremely high income elasticities for US imports from China: for capital and
consumer goods the estimated long run income elasticities are 10 and 4, respectively. The
consumer good price elasticity is not statistically significant, while the capital good elasticity is
implausibly high, around 10.5 On the other hand, US exports to China have a relatively low
income elasticity of 0.74 and 2.25 for capital and consumer goods, respectively. The price
elasticity estimates are not statistically significant. In general, they have difficulty obtaining
sensible coefficient estimates.
        Thorbecke (2006) examines aggregate bilateral US-China data over the 1988-2005
period. Using both the Johansen maximum likelihood method, as well as the Stock-Watson
(1993) dynamic OLS methodology, he finds statistically significant evidence of cointegration
between incomes, real exchange rates and CPI-deflated trade flows.
        US imports from China have a real exchange rate elasticity ranging from 0.4 to 1.28
(depending upon the number of leads and lags in the DOLS specification). The income elasticity
ranges between 0.26 to 4.98. In all instances, substitution with ASEAN trade flows is accounted
for by the inclusion of an ASEAN/Dollar real exchange rate. Interestingly, the income elasticities
are not statistically significant, even when quantitatively large. For US exports to China, he
obtains exchange rate elasticities ranging from 0.42 to 2.04, and income elasticities ranging from
1.05 to 1.21.
        Ahmed (2009) examines a more recent period of Chinese data, and finds that Chinese
exports respond fairly strongly to real exchange rate appreciation, at least when the relationship
is estimated in first differences. The long run elasticity (in growth rates) is in excess of unity. On
the other hand, they are unable to obtain sensible price elasticities for Chinese imports.
        Finally, Aziz and Li (2008) document the tremendous compositional changes in Chinese
trade flows in order to rationalize the use of disaggregate data. They find aggregate trade
elasticities are varying over time due to both compositional shifts in types of goods, and variation
in individual category elasticities.

5
  Mann and Plück (2007) use disaggregate US trade flow and price index data from BEA. The
reported income elasticities are for matched expenditure series, e.g., investment activity as the
income variable in a regression involving capital goods.

                                                   7
       Their specifications involve activity variables, and relative productivity variables, and use
dynamic OLS. Unlike our study, they rely upon prices of exports and imports as their price
variable; that is they do not incorporate exchange rate changes, but take the prices of exports and
imports as exogenously given.6


3.3    Estimation
       First, let us consider Chinese trade flows with respect to the rest-of-the-world. We
estimate the following equations, where the designations import and export are from the Chinese
perspective,
               ext   0  1 yt*   2 rt  3 zt  u1,t ,                   (1)

and
               imt   0   1 yt   2 rt   3 wt  u2,t ,                  (2)


where y is an activity variable, r is the real value of the RMB, and z is a supply side variable. The
variable w is a shift variable accounting for other factors that might increase import demand.
Seasonal dummies are included. The empirical counterparts to these variables are described in
Appendix 1.
       Most of the variables in these specifications appear to be integrated of order one (see
Appendix 2). Hence, the equations are estimated using the Stock-Watson (1993) dynamic OLS
(DOLS) regression method, which is a single equation approach that yields a consistent and
efficient OLS estimator of the cointegration relationship. 7 An interpretation of the reported
estimates is that they represent the empirical long-run interactions between these variables. Thus,
theoretical reasoning, rather the regression specification, is used to infer the causal links between


6
 Aziz and Li (2008) also examine differential behavior along customs classification, as we do,
but do not pursue the differentiation along firm types. They also allow for productivity trends
and evolving product sophistication in some of their regression specifications.
7
 While there are a number of methods for estimating the cointegrating relationships, we use this
DOLS approach because it has been shown to be outperform other approaches such as error
correction models, particularly in small samples (e.g., Inder (1993), Mantalvo (1995), Phillips
and Hansen (1990)). Given the small sample, we also eschew the Johansen maximum likelihood
multivariate approach.

                                                          8
these variables. For instance, it is conventionally assumed that the real exchange rate variable
causes the trade volume variables. Also, because of China’s role in the global supply chain, it is
assumed that a fraction of imports is intermediate goods and its demand is driven by export
activity.
        In general, the estimated residuals obtained from the specification that has one lead and
lag of first differences of the right hand side variables are quite well behaved. Stock and Watson
suggest the inclusion of time trends.
        For the dependent variables, we have collected data on Chinese exports and imports from
as early as 1993, to 2010, on a monthly basis, which are then aggregated to the quarterly
frequency. Note that we examine both aggregate and disaggregate trade flows. Disaggregation
mitigates potential biases due to inappropriate aggregation, as noted by Berman et al.
(forthcoming), and Dekle et al. (2011), among others.
        One particularly difficult issue involves price deflators to use to convert nominal
magnitudes into real. Until 2005, the Chinese did not report price indices for imports and
exports; this limits the sample to one far too short to use in the analysis. Hence, we rely upon a
variety of proxy measures, each with some drawbacks. Since the trade flows are reported in US
dollars, the price measures we consider include the US PPI for finished goods, price indices from
the World Bank8, and Hong Kong re-export unit value indices. We only report results based
upon the last deflator; the remaining results are qualitatively similar to those reported, and are
available upon request.
        Hong Kong is the most important entrepot for China trade. Given the paucity of the
Chinese trade indexes, the Hong Kong unit value indices have typically been used in empirical
analyses as proxy measures for Chinese trade (Cheung, 2005). In Cheung et al. (2010), the Hong
Kong to China re-export unit value indices are used to deflate Chinese imports and the Hong
Kong to US re-export unit value indices to deflate Chinese exports.
        Our measure of the real RMB exchange rate is the IMF’s CPI deflated trade-weighted
index of the RMB against a broad basket of currencies. The results do not differ if one uses the
BIS trade weighted index.


8
  Since the World Bank price indices are only available at the annual frequency, we interpolate
the data to obtain quarterly values.

                                                  9
       As one can see in Figure 1, before 1994, the trade weighted real value of the RMB based
on official exchange rates was highly appreciated, and experiences a large discrete downward
move in 1994M01. Some observers have characterized this as a massive devaluation; however,
as Fernald, Edison and Loungani (1999) observe, many transactions were taking at “swap” rates,
so that the relevant exchange rate was probably much weaker than the official rate. In order to
circumvent difficulties in identifying the “correct” exchange rate value, we truncate the sample
so as avoid pre-1994 exchange rate data. This means the regressions usually incorporate trade
data starting in 1994Q3, in order to account for lags.
       The IMF and BIS trade weighted indices are CPI deflated; while the CPI deflated real
rate is a commonly used indicator of currency strength, in some ways one would want something
more closely linked to firm competitiveness in the macroeconomic context, such as the PPI
deflated or unit labor cost deflated real value of the RMB (see Chinn, 2006). Unfortunately, we
don’t have access to such measures for China.
       For y*, we use export-weighted real GDP in the rest-of-the-world, while y is measured
using real GDP expressed in real RMB. For z, we rely upon several proxy variables, including
the stock of fixed asset investment, and relative productivity.


3.4    Results
       Table 1 presents the results for aggregate exports; the real value of the Chinese RMB is
expressed so that an increase represents an appreciation. Hence, our expectation is that GDP
should enter in with positive coefficient and the exchange rate with negative. In column 1, we
find that indeed the exchange rate enters with a strongly and significantly negative coefficient,
thus confirming the sensitivity of Chinese exports to exchange rate changes.
       In addition, rest-of-world economic activity registers strongly positive, with a coefficient
of around 1.4. This is true even though we have augmented the specification with a linear time
trend. Had we omitted the trend, the coefficient on foreign output would have been around 2.2.
In some sense, when we think of the tremendous growth in Chinese exports, only a small amount
is being driven by the measured correlation with the world’s income, and the rest is a trend
increase in the Chinese exports, perhaps due to China increasing share of world exports, as well
as the increasing export intensity of the world economy. That trend works out to a secular 16%
annual growth over the sample period.

                                                 10
         Our basic result is not sensitive to the inclusion of some obvious stationary covariates,
including for instance the growth rate of credit. Typically, one thinks of credit as driving
domestic demand, but we consider the possibility that the access to credit decreases the cost of
acquiring working capital (column 3). While the coefficient is positive, it is not statistically
significant.
         Finally, we consider the role of structural breaks in the export relationship. Although we
have conducted a number of univariate structural break tests, the results are inconclusive, and
often point to differing dates, although many of them are around China’s accession to the WTO.
On a priori grounds, as well as suggestive statistical test results, we augment the regression with
a dummy variable for WTO accession, and allow for a differential trend in the post-WTO
period.9
         The results are reported in Column 3. These results are interesting in that they indicate
that the overall time trend was proxying for a trend in the post-WTO period. The income
coefficient is now substantially higher.10
         We now turn to imports. We initially estimated the import relationship over the same
sample that we used for exports. However, a consistent finding when using this sample was a
statistically significant and negative sign on the real exchange rate, contrary to expectations. That
is, over the entire sample it appears that a stronger RMB causes less, not more, imports. Hence,
we take seriously the structural break identified in our univariate tests, and truncate the sample to
begin in the post WTO accession period. We report the results for aggregate imports in Table 2.
In the basic specification (column 1), increases in Chinese GDP are associated with an increase
in imports, with a particularly high elasticity of 3.2. In addition, an appreciated Chinese RMB
induces a decrease in imports.
         There has been much discussion of how much of Chinese imports are used as inputs for
export. That is, China is one link in the integrated supply chain. Assuming Chinese imports are
driven solely by demand by domestic Chinese households and firms would then be a mistake.



9
    The WTO accession dummy is set to equal 1 at 2002Q1 and thereafter.
10
  We also estimated regressions where our proxy for supply – namely the stock of capital – is
included; these were not particularly successful, so we do not report the results.

                                                  11
One way to account for this aspect of the Chinese economy is to include exports as an
independent variable.11
       The results of this specification are reported in column 2. Exports enter in with the
expected sign (and a near unit elasticity). The perverse coefficient on income is statistically
significant, and the time trend now becomes statistically significant. We suspect this finding is
due to the multicollinearity between GDP and the trend. However, we do obtain a positive and
statistically and economically significant coefficient on the real exchange rate.
       To sum up, on the export side, we have results that are basically in accord with
conventional theory. On the import side, we have some quite surprising and difficult to explain
results, unless we restrict the analysis to the post-WTO accession period. In addition, even the
results for this truncated sample are sensitive to the treatment of trends. There are two ways to
proceed. We can search out for additional variables that might eliminate these surprising results.
Alternatively, we can disaggregate the data, in the hopes that analyses of individual trade
categories will overturn the perverse results on the import side. And, on the export side,
disaggregation might yield new insights.


4.     Processing versus ordinary exports and imports
The Chinese customs agency categories exports and imports into those goods that are to be used
for processing purposes, and those to be used as ordinary exports or imports. For instance,
processing imports are usually for manufacturing finished products in China for (re-)exporting
and these imports are usually subjected to more favorable tariff rates. In contrast, processing
exports are exports that are used by the imported country for processing and assembly.
       We first examine the behavior of exports in Table 3. Ordinary export results are on the
left hand side, while processing export results are on the right hand side. The common result is
that for both types of exports, the value of the RMB enters in with the right sign and statistical
significance. One large difference is the fact that ordinary exports do not exhibit a statistically
significant sensitivity to rest-of-world GDP (unless a post-WTO trend is included, as in column
3). In contrast, processing exports always exhibit income elasticities in excess of unity.

11
   It could be argued that we should use processing exports instead of total exports. Substituting
one for the other does not lead to any consequential changes in the results. We conjecture that
this is the case because the two series share the same trajectory. See Figure 3.

                                                  12
       Next, we investigate whether the corresponding disaggregation yields some more
promising results for imports (see Table 4). The simple answer is mixed. For ordinary imports,
the income elasticity is positive but not statistically significant, while the exchange rate has the
wrong effect. If one includes exports (which is not well motivated for ordinary imports), the
results are largely negative as well, since no economic variable enters with significance.
       For processing imports, both income and the real exchange rate enter significantly, but
the latter enters with the wrong sign. Including exports results in properly signed coefficients for
the exchange rate and export variables. Income now enters with a negative, and significant, sign.
This result signals the collinearity of many of the variables.


5.     Manufactures versus Primary Products
       The next disaggregation we examine is between primary and manufactured goods.12 On
the export side, primary products have slowly trended to a smaller share, now less than 10% of
total exports. On the other hand, the primary share of imports has exhibited more substantial
movements as China has become a much more substantial importer of commodities, particularly
of oil. The latter has experienced large swings in price over the last few years, inducing an
upward spike in the primary product share in 2008.
       In interpreting Table 5, it is useful to recall that in the sample period almost all exports
are manufactured. Primary products exhibit a negative income elasticity, unless a post-WTO
accession trend is included. Then, China is exporting more commodities over time, with an
income elasticity of about unity; the time trend implies about 5.6% secular increase per annum.
Moreover, such exports respond to the exchange rate.
       Manufactured goods exports behave pretty much in the same fashion as aggregate
exports. That outcome makes sense since they account for most exports, and even at the
beginning of the sample didn’t account for less than 20% of total. If one takes column 6
estimates to be the most reliable, then the income elasticity of manufactured exports is 5.9, and
they respond to price changes with an elasticity of about 0.9. Even with the high income



12
  The classification follows the one-digit level convention of the Standard International Trade
Classification, Rev.3. Specifically, the “primary” includes the level 0 to level 4 and the
“manufactures” level 5 to level 9.

                                                  13
elasticity, Chinese manufactured exports exhibit a secular trend growth of about 10% per annum
(a bit less than double that for primary product exports).
        On the import side (Table 6), we obtain mixed results. Under specifications (1) and (3),
primary imports do not appear to respond to Chinese income in a statistically significant fashion
while the manufacturing imports do. It appears to be important to include exports in the
specification. Then, they appear to be important drivers of imports, and the exchange rate
coefficient no longer exhibits a significant and incorrect sign.


6.      The Changing Ownership Structure
To say the structure of the Chinese economy has changed drastically over the past twenty years
is an understatement. One of the dimensions in which that change has taken place is in terms of
ownership. At the beginning of the 1990’s, state owned enterprises retained a commanding role
in the economy. By the end of the sample, in 2010, private firms had taken on a much bigger
role.
        Figures 9 and 10 highlight the relative roles of state owned enterprises (SOEs), foreign
invested enterprises (FIEs), and private firms in exports and imports. The rise of the role of
foreign invested enterprises and even more so private firms in exports – all at the expense of
SOEs – is remarkable.
        The results of estimating separate equations for different types of exports depending on
sourcing are reported in Table 7. When we disaggregate to this level, we note that all the
coefficient estimates are correctly signed. With the exception of specification (9), SOE exports
exhibit the lowest income elasticity, while FIEs the next highest, and private firms the very
highest.
        Another general pattern is that the price elasticities rise as one goes from SOEs to FIEs,
to private firms. We find this pattern of interest since it accords with the view that SOEs are the
least concerned with profit maximization, FIEs are likely to be somewhat insensitive to exchange
rate and cost fluctuations as they are conducting long term intra firm transactions. Finally, in this
perspective, private firms should be most concerned with relative prices – holding all else
constant.13

13
  Of course, not all else is held constant. In particular, one would expect the industrial structure
and distribution across product types to differ across ownership segments.

                                                 14
       The results are otherwise somewhat sensitive to the inclusion of post-WTO accession
trends. In particular, the price effect is smaller (in magnitude) and displays a lower level of
significance in the presence of these WTO dummy variables. Interestingly, the exchange rate
elasticity for private firms remains significant (and quite strong) in all cases. The robustness of
the price elasticity is consistent with the argument that many private firms are operating with
very thin margins, so that small exchange rate appreciations can induce relatively large losses.
       The corresponding results for imports are less promising (Table 8). The estimated income
elasticity is positive, unless the exports variable is included. The exchange rate coefficient has
the wrong sign, and is correctly signed only for SOEs and FIEs when exports are included.
       For both SOEs and FIEs, exports show up as particularly important. The elasticity of
imports with respect to exports is least marked for private enterprises.


7.     Other Factors
7.1    Sex Ratios, Nominal Exchange Rates and Regimes
       Given the difficulty in modeling Chinese trade flows, we investigate the importance of
including additional control variables. In this subsection, we discuss the marginal effect of the
control variables including the sex-ratio, the nominal exchange rate, and the commodity price.
To conserve space, we present these results in the Appendix.
       One factor is suggested by the work of Du and Wei (2010). They employ an OLG model
to illustrate the importance of the sex-ratio in determining the Chinese current account balance.
In general, the inclusion of the sex-ratio variable does not qualitatively alter the sign and
significance of the other variables. These results are reported in Tables 3A and A4 in the
Appendix summarizes the sex-ratio effect on China’s exports and imports.14 Moreover, this
variable has a significant positive effect on exports but negative – albeit insignificant -- impact
on imports. The findings are in accord with the finding that the sex ratio imbalance is associated
with trade surplus.
       We also examine the proposition that the nominal exchange rate would be a better
indicator of relative prices. One rationale for this is that the rigidity of the nominal exchange rate

14
  The annual data were interpolated using the quarterly saving rate data and a time trend to
obtain the quarterly sex-ratio data from 1995Q1 – 2010Q4. We investigated whether the results
were due to seasonality; the results were unchanged when we used de-seasonalized data.

                                                  15
conveys information not incorporated into the behavior of the real exchange rate. As reported in
Appendix Tables A5 and A6, an RMB appreciation induces the expected effect only in the
export specifications for FIEs and private firms, and an unexpected sign in the SOE export
equation. The coefficient on the nominal rate is not significant in other export equations and the
import equations.
       Given the fact that the Chinese exchange rate is de facto fixed for much of the sample
period, we attempt to capture this fixity by inclusion of a dummy variable, which takes a value of
unity starting from the second quarter of 2005. The estimated price elasticity does not change
with this new specification (see Appendix Tables A7 and A8). Hence, these results do not lend a
strong support for this specific policy effect.
       Finally, given that commodity imports become important toward the latter part of the
period, we include a commodity terms of trade variable. Aside from the contrasting effects
recorded for the SOE and FIE export equations, the commodity terms of trade variable does not
have a statistically significant effect on other specifications in Appendix Tables A9 and A10.
Hence, despite the apparent importance of commodities, the terms of trade do not appear to be a
substantial factor affecting China’s trade.
       Summing up, the results in Tables A3 to A10 suggest that while the inclusion of these
additional control variables might have implications for selected trade equations, there is no
discernible evidence of a pattern of improved results. Nor does the inclusion of these variables
improve the goodness of fit. The root-mean-squared-errors (RMSEs) in Tables A3 to A10 are no
larger than the corresponding ones in Tables 1 to 8. Hence, we now move to examining an
alternative strategy aimed at the import equations in the next subsection.


7.2    Differential Import-Intensities of Aggregate Demand
As we noted earlier, there are other ways in which to attempt to obtain more plausible estimates,
particularly with respect to imports. In addition to disaggregation, one can see if different types
of imports respond differently to different components of aggregate demand. This approach
follows Chinn (2010) and more recently Bussiere et al. (2011). The idea is that consumption
might be relatively intensive in one type of import, while investment might be intensive in
manufactured goods. Aggregate imports’ relationship to aggregate activity might appear to
change as the composition of the economy varies.

                                                  16
       The results are reported in Table 9, for regressions over the entire sample (not just the
post-WTO accession sample). The same specification, incorporating consumption and fixed asset
investment as activity variables is estimated, along with exports, the real exchange rate and
dummies and trends.
       In column 1, the regression results for aggregate imports are reported to establish a
baseline. Interestingly, in this specification, both activity variables enter with the appropriate
sign. At the same time, the post-WTO accession trend variable drops in significance.
       When we decompose imports by type of product, we find that primary imports appear to
respond strongly to fixed asset investment, but negatively to consumption. They also depend on
exports. Manufactured goods, on the other hand, do not appear to depend on any activity
variable.
       For ordinary and processing goods, we find including fixed asset investment proves
useful. Positive elasticities are recovered in both cases. In addition, processing imports depend
positively on exports, while ordinary imports do not. This differential result makes a lot of sense.
       Finally, when stratifying the imports by firm type, we find once again including fixed
asset investment is useful. We obtain the correct sign in all three instances. Exports enter
positively as well.
       We obtain one particularly interesting result, relating to the exchange rate elasticity. In
the aggregate, the estimated exchange rate coefficient is wrong-signed. It becomes correctly
signed and statistically significant for primary imports and for imports of private firms. In the
other instances, the coefficient is not statistically significant. One puzzle remains, however:
manufactured imports continue to exhibit the wrong sign.
       Finally, we include relative productivity as an additional regressor, following Aziz and Li
(2008). The motivation is that the CPI deflated real exchange rate does not fully reflect the price
of Chinese tradable output, as it includes a large nontradable components (Chinn, 2006). The
proxy variable is Chinese GDP per capita relative to US output per man hour in the nonfarm
business sector. We present the results of these augmented regressions over the post-WTO-
accession sample in Table 10.
       The inclusion of the relative productivity variable yields substantially improved results.
The exchange rate now has the correct sign for all aggregates and components of imports, and is
statistically significant in most cases but one. Higher Chinese relative productivity decreases

                                                  17
imports as well, which makes sense, as higher productivity is consistent with greater
competitiveness. In some sense, the competitiveness variable explains even more of Chinese
import behavior than the conventional variables, as the associated coefficient is significant in all
cases but one.


8.      Concluding remarks
We have found that for exports, while there is some diversity of responses to income and
exchange rate variables, Chinese trade flow behavior largely accords with conventional wisdom:
Higher rest of world income results in higher Chinese exports, while a stronger RMB results in
lower exports. However, the income elasticity is imprecisely estimated, varying widely
depending upon the inclusion or exclusion of a linear time trend. In addition, the price elasticity
varies widely between goods exported from SOEs, foreign invested firms, and private firms. The
latter appear to behave in a more price-sensitive fashion than the other firm types. As their share
of exports continues to rise, one should expect the overall price elasticity to increase, holding all
else constant.
        On the import side, we obtain a more nuanced story, as we have replicated some of the
puzzling results that other researchers have found, namely an apparently negative income
elasticity. We are tempted to ascribe this result to import substitution taking place as the Chinese
economy’s structure alters drastically. However, that remains a conjecture.
        On the other hand, the fact that disaggregation and the use of proxies for sectoral
demands leads to positive coefficients on the activity variables is consistent with the view that
rapid structural change has resulted in what appears to be unstable and perverse income and price
elasticities at the aggregate level.
        Disaggregation improves the overall results, but leaves some anomalies in place. In
particular, we are unable obtain a specification without a large negative price coefficient for
manufactured imports, which still constitute about 70% of Chinese imports, except when relative
productivity is included. Indeed, inclusion of relative productivity makes the estimates much
more plausible, and results in a correctly-signed exchange rate coefficient. To the extent that
relative productivity is correlated with supply, this outcome is not entirely surprising.
        Overall, Chinese trade flows do seem to respond to economic activity and price variables
in the expected manner, at least when the data are sufficiently disaggregated or supply factors

                                                 18
incorporated. Does it mean that policymakers in principle had the means by which they could
have affected the trade balance in the run-up to the crisis, had they wished? Given the empirical
results presented here, the answer is in the eye of the beholder. Our results suggest that China’s
trade surplus could be reduced by appreciating the RMB, holding all else constant. To the extent
real and financial imbalances – both within and without China – are exacerbated by these large
Chinese surpluses and the consequent accumulation of reserves, this is an important finding.
       There is a less optimistic interpretation, however. We have assumed the exchange rate is
exogenous in identifying the parameters, including the price elasticities. It might be that when
policy authorities change the exchange rate, other macro variables might be affected in a way
that offsets the effects laid out in the traditional elasticities approach. And overarching these
points is the practical observation that our estimates are often imprecise and – in the case of
income elasticities – sensitive to the treatment of trends.
       To further our understanding on the role of exchange rate policy in China’s trade
imbalance, future work should investigate whether further disaggregation can yield greater
insights into Chinese trade behavior. In particular, we can examine commodity types more
finely. In addition, alternative proxies for Chinese supply might yield more precise estimates of
the price and income variables.




                                                 19
Appendix 1: Data – Definition and Source
Import           China’s imports in US dollar normalized by the Hong Kong re-export to China unit
                 value index. The data are in logarithm values. The types of import data considered are
                 China’s total imports, imports of ordinary trade, imports of processing trade, primary
                 goods imports, manufactured goods imports, and imports by SOEs, FIEs, and private
                 firms. (Data Source: CEIC)
Exports          China’s exports in US dollar normalized by the Hong Kong re-export to the
                 world unit value index. The data are in logarithm values. The types of export data
                 considered are China’s total exports, exports of ordinary trade, exports of processing
                 trade, primary goods exports, manufactured goods exports, and exports by SOEs, FIEs,
                 and private firms. (Data Source: CEIC)
GDP              The income is given by the real GDP index of the rest of the world in the
                 exports equation (Data source: Shaghil Ahmed at the Federal Reserve Board)
                 and by China’s real GDP in RMB in the imports equation (Data source: CEIC).
                 Both are in logarithm values.
REER             The real effective exchange rate of the Chinese currency, the renminbi. (Data
                 source: IMF IFS)
CRgrw            China’s domestic credit growth rate. (Data source: CEIC)

Consumption      China’s private consumption to GDP ratio. (Data source: CEIC)

Fixed asset inv. China’s fixed asset investment to GDP ratio. (Data source: CEIC)

Prod             China’s relative productivity, measured by the Chinese GDP per capita relative
                 to the US output per man hour in the nonfarm business sector. (Data source:
                 CEIC and St. Louis Fed FRED)
SexRatio         China’s sex ratio - the birth ratio of boy and girl, lagged for 20 years;
                 interpolated from Wei and Zhang (2011).
NER              The RMB nominal exchange rate, period average. (Data source: IMF IFS)

CTOT             China's commodity terms of trade, measured as the ratio of weighted real
                 commodity export price to weighted real commodity import price. The data are
                 compiled according to the methodology of Spatafora and Tytell (2009).
Reform           China’s exchange rate reform in July, 2005 dummy variable[ Reform = 1
                 (t>2005Q3)]
WTO              The China’s accession to WTO dummy variable [ WTO = 1 (t>2001Q4)]

gfc08            The 2008 Great Recession dummy variable [gf08 = 1 (t = 08Q4, 09Q1, 09Q2)]

Q1,Q2,Q3         The quarter dummy variables

Trend            The time trend variable



                                                 20
Appendix 2: Unit root and cointegration tests

Table A1: Unit root test results
                                                                    ADF test with one structural
                                       DF-GLS with a trend
                                                                    break in both mean and trend
                                      tau-statistics    lags       t-statistics     break point
Aggregated exports                       -1.672           5 -2.053                    2003q3
Primary goods exports                   -3.230**          4          -2.422           2003q4
Manufacture goods exports                -1.612           5          -2.004           2003q3
Ordinary exports                         -1.785           5 -2.183                    2003q3
Processing exports                       -1.304           5 -1.975                    2002q3
SOE exports                              -1.939           5 -2.268                    2002q4
FIE exports                               -0.94           5          -2.033           2002q3
Private firms exports                    -1.908           4 -1.944                    2004q1

Aggregated imports                       -1.665          5 -1.891                     2002q3
Primary goods imports                    -3.102          1            -3.221          2003q2
Manufacture goods imports                -2.273          4            -1.871          2002q3
Ordinary imports                         -2.782          4 -2.216                     2001q3
Processing imports                       -1.543          5 -2.531                     2002q3
SOE imports                              -1.683          6 -3.026                     2001q3
FIE imports                              -1.254          5 -2.031                     2002q4
Private firms imports                    -1.572          3 -1.844                     2001q4

China's real GDP                         -1.991          4 -1.767                     2003q4
China's private consumption              -2.862          4           -2.45            2002q1
China's fixed asset investment           -0.783          4 -1.725                      2004q3
The world real GDP                       -1.908          2          -2.320             2004q1
REER IMF                                  -1.46          1 -2.74                       2007q2
China's domestic credit growth rate    -5.764***         1        -6.599***           no break
Note: Export data are normalized by the Hong Kong re-export unit value index. Import data are
normalized by the Hong Kong re-export to China unit value index. The normalized series in
logarithms are used. The finite sample critical value at the 5% significant level for the DF-GLS
test and the ADF test with one structural break are from Cheung and Lai (1995) and Perron and
Vogelsang (1992), respectively. The break points are endogenously identified via grid search.




                                                   21
Table A2: Cointegration test results with one known break point (2001Q4)
                                                                                Test Statistics
                             Vector                                   H0
                                                                                 Max              Trace
Aggregated Export, GDP, REER                                           r=0    44.36**           50.13**
                                                                     r <= 1      5.34              5.76
Primary Export, GDP, REER                                              r=0    39.78**           44.91**
                                                                     r <= 1      4.62              5.12
Manufacture Export, GDP, REER                                          r=0    44.09**           50.64**
                                                                     r <= 1      6.13              6.54
Ordinary Export, GDP, REER                                             r=0    47.60**           52.28**
                                                                     r <= 1      4.06              4.68
Processing Export, GDP, REER                                           r=0    37.52**           48.57**
                                                                     r <= 1     10.89             11.04
SOE Export, GDP, REER                                                  r=0    29.55**           39.62**
                                                                     r <= 1      9.35             10.07
FIE Export, GDP, REER                                                  r=0    31.17**           38.83**
                                                                     r <= 1      7.49              7.65
Private Export, GDP, REER                                              r=0    49.53**           55.72**
                                                                     r <= 1      5.57              6.18

Aggregated Import, GDP, REER                                           r=0    61.37**         86.88**
                                                                     r <= 1   22.99**         25.51**
                                                                     r <= 2      2.51            2.51
Primary Import, GDP, REER                                              r=0    41.96**         68.55**
                                                                     r <= 1   24.26**         26.58**
                                                                     r <= 2      2.32            2.32
Manufacture Import, GDP, REER                                          r=0    62.43**         87.22**
                                                                     r <= 1   21.52**           24.79
                                                                     r <= 2      3.26            3.26
Ordinary Import, GDP, REER                                             r=0    40.02**         67.31**
                                                                     r <= 1   24.65**         27.28**
                                                                     r <= 2      2.63            2.63
Processing Import, GDP, REER                                           r=0    36.54**         62.34**
                                                                     r <= 1   21.59**         25.80**
                                                                     r <= 2      4.21            4.21
SOE Import, GDP, REER                                                  r=0    28.02**         53.29**
                                                                     r <= 1   23.39**           25.27
                                                                     r <= 2      1.87            1.87
FIE Import, GDP, REER                                                  r=0    38.27**         59.34**
                                                                     r <= 1   18.97**           21.06


                                                22
                                                                 r <= 2      2.09        2.09
Private Import, GDP, REER                                          r=0    29.11**     50.85**
                                                                 r <= 1   19.86**       21.74
                                                                 r <= 2      1.87        1.87

Aggregated Import, Aggregated Export, GDP, REER                    r=0    68.58**    114.63**
                                                                 r <= 1   28.43**     46.05**
                                                                 r <= 2     17.29       17.61
Primary Import, Primary Import, GDP, REER                          r=0    50.98**    109.96**
                                                                 r <= 1   37.80**     58.97**
                                                                 r <= 2   20.38**       21.16
                                                                 r <= 3       0.78       0.78
Manufacture Import, Manufacture Export, GDP, REER                  r=0    77.10**    119.24**
                                                                 r <= 1   24.96**     42.13**
                                                                 r <= 2     16.78       17.16
Ordinary Import, Ordinary Export, GDP, REER                        r=0    55.22**    101.69**
                                                                 r <= 1   35.29**     46.47**
                                                                 r <= 2      9.77       11.18
Processing Import, Processing Export, GDP, REER                    r=0    91.55**    130.42**
                                                                 r <= 1   19.88*8     38.86**
                                                                 r <= 2     18.79       18.98
SOE Import, SOE Import, GDP, REER                                  r=0    30.03**     66.07**
                                                                 r <= 1     24.01       40.03
FIE Import, FIE Export, GDP, REER                                  r=0    72.21**    104.67**
                                                                 r <= 1     19.46       32.45
Private Import, Private Export, GDP, REER                          r=0    49.75**     81.54**
                                                                 r <= 1     27.79       31.79

Aggregated Import, Aggregated Export, Consumption, FAI, REER       r=0    61.02**    125.66**
                                                                 r <= 1   40.33**     64.63**
                                                                 r <= 2     17.44        24.3
Primary Import, Primary Export, Consumption, FAI, REER             r=0    55.04**    142.34**
                                                                 r <= 1   48.85**     87.29**
                                                                 r <= 2   30.95**       38.44
                                                                 r <= 3      6.92        7.48
Manufacture Import, Manufacture Export, Consumption, FAI, REER     r=0    62.67**    121.87**
                                                                 r <= 1   34.54**     59.20**
                                                                 r <= 2     18.72       24.66
Ordinary Import, Ordinary Export, Consumption, FAI, REER           r=0    75.08**    128.17**
                                                                 r <= 1   38.96**       53.09


                                                  23
                                                                    r <= 2          9.44          14.12
Processing Import, Processing Export, Consumption, FAI, REER          r=0        93.83**       177.51**
                                                                    r <= 1       51.99**        83.67**
                                                                    r <= 2         24.61          31.68
SOE Import, SOE Export, Consumption, FAI, REER                        r=0        39.99**        90.51**
                                                                    r <= 1        31.18*          50.51
                                                                    r <= 2           11.8         19.33
FIE Import, FIE Export, Consumption, FAI, REER                        r=0        78.62**       135.86**
                                                                    r <= 1       38.55**        57.24**
                                                                    r <= 2         13.61          18.69
Private Import, Private Export, Consumption, FAI, REER                r=0        71.64**       118.42**
                                                                    r <= 1       32.62**          46.78
                                                                    r <= 2          8.22          14.15
 Note: Results of the Johansen cointegration rank test with one known structural break point are
reported. Critical values are from Cheung and Lai (1993). “**” denotes 95% level of
significance.




                                                 24
Appendix 3: Regression Results Discussed in Section 7.1

Table A3: China’s exports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index, controlling for China’s sex ratio effect
                           [1]            [2]            [3]           [4]             [5]             [6]              [7]                    [8]
                   Aggregate       Ordinary            Proc.     Primary           Manuf.            SOE               FIE                   Priv.
GDP                 5.068***       4.912***       5.748***          1.075       5.336***        3.832***        6.318***                    2.532
                        (0.41)         (0.68)         (0.62)        (0.70)          (0.41)          (0.72)           (0.70)                 (1.59)
REER               -0.954***      -1.273***      -0.787***     -0.758***       -0.967***        -0.541**       -0.660***               -5.771***
                        (0.17)         (0.27)         (0.15)        (0.23)          (0.18)          (0.24)           (0.21)                 (0.60)
CRgrw                  -0.100          0.038         -0.175         0.088          -0.157           0.073           -0.119                 -0.720
                        (0.37)         (0.53)         (0.32)        (0.34)          (0.42)          (0.48)           (0.37)                 (1.03)
SexRatio            0.131***           0.009      0.230***      0.122***        0.136***           -0.005       0.301***                   -0.077
                        (0.04)         (0.08)         (0.03)        (0.05)          (0.04)          (0.07)           (0.05)                 (0.10)
WTO                -0.594***      -0.756***      -0.442***      -0.279**       -0.581***          -0.204*        -0.180**               1.671***
                        (0.07)         (0.10)         (0.09)        (0.11)          (0.07)          (0.10)           (0.09)                 (0.27)
WTO*Trend           0.022***       0.027***       0.016***      0.011***        0.021***         0.008**        0.009***               -0.028***
                        (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)                 (0.01)
Trend                 -0.008*         -0.001     -0.017***          0.004          -0.007          -0.010         -0.011*               0.139***
                        (0.00)         (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)                 (0.02)
Q1                 -0.152***      -0.167***      -0.134***     -0.172***       -0.147***       -0.180***       -0.102***                  -0.122*
                        (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.02)          (0.03)           (0.03)                 (0.06)
Q2                  -0.042**          -0.016      -0.059**     -0.077***          -0.038*          -0.034           -0.039                 -0.013
                        (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.02)        (0.03)          (0.02)          (0.03)           (0.03)                 (0.06)
Q3                      0.009          0.017          0.008    -0.094***            0.020           0.020            0.007                  0.084
                        (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)                 (0.06)
Constant                0.633         14.128    -11.320***         -1.093          -0.071          12.866     -19.944***               37.655***
                        (4.64)         (8.79)         (3.71)        (5.08)          (4.88)          (7.84)           (5.29)               (10.39)

RMSE                       0.05             0.08             0.04            0.07             0.05            0.07             0.05            0.17
Obs.                         62               62               62              62               62              62               62              62
Leads-lags                 1, 1             1, 1             1, 2            1, 1             1, 1            1, 1             1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with the aggregate and disaggregated export data. The pair of numbers given in the row
labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS regression.
Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.
                                                                           25
Table A4: China’s imports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit value index, controlling for China’s sex ratio effect
                               [1]             [2]              [3]             [4]             [5]             [6]             [7]            [8]
                       Aggregate        Ordinary             Proc.       Primary          Manuf.              SOE              FIE           Priv.
GDP                       -4.208          -1.010          -2.586*     -11.097***           -2.292        -5.259*          -3.917*           4.160
                           (2.75)          (3.42)           (1.30)          (2.77)          (2.46)          (2.95)          (1.86)          (2.93)
REER                        0.525         -1.916        1.659***           -0.654          -0.273            0.580           1.041      8.021***
                           (1.11)          (1.32)           (0.52)          (0.71)          (0.94)          (0.74)          (0.76)          (2.15)
Export                      0.774         -0.885        1.649***           -0.179            0.589           0.429      1.304***        2.418***
                           (0.61)          (0.66)           (0.30)          (0.61)          (0.52)          (0.49)          (0.42)          (0.41)
SexRatio                  -0.169          -0.445             0.021         -0.408          -0.152          -0.239          -0.231           0.161
                           (0.25)          (0.29)           (0.11)          (0.26)          (0.22)          (0.22)          (0.17)          (0.34)
WTO                       -0.664          -0.853           -0.425          -0.999          -0.618          -1.268         -0.919*       -4.065**
                           (0.65)          (0.97)           (0.36)          (0.68)          (0.52)          (0.74)          (0.52)          (1.37)
WTO*Trend                   0.017           0.013            0.016           0.013           0.018           0.032           0.031      0.156***
                           (0.02)          (0.03)           (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.05)
Trend                     0.122*          0.158*             0.019      0.382***             0.075       0.172**             0.086      -0.323**
                           (0.07)          (0.08)           (0.03)          (0.09)          (0.06)          (0.08)          (0.05)          (0.12)
Q1                          0.001           0.352          -0.284            0.913         -0.190            0.118         -0.021          -1.000
                           (0.42)          (0.52)           (0.22)          (0.60)          (0.36)          (0.52)          (0.32)          (0.82)
Q2                        -0.353          -0.176           -0.070          -0.048          -0.325          -0.120          -0.043       -1.215**
                           (0.31)          (0.43)           (0.11)          (0.26)          (0.26)          (0.31)          (0.19)          (0.46)
Q3                          0.168       1.248**            -0.164        1.471**           -0.056            0.820          0.085          -1.181
                           (0.41)          (0.56)           (0.17)          (0.63)          (0.32)          (0.58)          (0.28)          (0.75)
Constant                  51.265          84.233             3.224    144.390***           40.157          69.934          47.426         -98.296
                         (44.11)         (49.65)          (18.93)         (47.15)         (39.19)         (40.23)         (30.21)         (60.69)

RMSE                         0.04             0.06            0.02            0.07           0.04             0.05            0.03            0.07
Obs.                           33               33              33              33             33               33              33              33
Leads-lags                   1, 1            1, 1            1, 1            1, 1           1, 1             1, 1            1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO aggregate and disaggregated import data. The pair of numbers
given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the
dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of
significance, respectively.

                                                                        26
Table A5: China’s exports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index, controlling for RMB nominal exchange rate
                           [1]             [2]          [3]            [4]             [5]              [6]         [7]             [8]
                   Aggregate       Ordinary           Proc.      Primary          Manuf.              SOE          FIE            Priv.
GDP                 5.826***       4.034***      7.549***           1.291       6.148***         2.637**     9.291***          4.135*
                        (0.88)         (1.13)        (0.95)        (1.04)           (0.88)          (1.01)       (1.28)         (2.37)
REER               -0.904***      -1.329***     -0.848***     -0.732***        -0.915***        -0.598**       -0.579*     -5.676***
                        (0.23)         (0.26)        (0.22)        (0.24)           (0.25)          (0.23)       (0.32)         (0.60)
CRgrw                  -0.176           0.016       -0.154          0.077          -0.234           0.178       -0.167         -0.924
                        (0.39)         (0.51)        (0.44)        (0.40)           (0.43)          (0.46)       (0.55)         (0.96)
d.NER                  -0.614           2.675       -2.368          0.993          -0.726         3.650*     -6.008**         -5.795*
                        (1.58)         (2.35)        (1.64)        (1.92)           (1.62)          (1.93)       (2.25)         (3.24)
WTO                -0.662***      -0.681***     -0.663***       -0.290**       -0.653***           -0.085   -0.453***       1.504***
                        (0.10)         (0.12)        (0.14)        (0.14)           (0.11)          (0.12)       (0.17)         (0.32)
WTO*Trend           0.025***       0.024***      0.025***      0.012***         0.025***             0.004   0.021***         -0.022*
                        (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.01)         (0.01)
Trend                  -0.007           0.006    -0.019**           0.009          -0.007          -0.001      -0.019*      0.121***
                        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.02)
Q1                 -0.211***      -0.188***     -0.216***     -0.227***        -0.207***       -0.184***    -0.204***          -0.084
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Q2                 -0.080***          -0.032    -0.112***     -0.111***        -0.077***           -0.033   -0.103***            0.004
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Q3                     -0.027         -0.009        -0.017    -0.127***            -0.017            0.016      -0.024         0.102*
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Constant           14.269***     15.417***      13.391***     11.747***       14.144***       12.548***     11.572***     29.104***
                        (1.07)         (1.20)        (1.00)        (1.10)           (1.12)          (1.09)       (1.50)         (2.73)

RMSE                     0.06              0.08          0.06             0.07           0.06            0.07           0.07            0.17
Obs.                       64                64             63              64             64              62              62             62
Leads-lags               1, 1              1, 1          1, 2             1, 1           1, 1            1, 1           1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with the aggregate and disaggregated export data. The pair of numbers given in the
row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS
regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance,
respectively.

                                                                        27
Table A6: China’s imports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit value index, controlling for RMB regime change
                                [1]            [2]              [3]             [4]            [5]              [6]            [7]              [8]
                       Aggregate        Ordinary             Proc.       Primary          Manuf.              SOE             FIE             Priv.
GDP                      -3.017*            1.320      -2.695***       -8.810***          -1.154         -4.087*         -2.033*             2.327
                            (1.50)         (2.42)           (0.75)          (2.58)         (1.34)           (2.23)          (0.95)          (3.39)
REER                         0.762        -1.041        2.001***             0.205          0.121          0.981*           1.520       7.439***
                            (1.11)         (1.38)           (0.56)          (0.47)         (1.00)           (0.47)          (1.12)          (1.81)
Export                       0.700        -1.023        1.788***           -0.329           0.596            0.273       1.281**        2.359***
                            (0.62)         (0.77)           (0.26)          (0.84)         (0.51)           (0.54)          (0.49)          (0.41)
d.NER                        0.120          1.608          -1.226            0.405        -0.886             2.561         -1.325           2.259
                            (1.86)         (3.92)           (0.77)          (2.78)         (1.13)           (2.48)          (1.51)          (2.76)
WTO                        -0.296         -0.003        -0.575**           -0.618         -0.361           -0.731          -0.521      -4.114***
                            (0.41)         (0.73)           (0.26)          (0.74)         (0.36)           (0.64)          (0.42)          (1.35)
WTO*Trend                    0.006        -0.015         0.021**             0.000          0.010            0.016          0.018       0.158***
                            (0.01)         (0.03)           (0.01)          (0.02)         (0.01)           (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.05)
Trend                    0.085**            0.077            0.016      0.303***            0.037        0.129**            0.026       -0.261**
                            (0.03)         (0.05)           (0.02)          (0.08)         (0.02)           (0.05)          (0.04)          (0.11)
Q1                         -0.044           0.192          -0.212           0.792         -0.203           -0.134          -0.033          -0.940
                            (0.46)         (0.49)           (0.21)          (0.72)         (0.41)           (0.54)          (0.35)          (0.82)
Q2                         -0.416         -0.400           -0.070          -0.252         -0.409           -0.310          -0.121       -1.042**
                            (0.29)         (0.39)           (0.10)          (0.26)         (0.25)           (0.24)          (0.15)          (0.42)
Q3                           0.019          0.764          -0.113           1.183         -0.169            0.425          -0.055          -1.058
                            (0.39)         (0.52)           (0.16)          (0.81)         (0.33)           (0.63)          (0.28)          (0.75)
Constant                23.468**          15.545             3.182     79.896***         13.039*        34.955**            5.812      -63.511**
                            (9.08)       (15.48)            (5.84)        (25.71)          (7.10)         (12.09)         (10.97)         (28.85)

RMSE                         0.04             0.07            0.02            0.07           0.04            0.05             0.04            0.07
Obs.                           33               33              33              33             33               33              33              33
Leads-lags                   1, 1            1, 1            1, 1            1, 1           1, 1             1, 1            1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO aggregate and disaggregated import data. The pair of numbers
given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the
dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of
significance, respectively.

                                                                        28
Table A7: China’s exports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index, controlling for RMB regime change using dummy variable
                           [1]            [2]           [3]            [4]             [5]              [6]          [7]           [8]
                   Aggregate       Ordinary           Proc.      Primary          Manuf.              SOE           FIE          Priv.
GDP                 5.981***       5.028***      7.386***        2.429**        6.250***        4.382***     7.981***          3.414*
                        (0.78)         (0.88)        (0.98)        (0.97)           (0.78)          (0.81)       (1.19)         (1.96)
REER               -0.877***      -1.301***     -0.839***     -0.655***        -0.891***          -0.484*      -0.611*     -5.653***
                        (0.23)         (0.26)        (0.22)        (0.23)           (0.25)          (0.25)       (0.36)         (0.59)
CRgrw                  -0.129         -0.036        -0.043          0.128          -0.186            0.116        0.061        -0.660
                        (0.38)         (0.54)        (0.46)        (0.37)           (0.43)          (0.48)       (0.62)         (1.01)
Reform                 -0.043         -0.028        -0.064      -0.109**           -0.040         -0.070*       -0.077         -0.140
                        (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.05)           (0.04)          (0.04)       (0.07)         (0.10)
WTO                -0.722***      -0.816***     -0.721***     -0.524***        -0.705***       -0.333***       -0.403*      1.429***
                        (0.12)         (0.12)        (0.18)        (0.16)           (0.13)          (0.09)       (0.21)         (0.33)
WTO*Trend           0.027***       0.029***      0.026***      0.020***         0.026***        0.012***     0.018***         -0.021*
                        (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.01)        (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.01)         (0.01)
Trend                  -0.008         -0.002     -0.017**           0.000          -0.007       -0.015**        -0.007      0.128***
                        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.02)
Q1                 -0.213***      -0.186***     -0.221***     -0.230***        -0.210***       -0.181***    -0.217***         -0.099*
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Q2                 -0.082***          -0.034    -0.114***     -0.117***        -0.079***           -0.036   -0.107***          -0.004
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Q3                     -0.027         -0.006        -0.017    -0.123***            -0.017            0.023      -0.030         0.098*
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Constant           14.135***     15.287***      13.328***     11.371***       14.022***       12.005***     11.697***      28.958***
                        (1.07)         (1.23)        (1.00)        (1.05)           (1.12)          (1.19)       (1.68)         (2.69)

RMSE                     0.06              0.08          0.06             0.07           0.06            0.07           0.08            0.17
Obs.                       64                64             63              64             64              62              62             62
Leads-lags               1, 1              1, 1          1, 2             1, 1           1, 1            1, 1           1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with the aggregate and disaggregated export data. The pair of numbers given in the
row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS
regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance,
respectively.

                                                                        29
Table A8: China’s imports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit value index, controlling for RMB regime change using dummy
variable
                                [1]             [2]             [3]             [4]             [5]             [6]             [7]             [8]
                       Aggregate        Ordinary             Proc.       Primary          Manuf.              SOE              FIE            Priv.
GDP                     -3.687**             1.392     -3.269***       -8.716***           -1.830          -2.266      -2.918***             3.054
                            (1.48)          (2.08)          (0.81)          (2.44)          (1.37)          (2.32)          (0.84)          (2.77)
REER                         1.275         -0.802       2.250***             0.228           0.423           0.863       2.220**        6.677***
                            (1.02)          (0.93)          (0.56)          (0.48)          (0.99)          (0.50)          (0.95)          (2.15)
Export                       0.932        -0.950*       1.906***           -0.300            0.739         -0.124       1.572***        2.207***
                            (0.58)          (0.49)          (0.26)          (0.80)          (0.51)          (0.55)          (0.43)          (0.50)
Reform                  -0.069**       -0.152***          -0.037*            0.003       -0.046*        -0.092**        -0.072**           -0.026
                            (0.03)          (0.05)          (0.02)          (0.06)          (0.02)          (0.04)          (0.03)          (0.05)
WTO                     0.092***         0.080**             0.026      0.300***         0.047**           0.099*            0.034        -0.257*
                            (0.02)          (0.04)          (0.02)          (0.08)          (0.02)          (0.05)          (0.03)          (0.12)
WTO*Trend                  -0.308            0.179      -0.576**           -0.617          -0.301          -0.836          -0.604       -3.816**
                            (0.31)          (0.51)          (0.25)          (0.73)          (0.28)          (0.55)          (0.38)          (1.50)
Trend                        0.006         -0.023        0.021**             0.000           0.008           0.014           0.022       0.146**
                            (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.05)
Q1                         -0.122            0.075         -0.321            0.805         -0.294            0.128         -0.188          -0.907
                            (0.44)          (0.42)          (0.21)          (0.72)          (0.41)          (0.49)          (0.35)          (0.85)
Q2                        -0.465*         -0.505*          -0.090          -0.256        -0.425*           -0.203          -0.152       -1.080**
                            (0.24)          (0.26)          (0.10)          (0.27)          (0.22)          (0.22)          (0.12)          (0.41)
Q3                         -0.117            0.605         -0.229            1.189         -0.295            0.701         -0.250          -0.937
                            (0.39)          (0.42)          (0.17)          (0.80)          (0.34)          (0.48)          (0.29)          (0.73)
Constant               23.714***           13.122            5.302     78.795***        15.351**         25.195*             6.425      -64.419*
                            (6.17)        (10.14)           (5.87)        (23.97)           (5.82)        (12.07)           (8.32)        (30.22)

RMSE                         0.04             0.05            0.02            0.07           0.03            0.05             0.03            0.08
Obs.                           33               33              33              33             33               33              33              33
Leads-lags                   1, 1            1, 1            1, 1            1, 1           1, 1             1, 1            1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO aggregate and disaggregated import data. The pair of numbers
given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the
dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of
significance, respectively.
                                                                        30
Table A9: China’s exports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index, controling for the commodity term of trade
                            [1]            [2]           [3]            [4]             [5]             [6]          [7]            [8]
                   Aggregate       Ordinary           Proc.      Primary          Manuf.              SOE           FIE           Priv.
GDP                 5.759***       4.333***      7.012***         1.681*        6.049***       3.630***      8.339***           2.095
                        (0.84)         (1.08)        (0.89)         (1.00)          (0.84)          (0.86)       (1.21)         (1.97)
REER               -0.913***      -1.305***     -0.865***     -0.743***        -0.924***      -0.599***      -0.634**      -5.662***
                        (0.23)         (0.25)        (0.21)         (0.25)          (0.24)          (0.22)       (0.31)         (0.59)
CRgrw                  -0.164         -0.050        -0.096           0.046         -0.220            0.076      -0.018         -0.761
                        (0.38)         (0.48)        (0.43)         (0.39)          (0.43)          (0.46)       (0.55)         (0.96)
CTOT                     0.161        -4.844          3.039        -2.192            0.316       -4.890*      7.217**            6.451
                        (2.22)         (2.90)        (2.04)         (2.52)          (2.32)          (2.49)       (2.99)         (3.98)
WTO                -0.654***      -0.559***     -0.717***          -0.244      -0.649***           -0.012   -0.577***       1.458***
                        (0.14)         (0.18)        (0.14)         (0.16)          (0.15)          (0.15)       (0.19)         (0.35)
WTO*Trend           0.025***       0.021***      0.026***        0.011**        0.024***             0.003   0.023***       -0.023**
                        (0.00)         (0.01)        (0.00)         (0.01)          (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.01)         (0.01)
Trend                  -0.006           0.004      -0.015*          0.006          -0.006          -0.008       -0.011      0.137***
                        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.02)
Q1                 -0.213***      -0.194***     -0.214***     -0.233***        -0.210***      -0.193***     -0.202***          -0.075
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)         (0.03)          (0.02)          (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Q2                 -0.079***          -0.039    -0.104***     -0.116***        -0.076***           -0.044   -0.090***            0.024
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.07)
Q3                     -0.028         -0.015        -0.014    -0.130***            -0.017            0.011      -0.019        0.107*
                        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.03)         (0.06)
Constant           14.149***     20.176***      10.407***     14.010***       13.868***       17.482***           4.569    22.523***
                        (2.63)         (3.50)        (2.38)         (2.84)          (2.72)          (3.01)       (3.59)         (4.65)

RMSE                     0.06              0.08          0.06             0.07           0.06            0.07           0.07            0.17
Obs.                       62                62             61              62             62              60              60             60
Leads-lags               1, 1              1, 1          1, 2             1, 1           1, 1            1, 1           1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with the aggregate and disaggregated export data. The pair of numbers given in the
row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS
regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance,
respectively.
                                                                        31
Table A10: China’s imports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit value index, controlling for the commodity term of trade
                               [1]             [2]              [3]             [4]             [5]             [6]             [7]             [8]
                       Aggregate        Ordinary             Proc.       Primary          Manuf.              SOE              FIE            Priv.
GDP                       -6.977            0.484         -2.656*      -8.341***           -5.114         -4.628*          -2.233        4.620**
                           (4.05)          (6.28)           (1.27)          (1.50)          (2.97)          (2.50)          (2.07)          (1.73)
REER                        4.274         -0.219         2.228**             0.452           3.280       1.295**             2.274      6.298***
                           (2.99)          (3.33)           (0.93)          (0.46)          (2.24)          (0.55)          (2.08)          (1.52)
Export                      2.461         -0.365        1.986***           -0.243          2.043*        1.225**          1.680*        2.066***
                           (1.49)          (2.08)           (0.36)          (0.55)          (1.08)          (0.40)          (0.81)          (0.35)
CTOT                        8.247           0.211            1.413         -1.262            8.560         -1.316            2.442           4.973
                           (7.31)        (10.58)            (2.13)          (4.08)          (5.26)          (6.36)          (4.44)          (5.56)
WTO                       -6.302          -3.768           -1.435      -6.695***           -4.515      -7.301***           -2.392      -8.896***
                           (4.36)          (6.07)           (1.48)          (1.20)          (3.64)          (1.95)          (2.75)          (2.47)
WTO*Trend                   0.207           0.111            0.051      0.199***             0.149      0.234***             0.082      0.306***
                           (0.15)          (0.21)           (0.05)          (0.04)          (0.12)          (0.06)          (0.09)          (0.08)
Trend                     0.088*            0.058            0.004      0.283***             0.057         0.119*            0.006     -0.286***
                           (0.04)          (0.07)           (0.03)          (0.05)          (0.03)          (0.06)          (0.05)          (0.08)
Q1                          0.441           0.573          -0.352        1.764**             0.128          0.673          -0.109          -0.572
                           (0.62)          (0.78)           (0.37)          (0.61)          (0.46)          (0.69)          (0.56)          (0.82)
Q2                        -0.489          -0.388           -0.090          -0.139         -0.468*            0.020         -0.142       -1.103**
                           (0.30)          (0.48)           (0.11)          (0.25)          (0.25)          (0.28)          (0.16)          (0.48)
Q3                          0.691           1.278          -0.136       2.257***             0.313         1.263*          -0.001            0.202
                           (0.71)          (0.87)           (0.32)          (0.49)          (0.56)          (0.67)          (0.52)          (0.78)
Constant                    9.666         11.066           -1.637      75.216***             4.286      28.751**           -2.780     -78.689***
                         (11.64)         (12.97)            (6.97)        (17.47)           (9.84)        (11.42)         (15.24)         (20.38)

RMSE                         0.05             0.08            0.02            0.05           0.04            0.05             0.04            0.06
Obs.                           30               30              30              30             30               30              30              30
Leads-lags                   1, 1            1, 1            1, 1            1, 1           1, 1             1, 1            1, 1            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO aggregate and disaggregated import data. The pair of numbers
given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the
dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of
significance, respectively.
                                                                        32
References

Ahearne, Alan, John Fernald, Prakash Lougani, and John Schindler, 2003, “China and Emerging
Asia: Comrades or Competitors?” International Finance Discussion Paper No. 789,
(Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve Board).

Ahmed, Shaghil, 2009, “Are Chinese Exports Sensitive to Changes in the Exchange Rate?”
International Finance Discussion Paper No. 987 (Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve Board,
December).

Aziz, Jahangir and Xiangming Li, 2008, “China’s Changing Trade Elasticities,” China and the
World Economy 16(3): 1 – 21.

Bai, Chong-En Bai, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Qingyi Qian, 2006, “Returns to Capital in China,”
Brookings Papers in Economic Activity 2006(2).

Berman, Nicolas, Philippe Martin and Thierry Mayer, forthcoming, “How Do Different
Exporters React to Exchange Rate Changes?” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Bussiere, Matthieu, Giovanni Callegari, Fabio Ghironi, Giulia Sestiere, and Norihiko Yamano,
2011, “Estimating Trade Elasticities: Demand Composition and the Trade Collapse of 2008-09,”
mimeo.

Cerra, Valerie, and Anuradha, Dayal-Gulati, 1999, “China's Trade Flows-Changing Price
Sensitivies and the Reform Process,” IMF Working Paper No. 99/01.

Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena, 2000, “An Empirical Analysis of China's Export
Behavior,” IMF Working Paper No. 02/200.

Cheung, Yin-Wong, 2005, “An Analysis of Hong Kong Export Performance,” Pacific Economic
Review 10(3): 323-340.

Cheung, Yin-Wong and Lai, Kon S, 1993, “Finite-Sample Sizes of Johansen's Likelihood Ratio
Tests for Cointegration,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 55, 313-328.

Cheung, Yin-Wong and Lai, Kon S, 1995, "Lag Order and Critical Values of the Augmented
Dickey-Fuller Test," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13(3), 277-80.

Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie Chinn and Eiji Fujii, 2010, “China’s Current Account and
Exchange Rate,” China's Growing Role in World Trade, edited by R. Feenstra and S.-J. Wei
(U.Chicago Press for NBER).

Chinn, Menzie, 2010, "Supply Capacity, Vertical Specialization and Trade Costs: The
Implications for Aggregate U.S. Trade Flow Equations," Mimeo.




                                             33
Chinn, Menzie, 2006, “A Primer on Real Effective Exchange Rates: Determinants,
Overvaluation, Trade Flows and Competitive Devaluations,” Open Economies Review 17(1)
(January): 115-143.

Council of Economic Advisers, 2009, Economic Report of President (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office).

Dekle, Robert, Hyeok Jeong and Heajin Ryoo, 2009, “A Re-Examination of the Exchange Rate
Disconnect Puzzle: Evidence from Firm Level Data,” mimeo.

Devereux, Michael B., and Hans Genberg (2007), “Currency Appreciation and Current Account
Adjustment,” Journal of International Money and Finance 26 (4): 570–86.

Du, Qingyuan and Shang-Jin Wei (2010), “A Sexually Unbalanced Model of Current Account
Imbalances,” NBER Working Paper No. 16000.

Fernald, John, Hali Edison, and Prakash Loungani, 1999, “Was China the First Domino?
Assessing Links between China and Other Asian Economies,” Journal of International Money
and Finance 18 (4): 515-535.

Fung, K.C. and Lawrence J. Lau, 2001, “New Estimates of the United States–China Bilateral
Trade Balances,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 15: 102-130.

Garcia-Herrero, Alicia and Tuuli Koivu, 2007, “Can the Chinese Trade Surplus Be Reduced
through Exchange Rate Policy?” BOFIT Discussion Papers No. 2007-6 (Helsinki: Bank of
Finland, March).

Gaulier, Guillaume, Françoise Lemoine and Deniz Ünal, 2006, “China’s Emergence and the
Reorganization of Trade Flows in Asia,” CEPII Working Paper No. 2006-05 (Paris: CEPII,
March).

Goldstein, Morris, 2004, “China and the Renminbi Exchange Rate,” in C. Fred Bergsten and
John Williamson (editors), Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against What? Special Report 17
(Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, November), pp. 197-230.

Goldstein, Morris, and Mohsin Khan, 1985, Income and Price Effects in Foreign Trade, in R.
Jones and P. Kenen (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 2, (Amsterdam:
Elsevier).

Helkie, William L., and Peter Hooper, 1988, “An Empirical Analysis of the External Deficit,
1980-86,” in Ralph C. Bryant, Gerald Holtham, and Peter Hooper (eds.), External Deficits and
The Dollar, The Pit, and the Pendulum (Washington: Brookings Institution).

IMF, 2006 “People’s Republic of China: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report,” IMF
Country Report No. 06/394 (Washington, D.C.: IMF, October).



                                              34
Inder, Brett, 1993, “Estimating long-run relationships in economics: A comparison of different
approaches,” Journal of Econometrics 57, 53-68.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2008, “How Much of Chinese Exports is
Really Made in China? Assessing Domestic Value-Added When Processing Trade is Pervasive,”
NBER Working Paper No. 14109.

Kwack, Sung Yeung, Choong Y. Ahn, Young S. Lee, Doo Y. Yang, 2007, “Consistent Estimates
of World Trade Elasticities and an Application to the Effects of Chinese Yuan (RMB)
Appreciation,” Journal of Asian Economics 18: 314–330.

Mann, Catherine and Plück, Katerina, 2007, “The US Trade Deficit: A Disaggregated
Perspective,” in R. Clarida (ed.), G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment
(U. Chicago Press). Also Institute for International Economics Working No. 05-11, (Washington,
D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 2005).

Marquez, Jaime and John W. Schindler, 2007, “Exchange-Rate Effects on China’s Trade,”
Review of International Economics 15(5), 837–853.

Montalvo, Jose G., 1995, “Comparing cointegrating regression estimators: Some additional
Monte Carlo results,” Economics Letters 48(3-4), 229-234.

O’Neill, Jim and Dominic Wilson, 2003, “How China Can Help the World,” Goldman Sachs
Global Economics Paper No. 97 (Sept. 17).

Osterwald-Lenum, Michael, 1992, “A Note with Quantiles of the Asymptotic Distribution of the
Maximum Likelihood Cointegration Rank Test Statistics,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics 54, 461-472.

Parsley, David and Helen Popper, 2010, “Understanding Real Exchange Rate Movements with
Trade in Intermediate Products,” Pacific Economic Review 15(2), 171-188

Perron, Pierre. and Timothy J. Vogelsang, 1992, “Nonstationarity and level shifts with an
application to purchasing power parity,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 10, 301–
320.

Phillips, Peter and Bruce Hansen, 1990, “Statistical inference in instrumental variables
regression with I(1) processes,” Review of Economic Studies 57, 99-125.

Schindler, John W. and Dustin H. Beckett, 2005, “Adjusting Chinese Bilateral Trade Data: How
Big is China's Trade Surplus,” International Finance Discussion Paper No 2005-831
(Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve Board, April)

Spatafora, Nikola and Irina Tytell, 2009, “Commodity Terms of Trade: The History of Booms
and Busts,” IMF Working Papers No. 09/205.


                                                35
Stock, James, and Watson, Mark, 1993, “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrated Vectors in Higher
Order Integrated Systems,” Econometrica 61: 783-820.

Thorbecke, Willem, 2006, “How Would an Appreciation of the Renminbi Affect the US Trade
Deficit with China?” BE Press Macro Journal 6(3): Article 3.

Thorbecke, Willem and Hanjiang Zhang, 2009, “The Effect of Exchange Rate Changes on
China's Labour-Intensive Manufacturing Exports,” Pacific Economic Review 14(3), 398–409.

Thorbecke, Willem and Gordon Smith, forthcoming, “How Would an Appreciation of the RMB
and Other East Asian Currencies Affect China’s Exports?” Review of International Economics.

Wang, Jiao and Andy G. Ji, 2006, “Exchange Rate Sensitivity of China’s Bilateral Trade Flows,”
BOFIT Discussion Papers No. 2006-19 (Helsinki: Bank of Finland, December).

Wang, Tao, 2004, “Exchange Rate Dynamics,” in Eswar Prasad (editor), China’s Growth and
Integration into the World Economy, Occasional Paper No. 232 (Washington, D.C.: IMF), pp.
21-28.

Wang Zhi and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, "What Accounts for the Rising Sophistication of China's
Exports?" China's Growing Role in World Trade, edited by Shang-Jin Wei and Rob Feenstra,
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 63-104.

Wei, Shang-Jin and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011. “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from
Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 119(3), 511 -
564.




                                              36
Table 1: Aggregate exports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index
                                            [1]                             [2]                 [3]
GDP                                   1.433***                       1.502***            5.648***
                                         (0.51)                         (0.52)               (0.61)
REER                                 -1.575***                      -1.584***           -0.906***
                                         (0.17)                         (0.17)               (0.23)
CRgrw                                                                    0.300              -0.159
                                                                        (0.51)               (0.38)
WTO                                                                                     -0.642***
                                                                                             (0.08)
WTO*Trend                                                                                0.024***
                                                                                             (0.00)
Trend                                 0.040***                       0.040***               -0.005
                                         (0.00)                         (0.00)               (0.01)
Q1                                   -0.213***                      -0.212***           -0.211***
                                          (0.03)                         (0.03)              (0.02)
Q2                                   -0.081***                       -0.075**           -0.080***
                                          (0.03)                         (0.03)              (0.02)
Q3                                       -0.021                         -0.017              -0.028
                                          (0.03)                         (0.03)              (0.02)
Constant                             17.153***                      17.175***           14.277***
                                          (0.77)                         (0.80)              (1.06)

RSME                                       0.08                           0.08                0.06
Obs.                                         63                             63                  64
Leads-lags                                  1, 2                           1, 2                1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with the aggregate export data. The
pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of
lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS regression. Robust
errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and
10% level of significance, respectively.




                                                     37
Table 2: Aggregate imports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit value index
                                                     [1]                                    [2]
GDP                                                3.184**                           -3.005**
                                                     (1.51)                              (1.14)
REER                                             -2.034***                            1.111**
                                                     (0.29)                              (0.48)
Export                                                                               0.980***
                                                                                         (0.17)
Trend                                                -0.033                          0.068***
                                                      (0.04)                             (0.02)
Q1                                                   -0.129                             -0.132
                                                      (0.50)                             (0.42)
Q2                                                     0.144                           -0.415*
                                                      (0.18)                             (0.23)
Q3                                                     0.371                            -0.095
                                                      (0.39)                             (0.34)
Constant                                             -4.163                          18.640**
                                                    (11.45)                              (6.51)

RMSE                                              0.06                           0.04
Obs.                                                33                             33
Leads-lags                                         1, 1                        1, 1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO aggregate
import data. The pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads
and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS
regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *”
indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.




                                                     38
Table 3: Exports of ordinary and processing trade, normalized by by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index
                             [1]              [2]              [3]           [4]               [5]              [6]
                      Ordinary         Ordinary        Ordinary       Processing       Processing       Processing
GDP                       0.422            0.478       4.809***        3.592***         3.640***         6.878***
                         (0.78)           (0.81)           (0.73)         (0.61)           (0.61)            (0.77)
REER                 -1.864***        -1.869***       -1.319***       -1.199***        -1.203***        -0.875***
                         (0.25)           (0.25)           (0.25)         (0.22)           (0.23)            (0.23)
CRgrw                                      0.226          -0.055                            0.195           -0.084
                                          (0.62)           (0.53)                          (0.55)            (0.44)
WTO                                                   -0.764***                                         -0.598***
                                                           (0.10)                                            (0.13)
WTO*Trend                                              0.027***                                          0.022***
                                                           (0.00)                                            (0.00)
Trend                 0.047***        0.047***              0.000       0.024***        0.024***           -0.014*
                          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.01)
Q1                   -0.176***       -0.175***        -0.185***        -0.226***       -0.225***        -0.218***
                          (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.02)
Q2                       -0.036          -0.031           -0.033       -0.117***       -0.113***        -0.111***
                          (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.02)
Q3                         0.003           0.006          -0.006           -0.041          -0.038           -0.018
                          (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.02)
Constant             17.660***       17.671***        15.380***        14.786***       14.795***        13.510***
                          (1.17)          (1.19)           (1.17)           (1.03)          (1.05)           (1.03)

RMSE                     0.11           0.11          0.08            0.08          0.08                       0.06
Obs.                       64             64            64              64            64                         63
Leads-lags               1, 1            1, 1          1, 1           1, 1          1, 1                        1, 2
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with the ordinary and processing
export data. The pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads
and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS
regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***, **, *”
indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.
.




                                                      39
Table 4: Imports of ordinary and processing trade, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit value
index
                                     [1]                    [2]                   [3]                       [4]
                              Ordinary               Ordinary              Processing             Processing
GDP                               2.960                -0.101               3.591***                -2.259**
                                 (2.02)                 (2.37)                 (1.13)                   (0.80)
REER                          -0.962**                   0.376             -3.101***                  0.787*
                                 (0.41)                 (0.89)                 (0.26)                   (0.45)
Export                                                   0.255                                     1.264***
                                                        (0.33)                                          (0.14)
Trend                           -0.026                   0.033                -0.051*                0.033**
                                 (0.05)                 (0.05)                  (0.03)                  (0.02)
Q1                                0.040                -0.318                  -0.447                  -0.222
                                 (0.68)                 (0.61)                  (0.41)                  (0.19)
Q2                                0.173               -0.661*                    0.060                   0.013
                                 (0.27)                 (0.36)                  (0.16)                  (0.11)
Q3                                0.603                  0.206                   0.055                 -0.064
                                 (0.54)                 (0.69)                  (0.37)                  (0.14)
Constant                        -8.300                   7.128                 -2.950              10.998**
                               (15.31)                (13.20)                   (8.58)                  (3.88)

RMSE                          0.09                  0.07                 0.06              0.02
Obs.                            33                    33                   33                33
Leads-lags                     1, 1               1, 1, 1                 1, 1           1, 1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO ordinary and
processing import data. The pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the
number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the
dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates.
“***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.




                                                      40
Table 5: Primary and manufactured products exports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index
                            [1]              [2]             [3]            [4]              [5]             [6]
                      Primary         Primary         Primary           Manuf.          Manuf.          Manuf.
GDP                     -0.603          -0.518          1.579*        2.151***        2.183***        5.938***
                         (0.44)          (0.47)          (0.80)          (0.63)          (0.64)           (0.61)
REER                -1.143***       -1.152***       -0.728***        -1.492***       -1.496***       -0.918***
                         (0.18)          (0.18)          (0.23)          (0.21)          (0.22)           (0.24)
CRgrw                                     0.343           0.050                           0.130          -0.214
                                        (0.44)           (0.38)                          (0.55)           (0.42)
WTO                                                 -0.321***                                        -0.631***
                                                         (0.12)                                           (0.09)
WTO*Trend                                            0.014***                                         0.024***
                                                         (0.00)                                           (0.00)
Trend                0.032***        0.032***             0.007       0.038***        0.037***           -0.005
                        (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.01)
Q1                  -0.224***       -0.222***       -0.226***        -0.201***       -0.200***       -0.208***
                        (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.02)
Q2                  -0.116***       -0.110***       -0.112***         -0.077**        -0.075**       -0.077***
                        (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.02)
Q3                  -0.126***       -0.122***       -0.126***            -0.010          -0.008          -0.018
                        (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.02)           (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.02)
Constant            13.535***       13.551***       11.733***        16.589***       16.596***       14.155***
                        (0.83)          (0.85)           (1.07)           (0.99)          (1.02)          (1.11)

RMSE                    0.08            0.08          0.07           0.09           0.09                     0.06
Obs.                      64              64            64             64             64                       64
Leads-lags               1, 1            1, 1          1, 1           1, 1          1, 1                      1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with export data on primary and
manufactured goods. The pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number
of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in the
dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates.
“***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.




                                                    41
Table 6: Primary and manufactured products imports, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit
value index
                                   [1]                    [2]                  [3]                     [4]
                             Primary               Primary                 Manuf.                Manuf.
GDP                             3.933                -0.746               2.889**                 -1.057
                               (2.74)                 (1.69)                (1.08)                 (0.99)
REER                       -2.210***                 -0.349             -2.102***                 -0.001
                               (0.44)                 (0.57)                (0.24)                 (0.44)
Export                                               1.431*                                    0.600***
                                                      (0.71)                                       (0.15)
Trend                         -0.032                   0.041                -0.031                  0.033
                               (0.07)                 (0.04)                 (0.03)                (0.02)
Q1                              0.042                -0.322                 -0.273                -0.262
                               (0.84)                 (0.77)                 (0.42)                (0.37)
Q2                              0.227                -0.302                   0.054              -0.367*
                               (0.35)                 (0.30)                 (0.14)                (0.20)
Q3                              0.896                  0.090                  0.085               -0.227
                               (0.74)                 (0.74)                 (0.32)                (0.28)
Constant                     -11.119                   4.361                -1.615             12.830**
                             (20.83)                (13.35)                  (8.24)                (5.45)

RMSE                          0.11                 0.09                 0.05             0.03
Obs.                            33                   33                   33               33
Leads-lags                     1, 1              1, 1, 1                 1, 1          1, 1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO import data on
primary and manufactured goods. The pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are
the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced cointegrated variables used in
the dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates.
“***, **, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.




                                                    42
Table 7: Exports of SOE, FIE, and Private firms, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export unit value index
                              [1]              [2]              [3]           [4]              [5]                 [6]          [7]           [8]             [9]
                            SOE              SOE              SOE            FIE              FIE                 FIE         Priv.         Priv.           Priv.
GDP                     2.384***        2.444***        3.813***        5.060***        5.176***           7.355***       7.155***      7.465***           2.268
                           (0.57)          (0.60)           (0.74)         (0.72)          (0.75)              (0.84)        (1.26)        (1.28)         (1.66)
REER                   -0.815***       -0.822***        -0.541**       -1.304***       -1.317***             -0.673*     -7.518***     -7.555***     -5.768***
                           (0.20)          (0.21)           (0.23)         (0.28)          (0.28)              (0.37)        (0.55)        (0.56)         (0.58)
CRgrw                                       0.252            0.071                          0.486               0.010                      1.295         -0.753
                                           (0.47)           (0.48)                         (0.64)              (0.61)                      (1.84)         (0.99)
WTO                                                     -0.203**                                             -0.260*                                  1.691***
                                                            (0.10)                                             (0.13)                                     (0.27)
WTO*Trend                                               0.008***                                           0.014***                                  -0.029***
                                                            (0.00)                                             (0.00)                                     (0.01)
Trend                        0.005           0.005        -0.010*       0.025***        0.024***              -0.002      0.107***      0.105***      0.136***
                            (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)             (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)
Q1                     -0.178***       -0.177***       -0.178***       -0.215***       -0.213***          -0.214***          -0.129        -0.123        -0.094
                            (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)             (0.03)         (0.09)        (0.09)        (0.06)
Q2                         -0.037          -0.032          -0.033      -0.111***       -0.102***          -0.103***          -0.009          0.017         0.003
                            (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.04)             (0.03)         (0.10)        (0.10)        (0.06)
Q3                           0.020          0.024           0.021          -0.035          -0.028             -0.032          0.030         0.049          0.094
                            (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)             (0.03)         (0.09)        (0.10)        (0.06)
Constant               13.488***       13.505***       12.284***       14.803***       14.836***          12.005***      37.754***     37.841***     29.521***
                            (0.95)          (0.98)          (1.10)          (1.34)          (1.32)             (1.70)         (2.56)        (2.60)        (2.64)

RMSE                      0.07           0.07         0.07           0.09       0.09          0.08          0.26           0.26                             0.17
Obs.                        62             62           62             62         62            62            62             62                               62
Leads-lags                 1, 1           1, 1         1, 1           1, 1       1, 1          1, 1          1, 1           1, 1                            1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with the post-WTO data on exports via SOEs, FIEs, and private firms. The
pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced
cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***,
**, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.


                                                                            43
Table 8: Imports of SOE, FIE, and Private firms, normalized by the Hong Kong re‐export to China unit value index
                                  [1]                     [2]                 [3]                     [4]                  [5]         [6]
                                SOE                     SOE                  FIE                     FIE                 Priv.       Priv.
GDP                           4.032*               -4.032*               3.412**               -1.760*                  0.403      -2.779
                               (2.19)                 (1.95)               (1.31)                 (0.96)               (1.66)       (2.51)
REER                        -0.947**               0.976**             -2.730***                   0.640           -3.096***       -0.056
                               (0.38)                 (0.42)               (0.25)                 (0.55)               (0.49)       (1.25)
Export                                             0.969**                                     0.952**                           0.589**
                                                      (0.36)                                      (0.15)                            (0.24)
Trend                         -0.067               0.111**                 -0.037               0.039*                 0.079*      0.099*
                               (0.05)                 (0.04)                (0.03)                (0.02)                (0.04)      (0.05)
Q1                            -0.093                 -0.486                -0.266                -0.069                  0.461     -0.206
                               (0.66)                 (0.53)                (0.42)                (0.28)                (0.82)      (1.20)
Q2                              0.211              -0.444*                   0.091               -0.044                  0.024     -0.889
                               (0.26)                 (0.22)                (0.16)                (0.13)                (0.33)      (0.56)
Q3                              0.591                  0.114                 0.189               -0.030                  0.735     -0.046
                               (0.51)                 (0.56)                (0.35)                (0.21)                (0.75)      (0.90)
Constant                     -16.858              27.559**                 -3.221              11.255*                19.164      25.239
                             (16.46)                (11.04)               (10.00)                 (5.36)              (13.20)     (15.53)

RMSE                         0.08                 0.05               0.06             0.03              0.11                  0.10
Obs.                           33                   33                 33               33                33                    33
Leads-lags                    1, 1              1, 1, 1               1, 1          1, 1, 1              1, 1              1, 1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the post-WTO data on imports via SOEs, FIEs, and private firms. The
pair of numbers given in the row labeled “Leads-lags” are the number of leads and the number of lags of the first-differenced
cointegrated variables used in the dynamic OLS regression. Robust errors are in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. “***,
**, *” indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% level of significance, respectively.




                                                                            44
Table 9: Disaggregated imports, with private consumption and fixed asset investments activity variables
                               [1]               [2]             [3]               [4]              [5]            [6]           [7]             [8]
                      Aggregate          Ordinary             Proc.         Primary           Manuf.             SOE            FIE            Priv.
Consumption             0.847**               1.304           0.436          -0.925*           -0.109           0.275      1.333*           -1.298
                           (0.40)            (0.79)          (0.32)            (0.45)           (0.16)         (0.61)        (0.72)          (0.90)
Fixed asset inv.          0.836*          1.663**         1.186***          1.054**            -0.214        1.438*       1.488**         2.149**
                           (0.47)            (0.74)          (0.41)            (0.40)           (0.20)         (0.78)        (0.67)          (1.00)
REER                  -1.561***             -0.647            0.665           1.814*       -1.501***            1.177       -0.660       7.155***
                           (0.52)            (1.54)          (0.56)            (1.01)           (0.34)         (0.78)        (0.52)          (1.33)
Export                  0.348**             -0.360        1.077***            0.898*             0.174          0.312    0.823***        1.676***
                           (0.16)            (0.31)          (0.11)            (0.50)           (0.11)         (0.24)        (0.13)          (0.18)
WTO                         0.366         1.857**          0.525**              0.330            0.215     1.548***           0.450     -3.363***
                           (0.31)            (0.69)          (0.22)            (0.36)           (0.17)         (0.51)        (0.31)          (1.05)
WTO*Trend                 -0.012        -0.053***         -0.016**            -0.012           -0.003     -0.043***         -0.017       0.093***
                           (0.01)            (0.02)          (0.01)            (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.02)        (0.01)          (0.03)
Trend                  0.026***          0.077***        -0.024***              0.014       0.039***        0.026**         -0.006      -0.240***
                           (0.01)            (0.02)          (0.01)            (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.03)
Q1                          0.042           -0.001            0.105             0.271            0.036        -0.030       0.220*           -0.008
                           (0.21)            (0.26)          (0.11)            (0.18)           (0.11)         (0.19)        (0.13)          (0.27)
Q2                        -0.081              0.212           0.090             0.213            0.055          0.043         0.140           0.099
                           (0.15)            (0.23)          (0.14)            (0.18)           (0.08)         (0.17)        (0.15)          (0.24)
Q3                          0.031             0.198           0.098        0.460***           0.138*            0.148      0.268*             0.474
                           (0.11)            (0.21)          (0.09)            (0.14)           (0.08)         (0.16)        (0.14)          (0.33)
Constant              15.245***          17.576**            -1.831           -6.828       14.377***            2.781    7.559***      -29.946***
                           (3.30)            (7.24)          (2.90)            (7.71)           (2.19)         (4.08)        (2.55)          (7.29)

RMSE                        0.05              0.08             0.05           0.11             0.04          0.04           0.05               0.08
Obs.                          59                59               59             59               65            59             57                 59
Leads-lags             1, 4, 1, 1        1, 2, 4, 1       1, 4, 1, 3     1, 1, 2, 4       1, 1, 1, 1    1, 2, 3, 1     2, 4, 1, 2         1, 1, 1, 2
 Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with GDP replaced by its two components – consumption and fixed asset
investment.


                                                                           45
Table 10: Disaggregated imports, with China’s relative productivity variable.
                              [1]              [2]                [3]               [4]           [5]            [6]              [7]             [8]
                     Aggregate          Ordinary               Proc.         Primary        Manuf.             SOE               FIE            Priv.
GDP                        4.099            1.563              4.648             6.723         1.701        -0.504             3.834       11.581**
                          (2.39)           (8.31)             (2.62)            (3.98)        (1.45)         (2.84)           (2.21)           (4.47)
REER                   2.785**              0.586              0.884         4.973**       1.320**       2.530***              1.518       5.535***
                          (1.13)           (1.07)             (1.21)            (1.86)        (0.58)         (0.64)           (1.01)           (1.24)
Export                1.472***          1.820**            0.857**           1.822**      1.323***       1.760***         1.137***         1.262***
                          (0.36)           (0.65)             (0.37)            (0.59)        (0.18)         (0.37)           (0.26)           (0.17)
Prod                  -6.744**            -2.091           -4.812*        -12.606***      -3.021**      -5.637***         -4.472**       -12.651***
                          (2.28)           (5.05)             (2.42)            (3.53)        (1.09)         (1.58)           (1.99)           (2.57)
Trend                    -0.009             0.010            -0.032              0.012       -0.013       0.113**            -0.027           -0.106
                          (0.03)           (0.12)             (0.04)            (0.07)        (0.02)         (0.05)           (0.03)           (0.07)
gfc08                    -0.849           34.195             -1.195              1.446         8.153          7.133            8.584        67.008*
                        (28.70)          (50.23)            (28.94)           (45.72)       (12.87)        (16.85)          (19.45)          (31.10)
gfc08*REER               -0.008           -8.217               0.221           -0.929        -2.101         -3.168           -1.635        -12.582*
                         (5.45)            (9.38)            (5.38)            (9.47)         (2.44)         (3.53)           (3.66)           (5.98)
gfc08*Export               0.083            0.416              0.026            0.246          0.156      0.639**            -0.050           -0.519
                         (0.43)            (0.62)            (0.48)            (0.45)         (0.24)         (0.25)           (0.39)           (0.52)
Q1                         0.091          -0.372               0.133           -0.175          0.038        -0.122             0.111          -0.468
                         (0.39)            (0.65)             (0.43)            (0.63)        (0.21)         (0.41)           (0.36)           (0.74)
Q2                       -0.308           -0.166             -0.261            -0.329        -0.025         -0.152             0.049          -0.463
                         (0.31)            (0.36)             (0.29)            (0.70)        (0.09)         (0.25)           (0.16)           (0.77)
Q3                         0.063          -0.103               0.098             0.149         0.077          0.284            0.094          -0.725
                         (0.36)            (0.75)             (0.41)            (0.57)        (0.20)         (0.41)           (0.32)           (0.92)
Constant              -76.17**            -29.88             -56.59        -133.24**        -34.37*         -41.10          -55.02*      -163.95***
                        (29.96)          (83.65)            (32.39)           (43.30)       (16.14)        (25.30)          (28.69)          (43.07)

RMSE                       0.04             0.09             0.04             0.07              0.02             0.04           0.04            0.07
Obs.                         35               35               35               35                35               35             35              35
Leads-lags            1, 1, 1, 1       1, 1, 1, 1       1, 1, 1, 1       1, 1, 1, 1        1, 1, 1, 1       1, 1, 1, 1     1, 1, 1, 1      1, 1, 1, 1
Note: The table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with a relative productivity variable and the Great Recession dummy and its
interactions. The one lead and one lag DOLS specification.
                                                                                46
 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50



 0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40



 0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30



   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
        Jan‐93
                 Oct‐93
                          Jul‐94
                                   Apr‐95
                                            Jan‐96
                                                     Oct‐96
                                                              Jul‐97
                                                                        Apr‐98
                                                                                  Jan‐99
                                                                                            Oct‐99
                                                                                                      Jul‐00
                                                                                                                 Apr‐01
                                                                                                                            Jan‐02
                                                                                                                                       Oct‐02
                                                                                                                                                  Jul‐03
                                                                                                                                                              Apr‐04
                                                                                                                                                                       Jan‐05
                                                                                                                                                                                Oct‐05
                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr‐10
 ‐0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10



 ‐0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0



 ‐0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‐10

                             Trade weighted real CNY (Log value, left axis)                                                                                                     Trade Balance (right axis)

Figure 1: The Log real value of RMB (left scale) and Chinese trade balance, in billions
USD per month (right scale)


                                                      China's Imports and Exports
 180

 160

 140

 120

 100

  80

  60

  40

  20

   0
        Jan‐93
                 Oct‐93


                                   Apr‐95
                                            Jan‐96
                                                     Oct‐96


                                                                         Apr‐98
                                                                                   Jan‐99
                                                                                             Oct‐99


                                                                                                                   Apr‐01
                                                                                                                              Jan‐02
                                                                                                                                         Oct‐02


                                                                                                                                                                 Apr‐04
                                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐05
                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct‐05


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oct‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Apr‐10
                          Jul‐94




                                                               Jul‐97




                                                                                                        Jul‐00




                                                                                                                                                     Jul‐03




                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul‐09




                                                                                                 Exports                                    Imports

Figure 2: Aggregate Imports and Exports (Billion USD)

                                                                                                                                     47
                            China's Ordinary and Processing Exports
 80

 70

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

  0
      Jan‐93
               Oct‐93
                        Jul‐94
                                 Apr‐95
                                          Jan‐96
                                                   Oct‐96
                                                            Jul‐97
                                                                     Apr‐98
                                                                              Jan‐99
                                                                                       Oct‐99
                                                                                                Jul‐00
                                                                                                         Apr‐01
                                                                                                                  Jan‐02
                                                                                                                           Oct‐02
                                                                                                                                    Jul‐03
                                                                                                                                             Apr‐04
                                                                                                                                                      Jan‐05
                                                                                                                                                               Oct‐05
                                                                                                                                                                        Jul‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr‐10
                                                            Exports: Ordinary Trade                                                    Export: Processing

Figure 3: Exports by customs classification (Billion USD)


                            China's Ordinary and Processing Imports
 90

 80

 70

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

  0
      Jan‐93
               Oct‐93
                        Jul‐94
                                 Apr‐95
                                          Jan‐96
                                                   Oct‐96
                                                            Jul‐97
                                                                     Apr‐98
                                                                              Jan‐99
                                                                                       Oct‐99
                                                                                                Jul‐00
                                                                                                         Apr‐01
                                                                                                                  Jan‐02
                                                                                                                           Oct‐02
                                                                                                                                    Jul‐03
                                                                                                                                             Apr‐04
                                                                                                                                                      Jan‐05
                                                                                                                                                               Oct‐05
                                                                                                                                                                        Jul‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr‐10




                                                            Imports: Ordinary Trade                                                    Imports: Processing

Figure 4: Imports by customs classification (Billion USD)



                                                                                                                           48
                  China's Primary Products and Manufactures
                                    Exports
 160

 140

 120

 100

  80

  60

  40

  20

   0
                Oct‐93


                                  Apr‐95


                                                    Oct‐96


                                                                      Apr‐98


                                                                                        Oct‐99


                                                                                                          Apr‐01


                                                                                                                            Oct‐02


                                                                                                                                              Apr‐04


                                                                                                                                                                Oct‐05


                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr‐07


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr‐10
       Jan‐93


                         Jul‐94


                                           Jan‐96


                                                             Jul‐97


                                                                               Jan‐99


                                                                                                 Jul‐00


                                                                                                                   Jan‐02


                                                                                                                                     Jul‐03


                                                                                                                                                       Jan‐05


                                                                                                                                                                         Jul‐06


                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul‐09
                                                    Exports: Primary Products                                                        Exports: Manufactures

Figure 5: Exports by product type (Billion USD)


                  China's Primary Products and Manufactures
                                    Imports
 120

 100

  80

  60

  40

  20

   0
                Oct‐93


                                  Apr‐95


                                                    Oct‐96


                                                                      Apr‐98


                                                                                        Oct‐99


                                                                                                          Apr‐01
       Jan‐93


                         Jul‐94




                                                                                                                            Oct‐02


                                                                                                                                              Apr‐04
                                           Jan‐96


                                                             Jul‐97




                                                                                                                                                                Oct‐05


                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr‐07
                                                                               Jan‐99


                                                                                                 Jul‐00




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr‐10
                                                                                                                   Jan‐02


                                                                                                                                     Jul‐03


                                                                                                                                                       Jan‐05


                                                                                                                                                                         Jul‐06


                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul‐09




                                                    Imports: Primary Products                                                        Imports: Manufactures

Figure 6: Imports by product type (Billion USD)


                                                                                                                        49
                                                    China's Exports By Firm Type
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
      Jan‐93
               Oct‐93


                                 Apr‐95
                                          Jan‐96
                                                   Oct‐96


                                                                     Apr‐98
                                                                              Jan‐99
                                                                                       Oct‐99


                                                                                                         Apr‐01
                                                                                                                  Jan‐02
                                                                                                                           Oct‐02


                                                                                                                                             Apr‐04
                                                                                                                                                      Jan‐05
                                                                                                                                                               Oct‐05


                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr‐10
                        Jul‐94




                                                            Jul‐97




                                                                                                Jul‐00




                                                                                                                                    Jul‐03




                                                                                                                                                                        Jul‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul‐09
                                                                      Exports: State Owned Enterprises
                                                                      Exports: Foreign Invested Enterprises (FIE)
                                                                      Exports: Private firms

Figure 7: Exports by firm type (Billion USD)


                                                   China's Imports By Firm Type
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
               Oct‐93




                                                   Oct‐96




                                                                                       Oct‐99
      Jan‐93


                        Jul‐94
                                 Apr‐95




                                                                                                                           Oct‐02
                                          Jan‐96


                                                            Jul‐97
                                                                     Apr‐98




                                                                                                                                                               Oct‐05
                                                                              Jan‐99


                                                                                                Jul‐00
                                                                                                         Apr‐01




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct‐08
                                                                                                                  Jan‐02


                                                                                                                                    Jul‐03
                                                                                                                                             Apr‐04
                                                                                                                                                      Jan‐05


                                                                                                                                                                        Jul‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr‐10




                                                                      Imports: State Owned Enterprises (SOE)
                                                                      Imports: Foreign Invested Enterprises (FIE)
                                                                      Imports: Private firms

Figure 8: Imports by firm type (Billion USD)

                                                                                                                           50
                                     The Share of Exports by Firm Type
 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
        Jan‐95
                 Sep‐95
                          May‐96
                                   Jan‐97
                                            Sep‐97
                                                     May‐98
                                                              Jan‐99
                                                                       Sep‐99
                                                                                May‐00
                                                                                         Jan‐01
                                                                                                  Sep‐01
                                                                                                           May‐02
                                                                                                                    Jan‐03
                                                                                                                             Sep‐03
                                                                                                                                      May‐04
                                                                                                                                               Jan‐05
                                                                                                                                                        Sep‐05
                                                                                                                                                                 May‐06
                                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                   Sep‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                            May‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       May‐10
            Exports: State Owned Enterprises                                                                        Exports: Foreign Invested Enterprises (FIE)
            Exports: Private firms

Figure 9: Shares of exports, by firm type


                                     The Share of Imports by Firm Type
 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
                          May‐96



                                                     May‐98



                                                                                May‐00
        Jan‐95
                 Sep‐95




                                                                                                           May‐02
                                   Jan‐97
                                            Sep‐97




                                                                                                                                      May‐04
                                                              Jan‐99
                                                                       Sep‐99




                                                                                                                                                                 May‐06
                                                                                         Jan‐01
                                                                                                  Sep‐01




                                                                                                                                                                                            May‐08
                                                                                                                    Jan‐03
                                                                                                                             Sep‐03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       May‐10
                                                                                                                                               Jan‐05
                                                                                                                                                        Sep‐05


                                                                                                                                                                          Jan‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                   Sep‐07


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep‐09




           Imports: State Owned Enterprises (SOE)                                                                   Imports: Foreign Invested Enterprises (FIE)
           Imports: Private firms

Figure 10: Shares of imports, by firm type


                                                                                                                       51
