                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INTERNATIONAL CONSUMPTION RISK IS SHARED AFTER ALL:
                            AN ASSET RETURN VIEW

                                            Karen K. Lewis
                                             Edith X. Liu

                                         Working Paper 17872
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17872


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2012




We thank seminar participants at the Aarhus University Globalization Conference, Arizona State University,
Cornell University, the Dallas Federal Reserve Bank, the Econometric Society, INSEAD, Keio University,
the NBER Summer Institute, the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank, the University of North Carolina,
the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of Southern California. We also thank Ravi Bansal,
Max Croce, Bernard Dumas, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Dana Kiku, Andreas Stathopoulos, Linda Tesar
and Amir Yaron for valuable comments. Of course, any errors are ours alone. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Karen K. Lewis and Edith X. Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
International Consumption Risk Is Shared After All: An Asset Return View
Karen K. Lewis and Edith X. Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 17872
February 2012
JEL No. E21,F30,F40,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

International consumption risk sharing studies have largely ignored their models' counterfactual implications
for asset returns although these returns incorporate direct market measures of risk. In this paper, we
modify a canonical risk-sharing model to generate more plausible asset return behavior and then consider
the effects on welfare gains. Matching the mean and variance of equity returns and the risk-free rate
requires persistent consumption risk, leading to three main findings: (1) risk-sharing gains decrease
as the ability to diversify persistent consumption risk decreases; (2) the international correlation of
equity returns is high relative to the correlation of consumption and dividends, implying low diversification
potential for persistent consumption risk; and (3) increasing persistent consumption risk reduces the
gains. Taken together, our findings suggest that asset returns imply more international risk sharing
than previously thought.


Karen K. Lewis
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu

Edith X. Liu
Department of Applied Economics and Management
105 Warren Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
edith.liu@cornell.edu
1        Introduction

How much welfare improvement can be generated by optimal international consumption risk-
sharing? The obvious importance of this question has motivated a significant body of research.1
As this literature shows, international risk-sharing gains depend directly upon the value of con-
sumption risk and the ability to diversify across countries. Clearly, asset prices in international
financial markets provide a direct measure of this consumption risk. Nevertheless, consumption
risk-sharing studies typically ignore implications for asset return behavior.2 Indeed, assumptions
about risk and intertemporal substitution in consumption often generate counterfactual implica-
tions for the magnitude of asset returns.
        This gap between models of international risk-sharing and asset return behavior appears sig-
nificant given advances in consumption-based asset pricing. Specifically, several lines of research
demonstrate that introducing low frequency variation into the intertemporal marginal rate of substi-
tution in consumption helps to fit asset return behavior.3 The persistence in this consumption risk
implies that investors do not view all uncertainty as temporary, in contrast to typical international
risk-sharing models.4
        In this paper, we begin to bridge this gap using a canonical international consumption risk-
sharing framework in the tradition of Obstfeld (1994a,b).                  Within this tradition, the current
degree of implied risk sharing is measured with observed consumption data. These data are used
to construct parameters that form the benchmark for evaluating potential diversification gains.
The consumption data parameters are then input into a fully diversified international risk sharing
equilibrium. Comparing the lifetime utility of the consumption path from the current economy to
that of the optimal risk sharing economy provides the welfare gains to international risk-sharing.
To evaluate the implications from disciplining the model with asset return behavior, we take this
    1
        Surveys that discuss the literature on international risk-sharing welfare gains include Tesar (1995), Lewis
(1999,2011), and Coeurdacier and Rey (2011).
   2
     Obstfeld (1994b) serves as a notable counter-example.     He chooses risk parameters to match means of equity
returns more closely, though not other asset return behavior such as the risk-free rate and the volatility of equity
returns. We describe this paper in more detail below.
   3
     Campbell and Cochrane (1999) employ habit persistence with time-varying risk aversion in preferences. Bansal
and Yaron (2006) assume that consumption growth has a persistent component. Barro (2006) follows Reitz (1984)
in assuming that investors price disaster risk.
   4
     Colacito and Croce (2010) and Stathopoulos (2011a) are important exceptions.       Below we describe how our
analyses diﬀer.



                                                          1
canonical model typically based on transitory risk and introduce low frequency variation in risk.
For this purpose, we introduce persistent risk as a small autoregressive component in consumption
following Bansal and Yaron (2006).             We choose this approach because it incorporates the same
recursive preferences as our canonical framework. As such, our analysis of persistent risk naturally
nests the more typical transitory-only risk case as in Obstfeld (1994b).5
       Our analysis generates at least three important findings.           First, we show that the risk-sharing
gains depend strongly on how much of the persistent risk can be diversified. If persistent consump-
tion risk correlations are low and, hence, can be diversified under optimal international risk-sharing,
the welfare gains are very large.
       Second, we use equity returns and consumption growth correlations to identify the magnitude
of persistent risk correlations across countries. For this purpose, we assume that equity returns
pay consumption dividends following Obstfeld (1994b) and Mehra and Prescott (1985). The model
implies that the persistent risk correlations are very high and near one across our sample of ad-
vanced economies.6          This finding follows from the higher correlation of equity returns relative
to consumption growth in the data. Within the model, equity return correlations depend more
strongly on persistent risk than do consumption correlations. Therefore, the model points to high
correlations in this consumption risk.
       Even though this model with persistent risk generates implied asset return moments that are
closer to the data, the implied equity premium and asset return variances remain too low. There-
fore, in our final scenario, we consider a version of the Bansal and Yaron (2006) model that assumes
equity pays out dividends as measured by the data. Evaluating this model leads to our third main
finding: the gains from risk-sharing are dampened when the variability of persistent risk best fits
asset returns. This result may seem surprising since the higher dividend volatility implies greater
persistent consumption risk. When we analyze the source of these lower gains, we find an intuitive
explanation. Matching asset returns increases the implied variability in persistent risk, but also
reduces the counterpart variability in transitory risk. At the same time, persistent consumption
   5
       In order to measure welfare gains when economies grow, Obstfeld (1994a) demonstrates the importance of decou-
pling risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity as in Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990) preferences. Bansal and
Yaron (2006) also use Epstein-Zin preferences.      By contrast, Barro (2006) assumes constant-relative-risk-aversion
preferences, implicitly constraining the parameters.    Campbell and Cochrane (1999) use habit-preferences that do
not naturally nest the Obstfeld (1994a,b) framework.
   6
     The analysis below only covers advanced economies. Our results below are likely to be mitigated for developing
countries if their returns are less correlated with the world.



                                                            2
risk is already highly diversified in the current economy since implied correlations are close to one.
Thus, fully opening the country’s asset markets to international trade only allows diversification
on a smaller transitory risk, thereby reducing the implied risk-sharing gains.
   Taken together, these findings show that modifying consumption-based models to match asset
return behavior do not substantially increase international risk-sharing gains. The high correlations
between equity returns across countries in combination with low correlations between consumption
or dividends mean that persistent risk is already highly diversified. Furthermore, consumption-
based models that match asset returns require higher persistent consumption risk relative to tran-
sitory consumption risk. The interaction of these two eﬀects suppress the gains from international
risk-sharing.
   Importantly, this result stands in contrast to a conventional view that disciplining consumption-
based models to match asset returns necessarily generates high welfare gains. The conventional
view follows by presuming that implausibly high risk aversion parameters are required to match the
equity premium. By contrast, including persistent consumption risk can produce basic features of
asset returns with risk aversion coeﬃcients of 10 or below.     Moreover, our findings suggest that
international risk-sharing cannot be determined simply by looking at the data co-movements in
consumption.    In the presence of persistent consumption risk, additional information from asset
returns is required to identify the degree of integration.
   In our analysis, we use a Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) approach to fit consumption
and preference parameters to data moments for seven industrialized countries Specifically, we
target the means and standard deviations of equity returns and the risk-free rate, along with
moments from consumption or dividends for three versions of the model. Although the asset return
implications improve with each successive version, no single model completely matches all the
moments we consider for all the countries. As such, we view our results as methodological rather
than prescriptive.   Consumption-based risk sharing models that incorporate persistent risk to
match asset return moments will tend to find the risk sharing relationships highlighted above.
   We analyze the canonical risk sharing model as in Obstfeld (1994b).        In this framework, all
countries share the risk of a common consumption good with identical preferences. To our knowl-
edge, this paper is the first to consider the impact of persistent consumption risk in a common
consumption multi-country model. In related papers, Colacito and Croce (2010) and Stathopoulos
(2011a) consider the gains from international risk-sharing in a two-country model aimed at ex-
plaining exchange rate behavior In these models, consumers in each country are assumed to prefer


                                                  3
their home goods in order to deliver variation in the relative price of goods. By contrast, we study
a common good framework that ignores the direct role of the real exchange rate but indirectly
incorporates that risk into the common good. As such, we can consider multiple countries with-
out the need to restrict our sample to two countries. As another diﬀerence, Colacito and Croce
(2010,2011) examine a two country model with otherwise symmetric consumption. By contrast, we
use SMM to fit asset returns to multiple countries generating asymmetric consumption parameters.
Overall, we view our analyses as complementary to each other as we focus on diﬀerent aspects of
risk-sharing.
        The structure of the paper is as follows.          In Section 2, we describes the basic risk-sharing
framework. In Section 3, we evaluate that framework under the assumption that all consumption
risk is transitory.        In Section 4, we modify this framework by incorporating a small persistent
component in consumption. Section 5 considers the Bansal and Yaron (2006) model based upon
dividend data. Section 6 extends the analysis in several ways including diﬀering means, population
sizes and a wider set of countries. Section 7 gives concluding remarks


2        Risk-Sharing and Returns: The Framework

How well are countries diversified? And given their degree of integration, what are the benefits
to complete international risk-sharing? The obvious importance of these questions has motivated
a large literature that studies consumption risk-sharing.7                These studies typically evaluate the
benefits of risk sharing by comparing implications for welfare from observed consumption to that of
an alternative fully integrated world economy. As in Lucas (1987), the consumption increase that
makes individuals in the observed equilibrium indiﬀerent between moving to the fully integrated
equilibrium provides a measure of the risk-sharing gains.
        In this paper, we ask how international risk-sharing gains are aﬀected when consumption based
models match asset return behavior. While asset return behavior is clearly only one way to disci-
pline the model, it is arguably the most important for the question at hand. Trade in international
capital markets is often viewed as the primary mechanism for sharing risks globally.                      As such,
    7
        Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1991) observed that consumption correlations are lower than output correlations,
thus violating the implications of perfect risk-sharing. Explanations range from incomplete markets (e.g., Baxter
and Crucini (1995)), hedging labor risk (e.g., Baxter and Jermann (1997), Heathcote and Perri (2008)), hedging
non-tradeables (e.g., Stockman and Tesar (1995)), and transactions costs (e.g., Tesar and Werner (1995), Warnock
(2002)). For a more detailed survey, see Lewis (1999).



                                                           4
the prices of assets in these markets reflect equilibrium views toward risk.    For this reason, we
take these asset returns as the basis for disciplining our models of international consumption and
implied risk parameters.
   To develop the framework, we first review a canonical consumption model and then evaluate
the eﬀects of diﬀerent consumption risk specifications in the following sections.


2.1   The Basic Framework

We begin with a canonical consumption risk-sharing model in the tradition of Obstfeld (1994a,b).
The world consists of  diﬀerent countries. A continuum of identical investors live in each country
, for  = 1  All of these investors have preferences over a common aggregate non-durable good,
. Investors in each country  diﬀer from investors in other countries because they originally own
the rights to  country output, denoted   .    This output is an exogenous endowment process
that in turn depends upon a state vector that spans all  country production processes.          For
expositional simplicity, we subsume the dependence of output on the state variables below and
write the variables as conditional realizations of these variables at time  Below, we also refer to
the investor in country  interchangeably as ”country ” as well as ”consumer” and ”agent” from
country .
                                                                               
   The log output growth rate processes of each of these agents is defined by  ≡ ln( −1
                                                                                               
                                                                                                  )
When capital markets become integrated, the mean growth rates of investor wealth may be aﬀected.
For this reason, we consider the eﬀects on welfare from changing growth paths as well as reducing
consumption variability.
   Since both growth rates and volatility may be altered under optimal risk sharing, we require
preferences that allow risk aversion and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution to diﬀer. As
demonstrated by Obstfeld (1994a), standard constant relative risk aversion preferences can lead to
misleading results about risk-sharing since these preferences restrict the risk aversion parameter
to equal the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitition (IES) in consumption. The risk
aversion parameter measures how much consumers value reduction in the variability of current
period consumption while the IES measures the value of consumption changes over time.             As
such, analyzing gains from risk-sharing requires preferences that do not impose this restriction.
Therefore, we assume consumers in each country have recursive preferences following Epstein and
Zin (1989) and Weil (1989).     Further, to ensure that our risk-sharing results do not arise from
country-specific views toward risk, we also assume all countries have the same preference parameters


                                                 5
over a common non-durable good, . Specifically, utility for each country  at time  can be written:
                                       (               ∙³               ) 
                                           1−
                                                               ´1− ¸ 1 1−
                                                         
                       (  +1 ) =   +  +1                                           (1)

       
where +1 is the utility function at  + 1; 0    1 is the time discount rate;  ≥ 0 is the
                                    1−
risk-aversion parameter;  ≡           1
                                    1− 
                                           for  ≥ 0, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution; and where
E (·) is the expectation operator conditional on the information set at time .8 As described by
Epstein and Zin (1989), this utility function specializes to standard time-additive constant-relative
                                            1
risk aversion preferences when  =          

       For an equilibrium to exist we require that lifetime utility be bounded and rational along the
equilibrium path for each country.               For this reason, we also require the condition that on an
equilibrium path:
                                                   (   [+1
                                                                 
                                                                     ])  ∞                                       (2)

with   (   [+1
                     
                         ]) ∈ R.


2.2       International Risk Sharing Economy

We first consider the optimal international risk sharing equilibrium.                       In this equilibrium, each
country initially owns its home country output claims.                           Here we describe this equilibrium as
a decentralized asset market although we show in Appendix A that this equilibrium also solves
the social planner problem.            Also, in this section, we assume that each country has a single
representative agent. Later, we consider the eﬀects of diﬀering population weights.
       We consider an economy with fully open financial markets at some initial time defined as  = 0.
Consumers in each country can sell oﬀ the rights to their own output streams. Since output is
non-durable, total consumption equals total output in each period.9 We define the price of claims
to country ’s output in world markets at time  as ∗ . The agent’s optimization problem can be
written:

                                                   
                                                             
                                                                 (  +1
                                                                         
                                                                             )
                                                    
                                                     ∀

   8
       In equation (1), we follow the form in Epstein and Zin (1989), equation (5.3). While we use this equation for
parsimonious price and the value functions, our gains and return calculations are also consistent with the Epstein
and Zin (1991) form.
   9
     While many of the international risk-sharing models consider endowment economies, some studies analyze busi-
ness cycle models (see for example, Tesar (1995)).        However, business cycle studies generally consider a common
steady-state growth rate across countries and constant-relative risk aversion utility.


                                                             6
                                                  s.t.  +  ∗´ ≤ ∗
                                                ¡              ¢
                                                  +1 +  ∗+1 ´ = +1
                                                                          ∗



where   (  +1
                  
                      ) is given by equation (1),  = {1  2     } is the vector of claims
held by country  investors on each of the country outputs,   is the Jx1 vector of the output
realizations,  ∗ is the price vector of these claims, and ∗ is the wealth of country  at world
prices.
       Assuming the budget constraint holds with equality, i.e.,  +  ∗´ = ∗ , country  agent’s
problem can be written as the Bellman equation:
                                                 ∙           h                   i 1 ¸ 1−
                                                                                        
                                                    ( 1− )
                       (   )                                     1−   
                                        =     +  +1 (+1  +1 )                               (3)
                                          { }
                                           ∀



                                                   ∗
                                            s.t. +1 = (∗ −  ) ∗ +1
                                                                         
                                                                                                            (4)
                         ∗       
                       +1 ++1
       where +1 =           ∗         is the gross return on the wealth portfolio paying out consumption
                             
                                  ∗
of country  at world prices and  is the value of that country’s consumption path generated by
portfolio holdings.
       The problem is simplified by noting that the utility function is homogeneous in consumption
and wealth so that all agents hold the same portfolio shares in each country’s output.10 Therefore,
all countries buy shares in a world mutual fund.                 They each sell oﬀ claims to their own output
and seek to buy the most claims on the world mutual fund as possible. Defining the world mutual
fund payout as  ≡ Σ=1  and  as the claim of country  on world output in period  = 0,
the investor in country  faces the constraint in the first period11 :
                                                               ³           ´
                                            (0 + 0∗ )  ≤ 0 + 0∗                                  (5)

where 0∗ is the price of the mutual fund in world markets. Since the agent chooses to maximize
utility, the portfolio constraint holds with equality so that:  = (0 + 0∗ )(0 + 0∗ ). Sub-
sequent to this initial sell-oﬀ, all countries own the same mutual fund albeit with diﬀering shares.
As a result, there is no incentive for future rebalancing so that  is constant over time.
       Using the homogeneity of Epstein-Zin preferences, the solution to the Bellman equation (3) has
  10
       See Ingersoll (1987) or the discussion in Obstfeld (1994b).
  11
       The equal portfolio weights derive from equal population weights. Below, we relax this assumption.




                                                             7
the general form:12                                                                         
                                                                                      1
                                                                      ∙        ¸   1−(1)
                                                                          
                                         (   ) =                                                             (6)
                                                                          
      where  =  +  , where  is the present value of all future consumption.                            In the
risk-sharing equilibrium, consumption levels for all countries are proportional to world output
according to: ∗ =   . Therefore, country  wealth can be written: ∗ = ∗ + 
                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                              =
 ( + ∗ ) and the value function becomes:
                                                                                                              
                                                                       
                                                                 1                                       1    
                                               "          #   1−(1)
                                                                                   ∙       ¸          ( 1 )
                                                                                                     1−
                                                   ∗                               ∗
                     (∗  ∗ ) = ∗                                    
                                                                            =   1 +                               (7)
                                                   ∗                               
                                                  ¡               ¢
Note from this equation that since ∗ ∗ = 1+  ∗   = 1+(∗  ), the wealth-to-
                                                            ³         ´ ¡            ¢
consumption ratios are equalized across countries; that is, ∗ ∗ = ∗ ∗  ∀ . Thus,
under perfect risk-sharing, all countries share the same welfare from the wealth-to-consumption
ratio, but their consumption levels diﬀer according to their shares in world output,  .
      Solving for the value function then requires solving for the equity prices of world output ∗ as
well as country  output in world markets. Epstein and Zin (1991) derive the first-order condition
for any asset  using these recursive preferences as:
                               ½                                  ¾
                                                
                                             −          (−1) 
                              (+1  )        (+1 )     +1 = 1                                              (8)

       
where +1                                                                         
           is the gross return on the market portfolio paying out consumption and +1 is the
gross return on asset .
   In the open economy, the market portfolio that pays out consumption for all countries is the
                             
                                             ¡
                                     ∗ =  ∗ +  
                                                         ¢ ∗
world mutual fund so that: +1 = +1         +1    +1  .  Since equation (8) must be
                                                                                    
satisfied for all returns, the price of the world output can be solved by setting: +1    ∗ and
                                                                                        = +1
solving the Euler equation:
                                        ½                        ¾
                                                        
                                                  −       ∗ 
                                        (+1  )      (+1 ) = 1                                               (9)

Similarly, the return on this common world consumption growth rate can be used to derive the
prices of country output in world markets. That is, the price of country ’s output at world prices
is determined by the Euler equation:
                             ½                              ¾
                                            
                                      −       ∗ (−1) ∗
                            (+1  )      (+1 )   +1 = 1                                                   (10)

 12
      See for example Campbell (1993) and Obstfeld (1994a).


                                                                  8
            ³            ´
       ∗     ∗      
where +1 = +1 + +1   ∗ for +1
                                       ∗
                                          is the price of country  output at world prices. Solving
                                                             ∗ and the country price  ∗ and
these two Euler equations for the price of the world output +1                       +1

substituting the result into the value function determines the welfare of each country under open
markets.


2.3       Benchmark Economy

So far, we have described a perfect risk-sharing equilibrium. To measure the potential gains to at-
taining this equilibrium, we also require a benchmark measure for the current degree of risk sharing.
For this purpose, we treat assets as though they were priced from a closed economy. We adopt
this benchmark for four important reasons. First, this assumption is standard in the asset pricing
literature that uses domestic economy Euler equations to value assets.13 Second, this assumption
is also the standard in the international risk sharing literature spanning at least two decades.14
Third, although the benchmark model treats the asset markets as closed, the consumption and
asset returns used to discipline the model incorporate the current level of integration. Since con-
sumption and asset returns are clearly influenced by foreign factors, these foreign eﬀects appear
in the data, reflecting the current level of integration. Finally, this benchmark is likely to bias
the analysis against our findings.           A closed economy benchmark typically generates larger gains
than a partially open economy benchmark. At the same time, our analysis below shows that the
gains from international risk sharing implied by asset returns are smaller than previously thought.
Therefore, using a closed economy pricing benchmark tends to make our conclusions conservative.
       We now describe this benchmark economy. Each agent from country  is endowed with real-
izations of output from his own country given by  . In each period, he consumes this output and
then buys claims on the endowment process for the following period at price  . Thus, the agent’s
optimization problem is given by:
                                                     (  +1
                                                                  
                                                                      )
                                                     
                                                {  }
                                                    ∀




                                              s.t.  +   ≤                                             (11)
                                            ³             ´
                                                      
                                             +1  + +1     = +1
                                                                      


  13
       Moreover, recent empirical studies of assets such as equities continue to find that country eﬀects are important.
See Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2009).
  14
     See for example, Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Obstfeld (1994a,b), van Wincoop (1994), Tesar (1995), Lewis (2000),
and Callen, Imbs, and Mauro (2011).


                                                            9
where   (  +1
                  
                      ) is given by equation (1).               The agent in country  consumes his own output
because the consumption good is non-durable and claims on this process cannot be sold interna-
tionally; that is,  =  . Note that in this case, the price of output is also equal to the price
                        
of consumption so that  =  . Since the number of shares is time invariant, we normalize the
number of outstanding shares to one. Clearly the agent in country  holds all of his own country’s
shares so that  = 1 and  = 0, ∀ 6= . Therefore, assuming the budget constraint in equation
(11) holds with equality,  +  =  .             Substituting wealth and consumption into the value
function (6) above, the solution to the country  agent’s problem can be written:
                                                                                                          
                                                                  1                                  1     
                                                 "          #    1−( 1 )               "          #   1−( 1 )
                                                                                                         
                                                                                        
                   (   )   =                                  =      1+                         (12)
                                                                                        
where we have used the superscript  to denote the benchmark economy equilibrium.
   Solving for the value function then requires solving for  , the value of consumption from the
country’s output process. As above, this price can be determined from the Euler equation (8). In
                                                                           ³            ´
                                                                                   
                                                              
the benchmark case, the return on the consumption asset is +1  = +1  ≡ +1  + +1    so
that:                               ½                          ¾
                                                    
                                               −          
                                    (+1  )      (+1 ) = 1                                               (13)

Once the price  is determined, the value function in equation (12) gives welfare in the benchmark
economy in terms of output.


2.4     Evaluating International Risk-Sharing Gains

We can now evaluate the international risk sharing gains. These gains are the permanent con-
sumption increase in lifetime utility that would make a consumer indiﬀerent between remaining in
a benchmark economy or moving to completely open markets. Thus, the welfare gains for country
 are given by ∆ in the following:

                           0 ((1 + ∆ )0  (1 + ∆ )0 ) = 0 (0∗  0∗ )




                                                                10
Using the solution for the value function for the benchmark economy in equation (12)) and the
value function for the perfect risk-sharing economy in equation (7), this welfare gain has the form:
                                                                                                          
                                                           
                                                                                                     1    
                                                       1                      ⎧           ⎫     ( 1 )
                                                                                                 1−
                              (                )   1−( 1 ) Ã           !       ⎪      0∗ ⎪                  Ã            !
                                   0∗ 0∗                      0∗           ⎨1 +     
                                                                                            ⎬                       0
                                                                                      0
                 (1 + ∆ ) =                                                 =
                                  0 0                     0           ⎪
                                                                                ⎩ 1+   0   ⎪
                                                                                             ⎭                      0
                                                                                       0

In the following sections, we use consumption processes to evaluate these gains.


3         Risk-Sharing and Returns With Transitory Consumption Risk

In this section, we start to use consumption processes to determine risk sharing gains and asset
prices. We begin with a standard assumption in the consumption risk sharing literature that all
risk is temporary around a trend.                  Thus, the log output growth rate processes of each of these
countries is determined by a mean growth rate  , and an independent and identically distributed
(I.I.D.) transitory innovation,  , given by:

                                                                      
                                                        +1 =  + +1                                                      (14)

       
where +1 v  (0   ).
         We now use this simple formulation to evaluate the welfare in the benchmark and international
risk sharing equilibria. In the benchmark case, consumption equals output so that the benchmark
                        
consumption process is +1 is given by equation (14).
         Substituting this consumption process into the Euler equation and solving for the price of output
implies:15                                                                 
                                                                          1
                                                                      1− 
                                                                 
                                                     =              
                                                                           1
                                                                                                                               (15)
                                                                        1− 
                                                                1 − 
              £  1 2¤                                           
                            e =  + 12  2 or the mean of log ( +1
               e − 2  for 
where  ≡ exp                                                                      1   2
                                                                     ) Note that − 2  is the
                                                                                             
eﬀect on the logarithm of marginal utility due to variations in future utility through the recursive
                       h         i
                           (1−)
next period utility,          . So ln( ) is the logarithm of the certainty equivalent consumption
                                                                    ³     ´1−        ³       ´
                                                                       
path for the period utility function in the recursive preferences, +1        , while 1 − 1 measures
how consumers value this consumption path over time. In other words, the price is the discounted
present value of the country output process.
    15
         Appendix B details this solution as well as the other prices used to determine the value function.


                                                                  11
       Substituting the price in equation (15) into (12) gives the value function in the benchmark
economy as:                                                                                         
                                                                                               1     
                                                                 ⎡                       ⎤    1−( 1 )
                                                                                                  


                                                         ⎢                     1         ⎥
                                  (   ) =  ⎣                         
                                                                                       1
                                                                                         ⎦                                              (16)
                                                                                    1− 
                                                                     1 − 
As we noted above, utility must be bounded and lie on the real line along the equilibrium
                                                                                        path
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                 1− 
(equation (2)). Therefore, the benchmark economy equilibrium requires that 1 −                                                        0, a
condition that also ensures positive prices in equation (15).
       Similarly, the mutual fund price in the world economy is given by:
                                                                            
                                                                           1
                                                                        1− 
                                                                 ∗
                                                    ∗ =             
                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                        (17)
                                                                        1− 
                                                                1 − ∗
              £                    ¤                               ¡ ¢2
where ∗ ≡ exp ∗ + 12 (1 − )  ∗2 for ∗ ≡ 1 Σ=1  and  ∗2 = 1 0 Σ  for Σ, the variance-
covariance matrix of consumption growth rates, and , a -dimensional unit vector. In other words,
∗ is the mean output growth rates for an equally-weighted portfolio of  countries while ∗ is its
standard deviation.16 Note that ∗ is the certainty equivalent consumption path as before, but
now this path is determined by the world per capita consumption growth process.
       The value function also depends upon the country’s share of world output,  , determined by
the price of output from country  in world markets, ∗ . As we show in the appendix, this price
depends upon the value of the growth in country  as well as the hedging properties of the country’s
output in world markets.
       Armed with the solutions to the benchmark economy price of consumption,  , the price of
world consumption, ∗ , and the price of output from country  in the world economy, ∗ , we
can determine the solutions for the value functions in the two economies. Using these solutions,
the welfare gain has the form:
                                                                                                                        
                                                           
                                                                                                          −        1    
                                                   1
                                                        1
                                                                              ⎡             ⎤                ( 1 )
                                                                                                               1−
                          (                )    ( ) Ã
                                               1−
                                                                      !                    1
                                                                                         1− 
                               0∗ 0∗                         0∗           ⎢ 1 − ∗      ⎥                              0
            (1 + ∆ ) =                                                    =   ⎣              ⎦                                         (18)
                              0 0                        0                        1
                                                                                         1−                                   0
                                                                                   1 − 
These gains therefore depend upon consumption means and variances given by the data.
  16
       As above, the countries have equal weights by the assumption of a measure one of representative agents in each
country. We allowing for diﬀering population weights below. Also, forming the means and variances as a sum of the
countries is not strictly correct since the sum of logs does not equal the log of sums. In the appendix, we describe
Monte Carlo analysis that considers the approximation error to this assumption.


                                                                  12
3.1         Gains: An Ilustrative Example

To develop intuition about the gains, we take the logarithm of equation (18) to yield:
                                                                                                         
                                                                   

                                                   −          1    
                                                                                        −           1
                                                                                                 ( 1 )
                                                                                                                    Ã          !
                                                           ( 1 )
                                                          1−                ³           ´       1−
                                                                                                                         0∗
               
             ∆ ≈ ln(1 + ∆ ) =    
                                     ln (0∗ 0∗ )                     − ln 0 0                       + ln
                                                                                                                         0
 This decomposition shows that the gains depend upon two components:                                           (a) the percentage
diﬀerence between the optimal
                           
                              risk sharing
                                    
                                           and benchmark economy wealth-to-consumption ratios
                                     −      1
                                         1−(1)
in utility terms, ln (0 0 )     ; and (b) the
                                              µ percentage
                                                    ¶      diﬀerence between the risk sharing
                                                 ∗
                                               0
and benchmark economy initial consumption, ln       17
                                                                         0
       Consider an example to illustrate these two components.                        Assume there are two symmetric
countries that have identical mean growth rates () of 2%, standard deviations () of 1.8% and
initial outputs, 0 .18 Furthermore, to make the best case for diversification, assume that the
correlation in consumption growth is −1 Since the countries are identical, the equilibrium prices
imply                              1   2
   µ equal
         ¶ shares in the world or  =  = 05. Thus, the second component is absent since
    0∗
ln      = 0.
       0
       Figure 1 shows the eﬀects on the utility and welfare gains over time assuming risk aversion
of 10 and IES of 1.5.19 The figure depicts the benchmark economy welfare in the blue line as
                  
                   −      1
                       1−(1)
ln (0∗ 0∗ )                   while the optimal risk sharing economy welfare is given in the red line. The
gains per year are depicted in the green line as the diﬀerence between the two lines.                                               As this
figure shows, the gains from risk-sharing derive from the higher wealth-to-consumption ratio in the
optimal risk sharing economy. Figure 1b provides a picture of how the certainty-equivalent portion
                e − 12  2 , diﬀers between the benchmark and international risk sharing economy.
of consumption, 
Clearly, the gains in this symmetric country case derive completely from the lower volatility in the
open economy.
       By contrast, Figures 2 consider a case when one country has a 50% higher volatility. As Figure
2a demonstrates, the gains are higher for the ”High ” country in the purple line than the ”Low
” country in the green line.               The breakdown between the two components can be seen in the
other panels. where we denote the high volatility country with ”H” and the low volatility country
with ”L”. First, Figure 2b shows that the gain in welfare for the low volatility country is higher
  17
       In Obstfeld (1994b), the initial reallocation of consumption occurs because countries diﬀer in the returns on their
risky capital and the technology in some parts of the world are shut down.
   18
      Below we show that these numbers correspond to the United States over our sample.
   19
      Below we show how gains are aﬀected for a wider range of parameters.


                                                                    13
since the expected utility is lower in the benchmark economy. By contrast, Figure 2c shows the
eﬀect from initial shifts in consumption allocations. The benchmark economy certainty equivalent
consumption paths appear in the solid lines showing that the low  country has a steeper path
than the high  counterpart. The open economy paths are given in the dashed lines. Since the
low volatility country has a higher price, it can buy more shares in the world mutual fund so that
   . Accordingly, the high volatility country initial consumption declines while the low
                                                    ¡            ¢              ¡           ¢
volatility country consumption increases. Thus, ln 0∗ 0  0 while ln 0∗ 0  0.
As the Figure 2c shows, both countries gain when this initial reallocation is combined with the gain
in wealth-to-consumption.


3.2       Gains: A Three Country Version

We now analyze these gains using data for three countries: the United States, the United Kingdom,
and Canada. Colacito and Croce (2010) and Stathopoulos (2011a) consider two country models
focusing upon asset returns for the U.S. and the U.K. alone. However, our framework allows for
multiple countries and does not require symmetry.20                 To demonstrate the eﬀects of asymmetry
and multiple countries, we begin parsimoniously by evaluating these two countries together with
Canada. Below, we extend this analysis to seven OECD countries.
       Since agents in our model have the same preferences over a common consumption good bas-
ket, we require data that incorporate changes in the value of this consumption across countries.
Therefore, we follow Obstfeld (1994b) in analyzing annualized consumption growth adjusted for
purchasing power parity deviations in the Penn World Tables from 1950 to 2009. Details of the
data construction are in Appendix C.
       Table 1, Panel A shows the means and standard deviations for the three country set, along with
the first order autocorrelation, and cross-country correlation.              The mean growth rates range from
1.96% for Canada to 2.08% for the U.S. However, the standard deviations in all three countries
are large and are close to the mean growth rates. For this reason, we assume in the preliminary
analysis that the mean growth rates are equal across countries. The table also shows that the first
order autocorrelations are lowest for the U.S. at 0.27 and highest for the U.K. at 0.40. The table
also reports the correlation matrix for consumption.
  20
       Martin (2010) considers gains in a multi-country model of disaster risk, but only calibrates to one moment such
as the mean of equity returns. Stathopoulos (2011b) analyzes a multiple country model of home bias but does not
evaluate risk sharing.



                                                           14
         Table 1 Panel B gives the estimates of welfare gains for risk aversion of 4 and 10 as well as
intertemporal elasticity of substitition (IES) equal to 0.5 and 1.5. In order to be consistent with
our analysis with persistent consumption below, we evaluate the consumption growth rates as a
percent of monthly consumption.21                 For a given , the welfare gains increase in risk aversion .
For example, the welfare gains for the US increase from 0.3% to 0.9% when  = 05 and from 1%
to 3.4% when  = 15.
         Table 1 Panel B also reports the share of the world fund owned by each country in the open
economy. As risk aversion increases, the hedging properties of each country’s endowment becomes
more valuable so that price shares in mutual funds begin to diverge.                         For example, when  = 4
and  = 05, the price shares are virtually identical, ranging from 33.3% for the US and Canada
to 33.4% for the U.K. But when risk aversion increases to  = 10 and IES is  = 15 the U.K.
receives a higher share at 33.6% compared to the U.S. at 33.1%.
         Panel C of Table 1 shows the implied asset return moments from this model in addition to the
data counterparts from 1971 to 2009. For brevity, we give the results for the U.S and U.K. alone,
though the implied results for Canada are quite similar.                      First, we note the well-known equity
premium puzzle (Mehra and Prescott (1985)). The equity premium over our sample in the data
is 4.3% and 4.5% for the U.S. and the U.K, respectively. However, the implied equity premium
is only a fraction of these numbers ranging from 0.1% to 0.3% for higher risk aversion. Second,
the numbers demonstrate the inability of the standard model to generate suﬃcient volatility in
equity returns. The standard deviation for equity returns are about 18% for the US and 23.5% for
the U.K, but the model can only generate numbers less than 2%. Finally, since the implied risk-
free rate is higher than the data, the numbers highlight the ”risk-free rate puzzle” (Weil (1989)).
Higher IES reduces the risk-free rate to below 3%, insuﬃcient to match the rate in the U.S. data.
Moreover, the model counterfactually predicts a constant risk free rate.


4         Risk Sharing and Returns with Persistent Consumption Risk

The disconnect between asset return means and the data shown above confirms the standard
findings.        Not only does the size of the equity premium demand a high risk aversion coeﬃcient,
but the historically low risk-free rates require a high intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
    21
         Since the gains are specified as a percentage of the initial consumption levels, the gains are measured as a percent
of permanent consumption as in Lucas (1987).




                                                               15
consumption. To match mean returns, these parameters must often be implausibly high, generating
exceedingly high welfare gains.22 Moreover, even relatively high risk aversion of 10 and IES of 1.5
cannot generate the volatility of equity returns observed in the data shown above. And the model
implies a constant risk-free rate, clearly inconsistent with the data.
       By contrast, persistent consumption risk provides higher volatility in asset returns and also
delivers a higher equity premium and lower risk-free rate with less extreme preference parameters.
Several approaches have been suggested in the literature to incorporate this risk. The leading
candidates are habit persistence (Campbell and Cochrane (1999)), long-run risk (Bansal and Yaron
(2004), and disaster risk (Reitz (1988), Barro (2006)). Among these, Bansal and Yaron (2006) alone
use recursive preferences, permitting a straightforward comparison to the canonical model above.
Therefore, we add a small persistent component to consumption growth as in the long-run risk
approach.
       The model in the previous section assumed that equity is an asset that pays out consumption.
This assumption follows most asset pricing studies beginning with Mehra and Prescott (1985) as
well as the international risk sharing counterpart. On the other hand, Bansal and Yaron (2004)
assume that equity pays out dividends as measured by the data. In order to understand the
implications of persistent consumption risk on risk-sharing, we continue to assume equity pays out
consumption in this section. Later, in Section 4 we re-evaluate the model when equity is assumed
to pay out dividends, a version closer to Bansal and Yaron (2006).
       To consider the impact of persistent consumption risk on risk-sharing, we now include a persis-
tent stochastic component  in the output growth.23

                                             
                                            +1 =  +  + +1
                                                                 
                                                                                                               (19)

                                              +1 =   + +1

       
where +1 v  (0  ) and +1 v  (0  ). Since the volatility of the persistent shock,  , is very
small compared to the transitory shock,  , we sometimes write the relationship in proportional
form:  ≡    . One reason risk-sharing models often assume the purely transitory process in
equation (14) is that the autocorrelation in consumption growth tends to be insignificantly diﬀerent
  22
       See, for example, the discussion in Coeurdacier and Rey (2011). Obsteld (1994b) finds gains in excess of 100%
when risk aversion matches the equity premium and growth rates diﬀer.       Lewis (2000) also finds large gains with
high risk aversion even when means are the same.
  23
     van Wincoop (1999) also examines risk-sharing assuming an auto-regressive consumption growth process but
with no transitory component.


                                                          16
from zero. Indeed, when we fit the output process with persistent risk below, we find the estimates
of the variance to be quite small.


4.1    Evaluating Risk-Sharing Gains with Persistent Consumption Risk

To evaluate the gains when consumption risk is persistent, we now reconsider the value function
for the consumers in the benchmark economy and in the integrated world economy. We use the
new output processes to determine the prices of consumption in the benchmark economy,  , and
the price of consumption in world markets, ∗ , as well as the share of each country’s endowment
at world market prices,  . The presence of persistent risk means that these prices can no longer
be solved explicitly.   In Appendix B, we detail our solution for these prices using the Campbell
and Shiller (1988) approximation. Our results below use the full numerical approximation of this
solution.
   To help build intuition for these results, we compare the approximation to the transitory con-
sumption risk case. As noted in equation (15), the benchmark economy price depends upon the
                                                       £  1 2¤
                                                        e − 2  where 
certainty equivalent consumption path given by  ≡ exp                e =  + 12  2 . With
the introduction of persistent consumption risk, a similar discount factor applies to this price where
now:                                  ∙        µ             ¶¸
                                          1 2       2 2
                               ≡ exp e −  1 +
                                           2       (1 − )2
                                                                         ³                  ´
                                                                                   2 2
                                                         e =  + 12  2 1 +
Here  is an approximating constant close to one and now                         (1−)2
                                                                                             . In other
words, certainty equivalent consumption has an additional source of risk due to the persistent
                                                     2   2
consumption, captured by its variance measured by (1−)2. Due to Jensen’s inequality, this vari-
                                              e as well as the riskiness of the consumption path
ance impacts the growth rate directly through 
through marginal utility measured by − 12 .
   Similarly, the discount factor under open economies is given by:
                                       ∙           µ               ¶¸
                                             1            ∗2
                                                             
                                                                2
                              ∗ ≡ exp  e∗ −  ∗2 1 +
                                             2           (1 − )2

where ∗ refers to the parameters in the world portfolio.
   The relationship between the certainty equivalent consumption paths in the benchmark and
open economy determine the gains from integration. As in equation (18), the gains for country 




                                                 17
in time 0 are:
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                            1                                     1 
                                                                         ⎡             ⎤   1− 1                 ⎡             ⎤    1− 1
                                                                                                                                     
            Ã          !(                )     1         Ã          !           0∗                                   0∗
                0∗        0∗ 0∗       1− 1
                                                            0∗        ⎢1 +    0∗   ⎥                0   ⎢1 +   0    ⎥
(1+∆ ) =                                            =                   ⎣             ⎦           =            ⎣             ⎦
                0        0 0                       0          1+
                                                                                0                     0       1+
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                0                                    0
                                                                                                                                    (20)
   The price of the world mutual fund, ∗ , the benchmark economy price of country  output,
 , and the open economy share of country  in world markets,  , now include the eﬀects of
persistent consumption risk.


4.2   Identifying Country-Specific Persistent Consumption Risk

The persistent component in consumption must be small since deviations from annual consumption
growth look close to transitory. Therefore, we follow Bansal and Yaron (2006) in assuming that
consumption decisions are made at the monthly frequency and persistence is diﬃculty to detect at
the annual level. To discipline our model, we choose the consumption parameter values that come
closest to generating the consumption and asset return moments we observe in the data. Here we
briefly summarize this identification, relegating the details to Appendix C.
   To generate the parameters values, we first calibrate the monthly rates  to the annual means
of consumption growth. We then implement Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) to provide the
best fit to the parameters for each country. That is, for every set of parameter values, we first
solve the model using the analytical solutions for returns in the benchmark economy.                                          We then
compute the diﬀerence between a targeted set of model generated moments and the data return
and consumption moments.            We weight these moments equally to give the same importance to
consumption and returns. The set of parameter values that minimizes this diﬀerence is the SMM
estimate.
   We target six data moments for each country: the standard deviation and first order auto-
correlation of annual consumption growth, the mean equity premium, the mean risk free rate, the
standard deviation of the market return, and of the risk free rate. Using these six moments per
country, we use SMM to obtain three parameters for each country: (a) the standard deviation of the
transitory component of consumption,   ; (b) the standard deviation of the persistent component,
 , and (c) the autocorrelation of the persistent risk component,  . In all our estimates, we find
that the autocorrelation parameters  are quite similar to each other. Therefore, in the results
below we set  =  for all  across countries for parsimony.

                                                                    18
    Our SMM analysis requires a set of preference parameters. Above we showed that higher IES
and risk aversion parameters help deliver the higher equity premia and lower risk-free rates shown
in the data. For this reason, we continue to assume  = 998 at the monthly horizon and restrict
our attention to the higher end of our parameter range with  = 15 and  = 10. These parameters
are also consistent with the preferred values chosen by Bansal and Yaron (2006).
    Table 2, Panel A shows the resulting SMM-generated parameters of (    ) conditional on the
monthly calibrated means of consumption. The monthly growth rates,  , are near 017% for all
three countries. The transitory risk standard deviation ranges from 06% for the U.K. to 09% for
the U.S. However, as measured by  , persistent consumption is only a tiny fraction of transitory
volatility.
    Table 2, Panel B gives the targeted moments for asset returns used to fit these parameters.
In addition to these moments, we target the annual mean and standard deviation of consumption
growth in Table 1. Panel C reports the implied moments from our simulation. Compared to the
purely transitory consumption risk in Table 1, the addition of persistent consumption risk increases
the mean equity premium and lowers the risk-free rate.       Also, the standard deviation of equity
returns increases to 3.6% for the U.S. and the risk-free rate is no longer constant. Clearly, the data
returns are much more volatile than the model implies. Nevertheless, the addition of persistent
consumption risk moves the model predictions in the direction of higher equity premium, lower
risk-free rate, and more volatile asset returns.
    Panel C also shows the fit for consumption moments. The implied consumption volatility is
higher than the data for all three countries. In the data, the standard deviation is about 1.7, but
the model generates higher volatility ranging from 2.9 for the U.S. to 2.2 for Canada. On the other
hand, the implied consumption autocorrelation fits the data quite well for all three countries.
    Finally, Panel D shows the implications of the model for the world variability.      Clearly, the
volatility is reduced for both the transitory and persistent components of risk, thereby generating
potential risk-sharing gains.


4.3    International Risk-Sharing Gains and Persistent Risk Correlation

Evaluating risk-sharing gains requires measures of the correlation of consumption across countries.
While Table 1 provides the correlation of consumption across countries in the data, the consumption
variance and covariance depends upon both the transitory shocks,  , and the persistent shocks,
 . We begin by analyzing the welfare gains when the correlation between transitory shocks are


                                                   19
assumed to be given by the data correlations as in the transitory-only case.                    For persistent risk
correlations, we consider a wide range to understand the eﬀects or this risk. Below, we describe an
identification that pins down this correlation.
       Table 3 illustrates the eﬀects of the correlation in persistent consumption risk on the welfare
gains. The top numbers for each country report the gains as a percent of permanent consumption
while the numbers in parentheses below give the percent of the country’s share in world output,
 . For reference, the first column gives the results using the same parameter estimates when there
is no persistent risk so that  = 0.24
       The following five columns provide welfare gains numbers assuming correlations between per-
sistent consumption ranging from 0 to 1, implying a decreasing ability to diversify this risk. When
the correlation is equal to zero, the gains increase dramatically for all countries relative to the case
with no persistent risk. For example, the gains for the U.S are 10.2% when  = 0 but increase
to 70% if persistent consumption shocks are uncorrelated. As the estimates show for increasing
correlations of (  
                             ), the U.S. gains decline steadily to about 8%. Similar patterns hold for

the other countries.25
       As illustrated in Figure 2, we can decompose the gains defined in Section 2.4 into two com-
ponents. The first component is the gain from the change in the wealth-to-consumption ratio:
½            ¾ 11
  0∗ 0∗  1−
                 
               . We report these percentage gains in Table 3 in the rows labeled ”Gain from
  0 0
    ” for each country.         When the persistent risk is uncorrelated, the gains from wealth-to-
consumption are substantially higher, ranging from about 90% for the U.S. and the U.K. to 57%
for Canada. The lower measures of transitory and persistent risk volatilities for Canada means that
the gains are lower than the counterpart for the other countries. As the correlation of the persistent
component increases, the gains from wealth-to-consumption decline. When (   ) = 1, no
further diversification on persistent risk is possible and the wealth-to-consumption ratio for Canada
declines so that the ”gain” is actually a loss of 4%.
       The second component,  ∗   , captures the compensation to countries such as Canada with
better diversification potential.
                                The change in the initial consumption allocation reflects the
                                                       ³          ´
value of each country’s endowment at world prices,  = 0 + 0∗  (0 + 0∗ ). Thus, this
  24
       These gains are higher than the I.I.D. case in Table 1 because here we target asset returns, thereby generating
greater consumption volatility. We return to a comparison of gains with the same consumption volatility below.
  25
     Similarly, Martin (2010) finds that the gains from risk sharing with disaster risk are much higher when disasters
are not synchronized.




                                                           20
component is greater for countries with higher endowments and prices.                       The percentage gains
from the initial consumption allocations are reported in Table 3 in the rows labeled ”Gain from
 ∗   ”. When persistent risk is perfectly correlated, the U.S. output is least valuable since it
has the highest volatility in persistent and transitory risk as well as the greatest correlation with
the world. As such, the intial value of consumption is less than the benchmark economy by −11%.
By contrast, Canada’s output is the most valuable and therefore the percent gain is positive at
12%. As the persistent risk correlation (   ) increases to one, the declining value of the
wealth-to-consumption gains to Canada are oﬀset by the price eﬀect.
    Table 3 demonstrates that the international correlation in persistent risk is important for de-
termining risk-sharing gains.        However, these measures treat the persistent correlation as a free
parameter. We next identify the cross-country correlations in both components of consumption
using asset return correlations.


4.4    Identifying Persistent Risk Correlation when Equity Pays Consumption

We have shown that international risk sharing gains depend crucially upon the correlation in
persistent consumption risk. We now use the model together with asset return and consumption
data to identify this correlation.
    In the benchmark economy, the covariance in consumption growth across countries using equa-
tion (19) can be written:

                                                                    
                           (   )                   
                                             =   (   ) +          (   )                   (21)
                                                                  1 − 2

Thus, the observed covariance is comprised of two sources of correlation: the component due to
the temporary shock, , and the persistent shock, , where 1 − 2 adjusts for the autocorrelation
    We now turn to the correlation of equity returns generated by the model. As we show in the
appendix, the Campbell-Shiller approximation of returns imply that equity returns for country 
can be written in the form:
                                        
                                       +1 = 0 + 1  + 2 +1 + +1
                                                                           
                                                                                                            (22)

where 0  1  2 are constants. Calculating the covariance of equity returns across countries provides
a second observable depending on consumption correlations:
                                                          "                 #
                                                              
                                                                          
               (   ) =     (     ) +     1 1
                                                                   + 2 2   (   )          (23)
                                                            1 − 2



                                                           21
       Note that equity covariances and consumption covariance depend identically upon the transitory
correlation, (     ). However, the variability in returns also depends upon the current level
of persistence risk through the two terms in square brackets. First, it depends upon the current
level of persistent risk,  , measured by the autoregressive eﬀect 1 1 (1 − 2 ). Second , it depends
upon the current innovation in persistent risk through 2 2 .
       Given the two observable covariances in consumption growth in equation (21) and equity returns
in equation (23), we can identify the two sets of correlations, (     ) and (   ), for each
pair of covariances across countries.26                     Combining the consumption covariances in equation (21)
with the equity covariance in equation (23), we solve for the correlation in the persistent shock as:
                                             "                                      #
                                       
                                                                
                   (   ) =           (   ) −          (   )            (24)
                                                        
                                                                    
                 ∙                            ¸−1
                     1 1 −1
where  ≡            1−2        + 2 2         . In the appendix, we show that   0.
       Equation (24) highlights the implications of consumption and equity covariances for the cor-
relation on persistent risk. As the correlation in equity returns, (   ), increases relative
to the correlation in consumption, (   ), the implied correlation of persistent shocks rises.
                                                                               exceeds the variability
Furthermore, this eﬀect is exacerbated if the variability in equity returns, 
in consumption,  .
       Table 4 Panel A reports the equity return correlations in the data. The correlations between
equity returns are generally higher than the correlations between consumption growth rates in Table
1.27 In particular, the equity return correlations are higher than 0.5. By contrast, the correlations
between consumption growth rates are lower than 0.5 with the exception of the correlation between
Canada and the U.S. The pattern for equity return correlations to be higher than consumption
correlations is even more pronounced when we expand the set of countries below. At the same
time, the variability of stock returns is much higher than the variability of consumption growth
rates. As a result, the relationship between equity and consumption correlations generates high
correlations for the persistent consumption risk, (   ). This tendency is reinforced by the
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                        
much lower variability of the persistent risk relative to equity returns, implying that                      
                                                                                                                   1.
                                                                                                         
Therefore, the combination of equity and consumption covariances imply high correlation of 
  26
       The appendix provides details about this construction.
  27
       Dumas et al (2003) also find that equity correlations across countries are higher than output correlations, and
use this observation to analyze the degree of integration. Bansal and Lundblad (2002) use the high international
correlation in equity returns to argue that cash flow growth rates contain a small predictable component.


                                                                    22
across countries.28 Indeed, across all seven of our countries studied and all versions of our model,
the implied correlations for persistent risk are never below 0.8.
       Table 4 Panel B then shows that the implied correlations for persistent and transitory risk.
As expected, the combination of consumption and equity covariances imply a very high degree of
correlation in persistent risk near one. In the interest of parsimony, we report only the correlation
of each country against the world. Panel B also shows the implied correlation on the transitory
risk. Comparing these correlations to the consumption correlations in Table 1 shows that the high
correlations on persistent risk generate lower correlations on the transitory risk.
       Panel C of Table 4 gives the welfare gains based upon the implied consumption correlations.
Since the identified correlations on the persistent component are essentially equal to one, persistent
risk is already fully diversified thereby attenuating the welfare gains. The gains range from 7.8% for
Canada to 9.4% for the U.K. Once again, the slightly lower volatility and better hedging properties
of Canadian consumption mean that Canada loses on the change in wealth to consumption ratio at
−4%, but gains on the value of its endowment implying a higher gain from initial consumption at
12%. By contrast, both the U.S. and the U.K. gain from the world wealth to consumption ratio,
but lose from initial risk-sharing consumption relative to the benchmark economy consumption at
−7% and −5%, respectively.


4.5       Summary: Persistent Risk with Consumption-Paying Equity

In this section, we examined the gains from risk sharing when asset returns are used to discipline
consumption parameters. We assumed that equity pays out consumption as measured by the data.
To determine the correlations of persistent versus transitory consumption across countries, we used
data on correlations in equity and consumption. Since cross-country equity correlations are higher
than consumption correlations and since the volatility of equity is higher than consumption, the
model implied high correlations in persistent consumption risk.                  As a result, this risk is almost
completely diversified, even without fully open markets.29
       Although this model generated better asset pricing implications than the transitory-only case,
the fitted asset return and consumption moments remain far from the data. In the next section,
we address a version of this model to improve the fit.
  28
       Since the standard deviations of  and  are fitted to the data, the implied correlations of the components can
in principle exceed 1. In such instance, we restrict the correlations to equal 1.
  29
     Similarly, Brandt, Cochrane and Santa-Clara (2006) argue that the high correlations in exchange rates imply
consumption risk is well-diversified.


                                                           23
5     Risk Sharing and Dividend-Paying Asset Returns

So far, we have assumed that equity returns pay out consumption, following in the tradition of
Mehra and Prescott (1985) and Obstfeld (1994).           However, as the analysis above shows, even
persistent consumption risk does not generate a suﬃciently high equity premium or volatility in
returns.    Moreover, the better fit for asset returns comes at the cost of higher variability in
consumption than observed in the data.        Bansal and Yaron (2004) (hereafter BY) have argued
that equity returns are better explained when persistence consumption risk depends upon dividend
payments.    In this section, we employ this framework to identify consumption risk and then re-
examine the implications for international consumption risk-sharing.


5.1   Persistent Consumption Risk and Dividends

We now reconsider the consumption growth process with persistent consumption risk in equation
(19) repeated here for convenience.

                                       
                                      +1 =  +  + +1
                                                           


                                       +1 =   + +1

       
where +1 ∼  (0   ), +1 ∼  (0  ), +1
                                                
                                                    ⊥ +1 . In order to match asset return behavior, BY
fit the behavior of dividends and consumption growth rates to the implied estimates of asset return
moments. For this purpose, they assume that the growth rate of dividends,  , depends upon the
persistent component of consumption. Using a superscript to identify the country , we rewrite
their assumed dividend process as:

                                       
                                      +1 =  +   + +1                                 (25)

where +1 ∼  (0  ), +1 ⊥ +1
                                    
                                        ⊥ +1 and  is the growth rate of dividends. Note that in
equation (25), dividends depend upon persistent consumption risk according to the coeﬃcient  .
BY argue that this coeﬃcient acts as a leverage ratio that relates dividends to consumption.


5.2   Identifying Country-Specific Consumption Risk with Dividends

We now amend our asset return model to assume equity pays the dividend process (equation (25)).
As BY have observed, the variability in dividends along with the leverage ratio helps generate
greater variability in persistent consumption growth, thereby generating better fit to asset returns.


                                                   24
       We therefore use the model to provide fitted values for the dividend parameters along with new
estimates of the original consumption parameters. For this purpose, we add to the set of target
moments the standard deviation and growth rate of dividends. As with consumption growth, we
first calibrate the monthly growth rate of dividends. We then use SMM to fit the four parameters
h                       i
           to eight moments: the prior six consumption and asset return moments augmented
by the dividend growth standard deviation and autocorrelation. As before, the fitted values for
 are quite close to each other across countries so we restrict them to be equal in our reported
results.
       Table 5 reports the analysis for the three countries. Panel A gives the parameter estimates.
Compared to the consumption asset model in Table 2, the variability due to persistent risk is higher
for all three countries at around 004%. As equation (25) shows, this higher volatility is in part
generated by the greater volatility of dividends as well as the leverage ratio,  . In our analysis,
we follow Bansal and Yaron (2004) in setting this parameter to 3.
       Table 5, Panel B shows the asset return and dividend target moments for the SMM analysis.
The asset return moments are the same as before: the equity premium, equity standard deviation,
risk-free rate means, and standard deviations. The analysis also continues to target the standard
deviations and first order autocorrelation of consumption.                 However, we now add two moments
from dividend growth: the standard deviation and the first order autocorrelation.
       Panel C provides the best fit estimates from SMM. The fitted equity premium is now close to
the data at 5% for the U.S. and 6.5% for Canada, though the number for the U.K. is somewhat
larger than the data.          Similarly, the estimates of the risk-free rate are now closer to the data.
Importantly, the standard deviation of equity is close to the data with implied estimates between
15% to 18.5%. The standard deviation of the risk free rate is also higher, though still considerably
lower than the data suggest.30 The model also tends to predict a more volatile dividend process for
the U.S. and Canada as well as somewhat greater persistence. As in the consumption asset case,
the implied consumption volatility and autocorrelation is higher than in the data. Nevertheless,
compared to the prior model, the dividend-based model gets closer to matching target moments.
  30
       Bansal and Yaron (2004) address this issue by assuming stochastic volatility. For parsimony, we do not include
this risk in the present paper.    Nevertheless, the high degree of correlation across countries in volatility measures
suggests that this risk is also highly diversified.




                                                           25
5.3   Identifying Persistent Risk Correlation when Equity Pays Dividends

We now use the newly fitted parameters to re-evaluate international risk-sharing gains. As before,
we require additional restrictions from equity returns to identify the correlation in persistent con-
sumption risk. When equity pays out dividends, we show in the appendix that the Campbell-Shiller
approximation of returns imply that equity returns for country  can be written in the form:

                                         
                                        +1 = 0 + 1  + 2 +1 + +1                                  (26)

where 0  1  2 are constants. Note that by contrast to the case when equity pays out consumption,
returns now depend upon the innovation to dividend growth, +1 , instead of the innovation to
transitory consumption, . Calculating the covariance of equity returns across countries as before
implies:                                                         "                   #
                                                                      1 1
                (   )   =     (   ) +                    
                                                                              + 2 2   (   )      (27)
                                                                     1 − 2
   Comparing the covariance in equation (27) with the implied covariances when equity pays out
consumption in equation (23) shows that the relationships are similar except that the correlation
and volatility in transitory dividend shocks () replace their counterparts for transitory consump-
tion shocks ().
   Therefore, to identify the eﬀects of dividend shocks, we require the covariance of dividends
across countries. Using the dividend growth process (equation (25)), this covariance is:


                                                                               
                     (   ) =   (   ) +                   (   )            (28)
                                                                               1 − 2
   Note that the dividend covariance in equation (28) has the same form as the covariance of
consumption growth in equation (21) with two important changes. First, the covariance in tran-
sitory consumption shocks is replaced by the covariance in transitory dividend shocks.                         Second,
”leverage” parameters   now appear in the second term, reflecting the covariance of persistent
consumption risk.
   Given the covariances in equity returns and in dividends, we can now solve for the correlation
in persistent consumption risk, (   ) as before:
                                                      "                                     #
                                
                                                
                                                                          
                       (   ) =                (   ) −         (   )    (29)
                                                                  
                                                                         
              ∙                         ¸−1
                 1 − 
where  ≡ 1 1−         2    + 2 2     . In the appendix, we show that   1 when    1, a
condition that is satisfied by the BY assumptions that  = 3. Thus, equation (29) illustrates

                                                           26
a similar relationship as in the consumption asset case.           As the correlation in equity returns,
(   ), increases relative to the correlation in dividends, (   ), the implied correlation
of persistent shocks rises, an eﬀect reinforced when the variability in dividends,  , is less than that
                     .
of equity returns, 
   Table 6, Panel A reports the dividend correlation while Panel B gives the equity return cor-
relation.   Consistent with the pattern observed between equity returns and consumption, the
correlations between equity returns are higher than dividends.            Furthermore, as previously re-
ported, the standard deviations of dividends are smaller than the standard deviations of equity
returns. As a result, Panel C shows that the implied correlations on persistent consumption risk
are all equal or close to one. The high correlations on persistent risk also identify a lower corre-
lation on transitory risk, since the (   ) estimates in Panel C are all lower than their data
counterparts (in Table 1).
   Panel D of Table 6 gives the gains implied by this decomposition, ranging from 2.7% for the U.S.
and Canada to 4.2% for the U.K. When equity is assumed to pay dividends instead of consumption,
the implied standard deviation on persistent consumption,  , is lowest for the U.K.. Thus, many
of the features previously observed for the lowest persistent risk country, Canada, hold here for the
U.K. In particular, the U.K. has the highest share of world output at 38.3%. Furthermore, the
percentage certainty equivalent change from the wealth-to-consumption ratio worsens for the U.K.
at −9% while both the U.S. and Canada gain at 13% and 9%, respectively. At the same time, the
U.K. gains from an improvement of initial consumption of 15% relative to the benchmark economy,
while this ratio is lower for both the U.S. and Canada.


5.4    Persistent Risk and Risk-Sharing Gains: Uncovering the Channels

Comparing the gains from risk-sharing when equity pays consumption and when equity pays divi-
dends highlights a surprising pattern. Although the dividend case implies greater persistent risk,
the risk-sharing gains are uniformly lower. That is, Table 4C shows that the gains from risk-sharing
range from around 8% to 9.5% when equity pays consumption. But Table 6D reports the counter-
part gains when equity pays dividends at around 3% to 4%. This result might seem counterintuitive
since greater persistent risk should make international diversification more valuable.
   A problem with this comparison is that the two scenarios diﬀer in other respects as well.
Importantly, the model implied consumption variability is lower in the dividend asset case than the
consumption asset case. The standard deviation of monthly consumption ranges from 0.9% to 0.7%


                                                     27
when equity pays consumption (Table 2 Panel A) but is lower at 0.5% to 0.6% when equity pays
dividends (Table 4 Panel A). Thus, the lower gains may simply reflect lower overall consumption
risk.
    To disentangle these two eﬀects, we conduct a thought experiment.           We constrain the data
consumption volatility  to the US estimates in the two asset cases.           We then increase the
volatility of persistent risk and recalculate the gains. Figure 3a illustrates the results. Strikingly,
the gains for both cases decline as the persistent risk increases. Moreover, due to the lower volatility,
the dividend case remains everywhere below the consumption asset. The triangles mark the fitted
numbers from the table. Clearly, whether the data volatility were higher, as in the consumption
case or lower as as in the dividend case, higher persistent risk would reduce welfare gains.
    Therefore, the lower gains in the dividend case arise from greater persistent risk and not lower
consumption volatility. The intuition is clear. When persistent risk is almost perfectly diversified,
an increase in the volatility of persistent risk dampens the gains to diversification.          Greater
persistent volatility implies lower transitory volatility. Therefore, the transitory diversifiable risk
is reduced.
    To verify this conjecture, we consider a counterfactual experiment.          We conduct the same
experiment as depicted in Figure 3a, but assume instead that the correlation on persistent risk is
0.8 instead of 1. Thus, some persistent risk can be diversified. The pattern is shown in Figure 3b.
As the variance of the persistent shock  increases, the welfare gains now increase since this risk
is diversifiable. When persistent risk can be diversified, the dividend asset case has the greatest
gains, highlighting once again the role of persistent risk.


5.5     Summary: Persistent Risk with Dividend-Paying Equity

In this section, we re-evaluated the model assuming that equity pays out dividends as measured
by the data.    This version of the model provided better fits for asset return and consumption
moments. It also required a new identification of the correlations of persistent consumption across
countries based on dividends. As with the consumption case, however, we found that persistent
consumption risk is almost completely diversified, even without fully open markets.
    Comparing the two versions of the model generated surprising results.          Despite greater per-
sistent risk when equity pays dividends, the gains were lower than the consumption asset case.
Further analysis yielded a straightforward explanation, however.        Higher volatility in persistent
risk implies lower volatility in transitory risk as measured by the data. Since the model implies the


                                                   28
persistent risk is essentially diversified, the lower risk on the diversifiable component means lower
gains.


6     Risk-Sharing and Other Considerations

In order to understand key features of risk-sharing across countries, we have focused upon a number
of simplifying assumptions. First, we have assumed that all countries have the same mean growth
rates. Second, we have treated all countries as though they are the same size.       Third, we have
considered a small set of three countries. In this section, we relax all three of these assumptions.


6.1      Diﬀering Means

In the quantitative analysis, we have so far assumed common growth rates across countries. Here
we consider the eﬀects of relaxing this assumption.
    The eﬀects on welfare gains are straightforward. The price of a country’s output in the open
economy is increasing in the mean growth rate. We described this relationship for the transitory
only case in Section 2 as well as the persistent case in Section 3. At the same time, a higher growth
rate economy will not benefit as much from the common growth rate in the open economy since it
must share the lower growth rates of the others.
    Table 7 shows that this intuition holds in our quantitative analysis as well. Panel A repeats
the mean annualized growth rates in Table 1 showing that the U.S. has the higher growth rate in
the sample at about 2.1%. Panels B and C repeat the analysis with diﬀering  for Table 4 when
equity pays consumption and for Table 6 when equity pays dividends, respectively.
    Compared to the common means analysis, the U.S. receives a greater share of world output but
also has a lower welfare gain than the other countries. For the dividend asset case, for example,
when mean growth rates are common as in Table 6, the share of world output is 30.2% but this
share increases to 31.3% with the higher U.S. mean in Table 7. At the same time, the gains to the
U.S. decline from 2.7% with common means in Table 6 to 2.3% with the diﬀering means in Table
7. Overall, allowing for diﬀering means imply a higher world share for high growth countries, but
also lower welfare gains as they share in a lower growth world economy.




                                                 29
6.2     Diﬀering Sizes

Above we treated the three countries as though they were all the same size, though this assumption
is clearly counterfactual.   Since our consumption data are measured in per capita units, we can
easily recover aggregate consumption by multiplying population size.        Accounting for diﬀering
sizes requires a modification of the framework described in Section 2. Here we describe the new
equilibrium as a decentralized economy. Appendix A shows that this equilibrium is also the solution
to a social planner’s problem that puts equal weight on each person in the population.


6.2.1    The modified equilibrium

Each person in each country is endowed with the claim to one unit of per capita output in his home
country,  , ∀. Defining the number of people in country  as   , total output in country  is
    . In the perfect risk-sharing economy, each person owns the per capita output of his own
country. Thus, there are now   claims to output of country  available. At time 0, each person
in country  sells his share and purchases shares in the world output process. Thus, the budget
constraint for country  as a whole implies
                                  ³          ´
                                 0 + 0∗ =   (0 + 0∗ ) 0

where total population is   = Σ=1   . Solving for the share of country  agents in world
                                ³           ´
markets then implies:  =  0 + 0∗  (0 + 0∗ ) where  ≡     . That is, the
                                                                                    0 +0∗
share of country  in the world market is equal to its share in the world wealth,   0 +0∗ ,   multiplied
by its share in world population,  .
   Using these population-weighted shares, the world parameters become ∗ ≡ Σ=1   for the
                           ¡ ¢2                    ¡ ¢2
mean growth rate and ∗2 = 1 0 Σ  and ∗2 = 1 0 Σ  for the transitory and persistent
variance, respectively, where  is the  dimensioned vector of population shares and Σ and Σ are
the variance-covariance matrices of transitory and persistent shocks, respectively.


6.2.2    The implied gains

Table 8 reports the results assuming diﬀering country sizes.     Panel A gives the new parameters
based upon fitting the model with population diﬀerences.       Panels B and C repeat the analysis
based on these population weights when equity pays consumption and when equity pays dividends,
respectively. For both of these cases, the price-weighted gains do not provide a steady-state equi-


                                                 30
librium because one or more countries have unbounded utility, violating the equilibrium condition
(equation (2)).
      Since the pricing equilibrium does not have a steady state, we consider a more general the set
of Pareto eﬃcient allocations.31           In particular, we report the gains if each country receives all
the gains while leaving every other country indiﬀerent. Thus, the upper bound in gains for each
eﬃcient equilibrium is given by calculating for country  the gains from receiving all of the initial
surplus consumption allocation while setting ∆ = 0 ∀ 6= .                                                       b∗ , the
                                                                                           Thus, we first solve for 0

initial consumption allocations for residents in country  that implies no gains for residents of all
countries except .                            Ã         !½
                                                   b∗                         ¾     1
                                                   0              0∗ 0∗        1− 1
                                                                                       
                                          1=                                                                                     (30)
                                                   0            0 0

where 0 0 are calculated from the benchmark economy as above. Similarly, the open economy
wealth-to-consumption ratios 0∗ 0∗ must be the same among the set of eﬃcient allocations since
state prices are equalized in the competitive equilibrium. The upper bounds on country  welfare
among this set of allocations is then given by:
                                                                     ⎛             P      b∗   ⎞
                       Ã            !(                )     1            0 −                   (                )     1
                           b∗
                                        0∗ 0∗       1− 1                             0
                                                                                                        0∗ 0∗       1− 1
                            0                                  ⎜             6=          ⎟                            
      (1 + ∆ ) =                                               =⎝                           ⎠                                (31)
                            0          0 0                             0
                                                                                                       0 0

The set of eﬃcient allocations for residents in each country  are then bracketed by the minimum
             b∗ , that will give zero welfare gains and the maximum consumption, 
consumption,                                                                     b∗
              0                                                                    0 , that

will give all the world welfare gains to country 
      Panel A shows the eﬃcient set range of gains under the consumption asset case for each country.
The first row shows the gains from the improvement in the wealth-to-consumption ratio. As before
these are positive for the U.S. and U.K., but negative for Canada. The remaining rows show the
range in gains depending upon which country receives all the surplus. For the U.S, the gains are
as high as 8.8% when Americans receive all the surplus at 71% of world output.                                       On the other
hand, when the US is indiﬀerent, thereby receiving no gains, that share of world output is 65%.
By contrast, Canada loses on the wealth-to-consumption ratio but if compensated to the maximum
share of 13% of world output, receives a large 78.6% gain. Similar patterns hold for the dividend
asset case in Panel B. In this case, the U.K. has better hedge properties so its role switches with
Canada. Overall, the results in Table 8 highlight the scope for gains to trade across countries.
 31
      Details are in Appendix A.



                                                              31
6.3       More Countries

In the analysis so far, we have focused upon a small group of countries comprised of three countries.
This analysis demonstrates how the framework can expand the number of countries over the two-
country models of Colacito and Croce (2010) and Stathopoulos (2011a).                      In principle, however,
the multi-country framework described in Section 2 applies to an arbitrary number of countries.
To show the analysis with more countries, we now apply our framework over seven countries. For
our analysis, we consider the three countries above and include Australia, France, Germany, and
Japan.32
       As above, we consider the eﬀects of persistent consumption risk under the two alternative
assumptions that link equity returns to the data: (1) equity pays out consumption; and (2) equity
pays out dividend. We first use the target moments to try to fit consumption parameters for the
new countries. We then use these parameters together with the parameters for the U.S., U.K., and
Canada above to re-evaluate the risk-sharing gains. In the interest of parsimony, we only report
the results for the dividend asset case since it fits returns better.


6.3.1       Identifying Persistent Consumption Risk for Additional Countries

We first implement our Simulated Method of Moments approach on consumption and asset return
data for the four new countries. Table 9 Panel A reports the set of consumption and dividend
parameters [         ]. Panels B and C give the set of target data moments and implied
moments, respectively. The variability in persistent consumption risk  , is similar across coun-
tries. Although Japan has the lowest variability of persistent consumption, it also has the highest
variability in transitory consumption risk.            Note that to fit asset returns, implied consumption
variability is higher than the data as found for the other three countries.                  Moreover, while the
autocorrelation in consumption is close to the data for most countries, it is clearly too high to
match the tiny autocorrelation for Australia.


6.3.2       Risk-Sharing Gains with More Countries

We next consider the implications for risk-sharing using the fitted parameters for the four new
countries together with the corresponding parameters for the U.S., U.K., and Canada previously
reported in Table 5. Panel D of Table 9 shows these results. The first column reports the data
  32
       This set of countries is close to the Group of Seven countries analyzed in Lewis (2000), except that Australia
replaces Italy to provide a wider geographic coverage of industrialized countries.


                                                          32
correlations between dividends. To preserve space, we simply report the correlation of dividends
for each country and the world, although the full matrix is used in estimation. The correlations
demonstrate the low correlations in dividends relative to those between equity returns, noted earlier.
All correlations are less than 0.55 and that of the UK is as low as 0.33. The next two columns
report the implied correlations between the world and country persistent shock,  as well as the
transitory shock,   . Once again, the correlations in persistent risk are very high and close to one.
    The final columns show the welfare gains. As in the population-weighted case, the decentralized
economy does not have a steady state equilibrium. The U.K. has a low persistent and transitory
risk volatility and its share is correspondingly high. Thus, with the expanded set of countries, its
price becomes undefined.
    We therefore report the range of Pareto eﬃcient allocations. Under the column labeled ”Gains”,
we report the maximum gain for the row country while setting the gains for all other countries equal
to zero. The following three columns report the maximum share of output for that country when
setting all other country gains to zero along with the gain due to increases in wealth-to-consumption
”W/C” and the change in initial consumption ” ∗   ”.       For example, the gain for the U.S. is
127% when the gains are zero for all other countries so that residents receive 28% of world per capita
income. The gains from wealth-to-consumption are only 16% while the gains from receiving initial
consumption is 96%. On the other hand, the last column reports the lowest world consumption
share so that the U.S. is not made worse oﬀ in the world economy. At 12%, this share is significantly
lower than the maximum.
    The welfare gains may appear high relative to earlier tables, but the reasons are clear. First,
the reported gains are the maximum if all surplus were given to one country. For the U.S. gains, for
example, dividing by seven would imply an average gain per country of only about 17%. Second,
the gains are larger because there are more countries, increasing the potential gains from trade.


7    Conclusion

International asset returns incorporate market valuations of risk and these valuations are central to
understanding potential gains from global consumption risk sharing. Nevertheless, most interna-
tional risk sharing studies ignore the implications of these markets. In this paper, we have begun
to bridge this gap by noting how features that bring the model closer to data impact views about
risk sharing.


                                                  33
   Low frequency variations in consumption risk are key to generating the size of equity premia
and volatility of asset returns. In this paper, we consider these variations as a small but persistent
component of consumption shocks. For this purpose, we use data on consumption, asset returns,
and in the final version, dividends to determine the best fit for seven industrialized economies. Our
analysis produces three main findings.
   First, we find that the magnitude of risk-sharing gains depend inversely on the degree of correla-
tion in persistent consumption risk across countries. In other words, the consumption risk-sharing
gains increase with the ability to diversify persistent risk.
   Second, we provide an identification for the persistent risk correlation using consumption and
equity return correlations across countries.     This identification implies high correlations on per-
sistent risk and, hence, a low diversification potential. In the data, equity return correlations are
higher than consumption correlations across countries. In the model, equity returns and, hence,
their correlations depend more strongly on the persistent risk component than the transitory risk
component. Taken together, the model implies a high correlation in persistent risk.
   Third, we show that higher volatility in persistent risk reduces the implied gains from risk
sharing. Once we disentangle the diversification benefits of transitory versus persistent risk, the
intuition is clear.   Greater volatility in persistent risk implies lower volatility in transitory risk.
Since persistent risk is already diversified, only transitory risk can be shared. Higher persistent
risk therefore implies lower diversifiable transitory risk, thereby reducing risk sharing gains. Thus,
significant international consumption risk is already shared.
   Overall, our results overturn conventional views about the gains from international consumption
risk sharing when disciplined by asset returns. Calibrating models to asset return moments such
as the equity premium do not translate into significantly higher risk sharing gains. Indeed, incor-
porating persistent risk implies lower risk sharing gains even though this risk helps fit a number of
asset return moments. Thus, this paper provides a new departure in understanding international
consumption risk sharing.




                                                   34
References

 [1] Backus, David K; Kehoe, Patrick J; Kydland, Finn E., International Real Business Cycles,
    Journal of Political Economy, vol. 100, no. 4, August 1992, pp. 745-75

 [2] Barro, Robert J., Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs, American Economic Re-
    view, vol. 99, no. 1, March 2009, pp. 243-264.

 [3] Bansal, Ravi; Lundblad, Christian, Market Eﬃciency, Asset Returns, and the Size of the Risk
    Premium in Global Equity Markets, Journal of Econometrics, vol. 109, 2002, pp. 195-237.

 [4] Bansal, Ravi; Yaron, Amir, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
    Puzzles, Journal of Finance, vol. 59, no. 4, August 2004, pp. 1481-1509

 [5] Baxter, Marianne; Crucini, Mario J., Business Cycles and the Asset Structure of Foreign Trade,
    International Economic Review, vol. 36, no. 4, November 1995, pp. 821-54

 [6] Baxter, Marianne; Jermann, Urban J., The International Diversification Puzzle Is Worse Than
    You Think, American Economic Review, vol. 87, no. 1, March 1997, pp. 170-80

 [7] Bekaert, Geert; Hodrick, Robert; Zhang, Xiaoyan, International Stock Return Comovement,
    Journal of Finance, vol. 64, no. 6, December 2009, pp. 2591-2626

 [8] Brandt, Michael W; Cochrane, John H; Santa-Clara, Pedro.International Risk Sharing Is Bet-
    ter Than You Think, or Exchange Rates Are Too Smooth, Journal of Monetary Economics,
    vol. 53. no. 4 May 2006, pp.671-698.

 [9] Callen, Michael; Imbs, Jean; Mauro, Paulo, Pooling Risk Among Countries, Paris School of
    Economics Working Paper, July 2011.

[10] Campbell, John Y., Consumption-Based Asset Pricing, ”Handbook of the Economics of Fi-
    nance” Vol. IB, George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz eds., North-Holland,
    Amsterdam, 2003.

[11] Campbell, John Y., Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consumption Data, American Eco-
    nomic Review, vol. 83, no. 3, June 1993, pp. 487-512

[12] Campbell, John Y; Cochrane, John H., By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
    of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 107, no. 2, April 1999,
    pp. 205-51

                                                35
[13] Campbell, John Y; Shiller, Robert J., The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
    dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies, vol. 1,1988, pp. 195-227.

[14] Coeurdacier, Nicolas; Rey, Helene; Home Bias in Open Economy Financial Macroeconomics,
    Working Paper, London Business School, September 2011.

[15] Colacito, Riccardo; Croce, Mariono M. The Short and Long Run Benefits of Financial Inte-
    gration,American Economic Review, vol. 100, no. 2, May 2010, 527-531.

[16] Colacito, Riccardo; Croce, Mariono M. Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange Rate,
    Journal of Political Economy, vol. 119, no. 1, February 2011, 153-181.

[17] Cole, Harold L; Obstfeld, Maurice, Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing: How
    Much Do Financial Markets Matter?, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 28, no. 1, August
    1991, pp. 3-24

[18] Dumas, Bernard; Harvey, Campbell R; Ruiz, Pierre. Are Correlations of Stock Returns Justified
    by Subsequent Changes in National Outputs? Journal of International Money and Finance,
    vol. 22. no. 6, Nov 2003, pp. 777-811.

[19] Epstein, Larry G; Zin, Stanley E., Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
    Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework, Econometrica, vol. 57, no. 4, July
    1989, pp. 937-69

[20] Gallant, A Ronald; Tauchen, George.The Relative Eﬃciency of Method of Moments Estimators
    Journal of Econometrics vol. 92, no.1, Sep 1999, pp. 149-172.

[21] Hansen, Lars P. Dynamic Valuation Decomposition within Stochastic Economies Econometrica,
    forthcoming.

[22] Jonathan Heathcote; Perri, Fabrizio, The international diversification puzzle is not as bad as
    you think, University of Minnesota Working Paper, April 2008.

[23] Ingersoll, Johnathan E., Theory of Financial Decision Making, Rowman and Littlefield, 1987.

[24] Lewis, Karen K., Why Do Stocks and Consumption Imply Such Diﬀerent Gains from Inter-
    national Risk Sharing?, Journal of International Economics, vol. 52, no. 1, October 2000, pp.
    1-35


                                                36
[25] Lewis, Karen K.,Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption, Journal of Eco-
    nomic Literature, vol. 37, no. 2, June 1999, pp. 571-608.

[26] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., Models of Business Cycles, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987.

[27] Lucas, Robert E., Jr.; Stokey, Nancy L. Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard
    University Press, 1989.

[28] Martin, Ian, How Much Do Financial Market Matter? Cole-Obstfeld Revisited, Stanford Uni-
    versity, Working Paper, November 2010.

[29] Meese, Richard A; Rogoﬀ, Kenneth, Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do
    They Fit Out of Sample?, Journal of International Economics, vol. 14, no. 1-2, February 1983,
    pp. 3-24

[30] Mehra, Rajnish; Prescott, Edward C., The Equity Premium: A Puzzle, Journal of Monetary
    Economics, vol. 15, no. 2,March 1985, pp. 145-61

[31] Obstfeld, Maurice, Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth, American Economic Re-
    view, vol. 84, no. 5, December 1994b, pp. 1310-29

[32] Obstfeld, Maurice, Evaluating Risky Consumption Paths: The Role of Intertemporal Substi-
    tutability, European Economic Review, vol. 38, no. 7, August 1994a, pp. 1471-86

[33] Rietz, Thomas A., The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution, Journal of Monetary Economics,
    vol. 22, no. 1, July 1988, pp. 117-131

[34] Stathopoulos, Andreas, Asset Prices and Risk Sharing in Open Economies, Working Paper,
    University of Southern California, January 2011a

[35] Stathopoulos, Andreas, Portfolio Home Bias and External Habit Formation, Working Paper,
    University of Southern California, November 2011b

[36] Stockman, Alan C; Tesar, Linda L., Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of the
    Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements, American Economic Review, vol. 85,
    no. 1, March 1995, pp. 168-85

[37] Tesar, Linda L., Evaluating the Gains from International Risksharing, Carnegie-Rochester
    Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 42, June 1995, pp. 95-143

                                               37
[38] Tesar, Linda L; Werner, Ingrid M., Home Bias and High Turnover, Journal of International
    Money and Finance, vol. 14, no. 4, August 1995, pp. 467-92

[39] van Wincoop, Eric, Welfare Gains from International Risksharing, Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, vol. 34, no. 2, October 1994, pp. 175-200

[40] van Wincoop, Eric, How Big are Potential Welfare Gains from International Risksharing?
    Journal of International Economics, Vol. 47, 1999, pp. 109-135.

[41] Varian, Hal R., Microeconomic Analysis, W.W. Norton and Company, 1987.

[42] Warnock, Francis E., Home Bias and High Turnover Reconsidered, Journal of International
    Money and Finance, vol. 21, no. 6, November 2002, pp. 795-805

[43] Weil, Philippe, Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
    105, no. 1, February 1990, pp. 29-42

[44] Weil, Philippe, The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle, Journal of Mone-
    tary Economics, vol. 124, no. 3, 1989, pp. 401-21




                                               38
         Table 1: Consumption, Welfare Gains and Asset Returns
Panel A: Consumption Statistics                                           Correlation

                                           Mean      S.D.     AC       U.S.    U.K.     Can

                           United States    2.08     1.76     0.27     1.00    0.49     0.63

                        United Kingdom      1.99     1.72     0.40     0.49    1.00     0.32

                                Canada      1.96     1.73     0.38     0.63    0.32     1.00

Panel B: Welfare Gains
Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution       = 05            = 15
Risk Aversion                              =4       = 10   =4       = 10
US                                          0.3      0.9      1.0      3.4
                                           (333)   (332)   (331)   (331)
UK                                          0.6      1.7      2.4      6.7
                                           (334)   (335)   (336)   (336)
Canada                                      0.4      1.3      1.8      5.2
                                           (333)   (334)   (334)   (334)
Panel C: Return Moments                    Model Implied:                        Data
US:
Equity Premium-Mean                         0.1      0.3      0.1      0.3        4.3
Equity Return-Std Dev                       1.8      1.8      1.8      1.8        17.6
Risk-free Rate - Mean                       5.6      5.3      2.9      2.7        1.5
Risk-free Rate - Std Dev                    0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0        2.2
UK:
Equity Premium-Mean                         0.1      0.3      0.1      0.2        4.5
Equity Return-Std Dev                       1.7      1.7      1.7      1.7        23.5
Risk-free Rate - Mean                       5.4      5.1      2.8      2.7        3.9
Risk-free Rate - Std Dev                    0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0        2.8




                                             39
Table 2: Parameters and Targeted Moments
Country                           US     UK     Can
Panel A: Monthly Parameters
Mean ()                          .173   .166   .164
Transitory Std Dev ( )           .920   .630   .660
Persistence Std Dev ( )         .027   .030   .026
Cons Std Dev ( )               .929   .648   .673
Panel B: Targeted Moments
Equity Premium-Mean               4.3    4.5      6.5
Equity Return-Std Dev             17.6   23.5   17.6
Risk-free Rate - Mean             1.5    3.9      2.5
Risk-free Rate - Std Dev          2.2    2.8      6.0
Consn Growth - Std Dev            1.8    1.7      1.7
Consn Growth - Autocorrelation    0.3    0.4      0.4
Panel C: Simulated Moments
Equity Premium-Mean               1.6    1.2      1.1
Equity Return-Std Dev             3.6    2.8      2.7
Risk-free Rate - Mean             1.8    2.2      2.2
Risk-free Rate - Std Dev          0.5    0.5      0.4
Consn Growth - Std Dev            2.9    2.3      2.2
Consn Growth - Autocorrelation    0.3    0.5      0.4
Panel D: Implied World             ∗    ∗       ∗
                                                  
                                  .599   .028   .614
Notes: All variables in percent. Model assumes common

mean ∗ = 168. All reported simulations based upon

 = 0979,  = 10, = 15, and annual  = 0985




                            40
  Table 3: Welfare Gains and the Persistent Risk Correlation
Cross-Country Correlation                  Corr(e  e ) =
                                 = 0         00    02      05        08            10
US                               10.2      70.0      54.2     34.0       17.4            7.8
       Portfolio Share           (28.4)    (29.7)    (30.0)   (37.4)    (30.7)       (30.9)
     Gain from               29           91     71       47          27            16

     Gain from  ∗           -11          -11    -10       -9         -8            -7

UK                               12.6      86.0      65.5     40.3       20.2            9.0
       Portfolio Share           (36.9     (33.0)    (32.6)   (32.2)     (31.9)      (31.7)

     Gain from                2           88     69       45          26            15

     Gain from  ∗           11           -1      -2       -3         -4            -5

Canada                            8.4      75.7      58.1     35.9       17.8            7.6
       Portfolio Share           (34.7)    (37.3)    (37.4)   (30.4)     (37.4)      (37.4)

     Gain from                4           57     41       21          5             -4

     Gain from  ∗            4           12     12       12          12            12

Notes: All variables in percent. For each country, first line gives total % gains

in consumption implied by Table 2 parameters. Second line in parenthesis
                                                                                    1
                                                                      ∗  ∗   1− 1
reports percentage shares in world output, . Third line is %      .
                                                               ³           ´
                                                                 ∗     
The fourth line is % change in initial consumption allocation,. 0 0 .




                                          41
       Table 4: Equity Correlations and Gains
                    Equity as Consumption Asset
                                     United   United

                                     States   Kingdom   Canada

A. Equity Return Correlation:

          United States               1.00      0.75     0.72

        United Kingdom                0.75      1.00     0.59

             Canada                   0.72      0.59     1.00

B. Implied Correlations

Corr(e  e ):                       1.00      1.00     1.00

Corr(     ):
          United States               1.00      0.48     0.62

        United Kingdom                0.48      1.00     0.29

             Canada                   0.62      0.29     1.00

Corr(     ):                     0.70      0.59     0.64

C: Welfare Gains

Gain                                  7.9       9.4      7.8
         Portfolio Share             (309)    (317)   (374)
       Gain from                 17         15       -4

     Gain from  ∗                -7        -5       12
 Implied   Correlations determined from cross-country equity

and consumption correlations (Table 1A)




                                42
   Table 5: Parameters - Dividend Model
Country                            US    UK     Can
Panel A: Monthly Parameters
Mean ()                          .173   .166    .164

Transitory Std Dev ( )           .604   .469    .454

Persistence Std Dev ( )         .044   .040    .044

Cons Std Dev ( )               .641   .509    .499

Dividend Mean ( )               .186   .339    .201

Dividend SD ( )                 3.03   3.74    3.63

Panel B: Targeted Moments
Equity Premium-Mean                4.3   4.5     6.5

Equity Return-Std Dev             17.6   23.5    17.6

Risk-free Rate - Mean              1.5   3.9     2.5

Risk-free Rate - Std Dev           2.2   2.8     6.0

Consn Growth - Std Dev             1.8   1.7     1.7

Consn Growth - Autocorrelation     0.3   0.4     0.4

Dividend - Std Dev                 7.1   6.8     13.0

Dividend - Autocorrelation         0.1   0.3     0.3

Panel C: Simulated Moments
Equity Premium-Mean                5.0   5.7     6.5

Equity Return-Std Dev             15.2   18.5    18.3

Risk-free Rate - Mean              2.0   2.0     1.9

Risk-free Rate - Std Dev           0.7   0.7     0.8

Consn Growth - Std Dev             2.6   2.4     2.6

Consn Growth - Autocorrelation     0.6   0.6     0.7

Dividend - Std Dev                 9.6   12.1    12.2

Dividend - Autocorrelation         0.4   0.4     0.4

Panel D: Implied World             ∗     ∗     ∗
                                                 
                                  .397   .043    .449

Notes: All variables in percent. Model assumes common

∗ = 168, ∗ = 201. All reported simulations set
 = 0979,  = 10, = 15, and annual  = 0985

                            43
      Table 6: Dividend Correlations and Gains
                    Equity as Dividend Asset
                                     United   United

                                     States   Kingdom   Canada

A. Dividend Correlation:

          United States               1.00      0.35      0.37

        United Kingdom                0.35      1.00      0.12

             Canada                   0.37      0.12      1.00

B. Equity Return Correlation:

          United States               1.00      0.75      0.72

        United Kingdom                0.75      1.00      0.59

             Canada                   0.72      0.59      1.00

C. Implied Correlations

Corr(e  e ):                      0.996    0.996    1.000

Corr(     ):
          United States               1.00      0.42      0.57

        United Kingdom                0.42      1.00      0.19

             Canada                   0.57      0.19      1.00

D: Welfare Gains                      2.7       4.2        2.7

         Portfolio Share             (30.2)    (38.3)    (31.4)
       Gain from                 13         -9        9

      Gain from  ∗               -9       15         -6
 Implied   Correlations based on dividend correlations in A,

on equity in B, and consumption in Table 1A
   Corr(e ,e )=0.987




                                44
        Table 7: Diﬀering Means and Gains
                                   United   United

Country                            States   Kingdom    Canada

Annual Means                        2.08     1.99        1.96

A.Equity paying Consumption

Welfare Gains                       8.3       9.5        7.5

       Portfolio Share             (32.6)    (31.4)     (36.0)

     Gain from                 10.8     16.3        -0.6

     Gain from  ∗             -2.2      -5.9       8.1

B. Equity paying Dividends

Welfare Gains                       2.3       4.5        2.4

       Portfolio Share             (31.3)    (38.1)     (30.6)

     Gain from                 8.9       -8.5       11.4

     Gain from  ∗             -6.1     14.2        -8.1

Notes: All variables in percent. Panel A reports gains for

the consumption asset case (Table 4) with diﬀering means.

Panel B gives the gains for dividend asset case (Table 6).




                              45
   Table 8: Diﬀering Sizes and Eﬃcient Range
                                    United   United

Country                             States   Kingdom   Canada

Population Weights                   .70       .23       .06

A.Equity paying Consumption

      Gain from                  8         6        -11

Maximum Gains                       8.8      26.3       78.6

           Portfolio Share           (71)     (27)       (13)

     Gain from  ∗               1        19        101

Minimum Gains                         0         0            0

       Portfolio Share              (65)     (22)       (7)

B. Equity paying Dividends

      Gain from                  8        -14           4

Maximum Gains                       3.0       7.2       31.0

           Portfolio Share           (67)     (29)       (8)

     Gain from  ∗               -5       24            26

Minimum Gains                         0         0            0

       Portfolio Share              (65)     (27)       (6)

Notes: All variables in percent. Panel A reports gains for

the consumption asset case (Table 4) with population sizes

Panel B gives the gains for dividend asset case (Table 6).
 Results   give bounds for eﬃcient allocations where ∆ = 0

for all countries but column country.
 Shares   that imply ∆ = 0 for column country .




                               46
                            Table 9: Many Countries and Gains
A. Parameters                  Consumption Mean and SD                       Dividend

                           Mean       Trans       Persist        Total    Mean       SD

                            ()        ()          ( )        ( )   ( )     ( )
      Australia            0.170      0.620         0.051        0.668    0.280      4.32

       France              0.212      0.672         0.049        0.714    0.267      5.25

      Germany              0.157      0.562         0.044        0.602    0.398      4.50

       Japan               0.322      1.092         0.036        1.111    0.233      5.15

   Implied World           0.195      0.403         0.042        0.454    NA         NA

B: Target Moments          Equity    Equity         Rfree        Rfree.   Con       Con        Div      Div

                           Prem        S.D.         Mean          S.D     S.D       A.C.       S.D      A.C.

      Australia             7.1        22.1          1.6          6.3      2.2       0.03     11.8      0.48

       France               7.6        25.6          1.8          5.9      1.8       0.52     14.0      0.19

      Germany               6.4        23.1          4.2          4.5      1.6       0.61     12.6      0.43

       Japan                2.2        25.0          2.6          5.2      3.2       0.68     10.2      0.61

C: Implied Moments

      Australia             7.6        20.4          1.6          0.8      3.0       0.62     13.7       0.4

       France               7.9        23.4          1.9          0.9      3.1       0.60     16.4       0.4

      Germany               6.6        21.2          1.8          0.8      2.7       0.62     14.3       0.4

       Japan                3.6        20.9          2.4          0.6      3.6       0.39     15.0       0.3

 D: Welfare Gains        Div Corr                                            Eﬃcient Set Range

            and             with        Implied Corr                              Max                  Min

    Correlations           World     (   )   (     )   Gains    Share    ∆ W/C      ∗     Share

   United States            0.44       0.96         0.42          127      28        16        96        12

  United Kingdom            0.33       1.0          0.28          100      31         -9       119       16

      Canada                0.54       0.91         0.37          122      29        11        100       13

      Australia             0.50       0.88         0.06          192      24        75        67        08

       France               0.47       1.0          0.35          180      24        64        70        09

      Germany               0.51       0.92         0.32          125      28        14        97        13

       Japan                0.48       0.83         0.38          111      30            1     108       14

Notes: All reported simulations based upon  = 10,  = 15,and annual  = 0985
 Results   give bounds for eﬃcient allocations where ∆ = 0 for all countries but row country.
 Shares   that imply ∆ = 0 for row country .

                                                    47
                                                                                   




                     &ŝŐƵƌĞϭĂ͗tĞůĨĂƌĞ'ĂŝŶƐĂŶĚhƚŝůŝƚǇ
                                              ^ĂŵĞ^ŝŐŵĂƐ
      >
      Ž ϰϬϬ
      Ő ϯϱϬ
        ϯϬϬ
      h ϮϱϬ
      ƚ ϮϬϬ                                                                                 ĞŶĐŚŵĂƌŬ
      ŝ ϭϱϬ                                                                                 KƉƚŝŵĂůZ^
      ů ϭϬϬ
                                                                                            'ĂŝŶ;йͿ
      ŝ  ϱϬ
      ƚ   Ϭ
      Ǉ         Ϭ     Ϯ       ϰ       ϲ   ϴ       ϭϬ ϭϮ ϭϰ ϭϲ ϭϴ ϮϬ
                                              zĞĂƌƐ



    Ϭ͘ϰϱ
               &ŝŐƵƌĞϭď͗ĞƌƚĂŝŶƚǇƋƵŝǀĂůĞŶƚŽŶƐƵŵƉƚŝŽŶ
     Ϭ͘ϰ                                                                                      ђũͲЪɶʍũϮ
    Ϭ͘ϯϱ                                                                                      ђΎͲЪɶʍΎϮ

     Ϭ͘ϯ

    Ϭ͘Ϯϱ

     Ϭ͘Ϯ

    Ϭ͘ϭϱ

     Ϭ͘ϭ

    Ϭ͘Ϭϱ

      Ϭ
           Ϭ     Ϯ        ϰ       ϲ       ϴ        ϭϬ     ϭϮ        ϭϰ   ϭϲ   ϭϴ       ϮϬ
ͲϬ͘Ϭϱ
                                                  zĞĂƌƐ                                                  

                                             




                                                               48
                                        &ŝŐƵƌĞϮĂ͗tĞůĨĂƌĞ'ĂŝŶƐ
                                                ŝĨĨĞƌŝŶŐ^ŝŐŵĂƐ
      ϭϰϬ
    W ϭϮϬ
    Ğ ϭϬϬ
    ƌ ϴϬ
    Đ ϲϬ                                                                                    'ĂŝŶ>Žǁʍ
    Ğ ϰϬ                                                                                    'ĂŝŶ,ŝŐŚʍ
    Ŷ ϮϬ
    ƚ   Ϭ
               Ϭ        Ϯ       ϰ       ϲ   ϴ      ϭϬ    ϭϮ   ϭϰ   ϭϲ    ϭϴ    ϮϬ
                                                 zĞĂƌƐ


                                    &ŝŐƵƌĞϮď͗ǆƉĞĐƚĞĚhƚŝůŝƚǇ
      ϰϬϬ
    >
      ϯϱϬ
    Ž
    Ő ϯϬϬ
      ϮϱϬ
    h                                                                                     ZŝƐŬ^ŚĂƌĞ
    ƚ ϮϬϬ                                                                                 ĞŶĐŚͲ>Žǁʍ
    ŝ ϭϱϬ
                                                                                          ĞŶĐŚͲ,ŝŐŚʍ
    ů
      ϭϬϬ
    ŝ
    ƚ ϱϬ
    Ǉ   Ϭ
               Ϭ ϭ Ϯ ϯ ϰ ϱ ϲ ϳ ϴ ϵ ϭϬ ϭϭ ϭϮ ϭϯ ϭϰ ϭϱ ϭϲ ϭϳ ϭϴ ϭϵ ϮϬ

               &ŝŐƵƌĞϮĐ͗ĞƌƚĂŝŶƚǇƋƵŝǀĂůĞŶƚŽŶƐƵŵƉƚŝŽŶ

    Ϭ͘ϲ



    Ϭ͘ϰ



    Ϭ͘Ϯ
                   ůŶ;Ύ>ͬ>Ϳ

      Ϭ
           Ϭ        Ϯ       ϰ       ϲ       ϴ     ϭϬ     ϭϮ   ϭϰ    ϭϲ    ϭϴ        ϮϬ
                                                                                         ђͲЪɶʍ>Ϯ
    ͲϬ͘Ϯ
                   ůŶ;Ύ,ͬ,Ϳ
                                                                                         ђͲЪɶʍ,Ϯ
                                                                                         ђͲЪɶʍ>ΎϮ
    ͲϬ͘ϰ                                                                                 ђͲЪɶʍ,ΎϮ
                                                 zĞĂƌƐ
                                                                                                          

                                                        49



                                              &ŝŐƵƌĞϯĂ͗dŚĞĨĨĞĐƚƐŽĨsĂƌǇŝŶŐWĞƌƐŝƐƚĞŶƚZŝƐŬ
                        ϭϰй

                        ϭϮй

                        ϭϬй
    tĞůĨĂƌĞ'ĂŝŶŝŶй




                        ϴй

                        ϲй

                        ϰй

                        Ϯй

                        Ϭй
                              Ϭ͘ϬϬϬ Ϭ͘Ϭϭϱ Ϭ͘ϬϯϬ Ϭ͘Ϭϰϱ Ϭ͘ϬϲϬ Ϭ͘Ϭϳϱ Ϭ͘ϬϵϬ Ϭ͘ϭϬϱ Ϭ͘ϭϮϬ Ϭ͘ϭϯϱ Ϭ͘ϭϱϬ Ϭ͘ϭϲϱ Ϭ͘ϭϴϬ
                                                                     ʍĞ

                              ŽŶƐƐƐĞƚ͗/ŵƉůŝĞĚŽŶƐsŽůс͘ϵϮй            ŝǀŝĚĞŶĚƐƐĞƚ͗/ŵƉůŝĞĚŽŶƐŶsŽůс͘ϲϰй
                              DŽĚĞů&ŝƚ
                                                                                                                    

                                    &ŝŐƵƌĞϯď͗dŚĞĨĨĞĐƚƐŽĨsĂƌǇŝŶŐWĞƌƐŝƐƚĞŶƚZŝƐŬ
                                                     Žƌƌ;Ğŝ ͕ĞũͿсϬ͘ϴ
                        Ϯϱй


                        ϮϬй
    tĞůĨĂƌĞ'ĂŝŶŝŶй




                        ϭϱй


                        ϭϬй


                        ϱй


                        Ϭй
                                Ϭ͘ϬϬϬ     Ϭ͘Ϭϭϱ    Ϭ͘ϬϯϬ    Ϭ͘Ϭϰϱ   Ϭ͘ϬϲϬ     Ϭ͘Ϭϳϱ     Ϭ͘ϬϵϬ     Ϭ͘ϭϬϱ     Ϭ͘ϭϮϬ
                                                                     ʍĞ

                               ŽŶƐƐƐĞƚ͗/ŵƉůŝĞĚŽŶƐsŽůс͘ϵϮй      ŝǀŝĚĞŶĚƐƐĞƚ͗/ŵƉůŝĞĚŽŶƐŶsŽůс͘ϲϰй
                                                                                                                    

                                                                              

                                                             50
A       Appendix: Country Consumption Weights

In this appendix we show that the country weights in aggregate consumption are determined by
the solution to a planner’s problem. We first assume identically sized economies and then extend
these results to diﬀering population weights.                  Finally, we characterize the set of Pareto eﬃcient
allocations.



A.1     The Consumption Allocation with Identically Sized Countries

Proposition 1: Let  be the planner weights on utility of country ,  be the state-price for
country  at time  . and   (  +1
                                      
                                          ) be given by:
                                               (                    ∙³             ) 
                                                         1−
                                                                          ´1− ¸ 1 1−
                            (  +1
                                      
                                          )=           
                                                                       
                                                               +  +1                                         (32)

Then the solution to the planner’s problem:

                                                 X
                                           =        (0  1 )                                           (33)
                                           
                                         { }   =1
                                              ∀




                                              
                                              X       
                                                      X
                                       s.t.      =     ∀                                                   (34)
                                               =1                  =1
                                       ∞
                                       X          ∞
                                                  X
                                     0   = 0    ∀
                                          
                                                                                                                   (35)
                                        =0                            =0
                                       (0  1 )
                                       
                                                           ∈   ∞ ∀                                            (36)

is given by:
                                                    =    ∀

where
                                                               0 + 0∗
                                                    =                                                            (37)
                                                               0 + 0∗
            P
                                                                               P
                                                                                ∞                           P
                                                                                                            ∞
for  ≡        , the world output in each period and for 0∗ = 0             ∗  and 0∗ = 0       ∗  ,
            =1                                                                  =1                         =1
the present value of country ’s output and the world output, respectively, at the world stochastic
discount factor, ∗ .
    Discussion: Note that the planner maximizes utility across agents in each country given three
constraints. The first constraint given in equation (34) is the resource constraint that total output

                                                                i
equals total consumption in each period.               The second constraint given in equation (35) is the
lifetime budget constraint for each country. This constraint says that the expected lifetime value
of consumption for each country equals the expected lifetime value of its output. The budget
constraint holds in expectations both because of uncertainty (Lucas and Stokey (1989), pp. 487-
490) and because current utility depends upon expected future utility. Finally, the third constraint
in equation (36) requires utility to be bounded and rational along the equilibrium path.
   Proof: The planner’s problem can be simplified by solving for the value function of each country
given the budget constraint (35). For this purpose, first note that since the state-price at time 0 is
one (i.e., 0 = 1), the lifetime budget constraint can be rewritten as:
                                            ∞
                                            X                   ∞
                                                                X
                                 0 + 0       = 0 + 0    ∀
                                             =1                     =1

Or as:
                                        0 + 0 = 0 ≡ 0 + 0  ∀                            (38)

where  is the price of country  output at state prices  and  is the price of country 
consumption at these same prices. Thus, the budget constraint simply states that current con-
sumption plus the future expected value of consumption equals current country output plus the
expected value of future output. Alternatively, the value of current and future output is identically
equal to country wealth.
   To solve for the value function of each country, we then solve for the Bellman equation:
                                                   (                ∙³             ) 
                                                         1−
                                                                          ´1− ¸ 1 1−
                        (0  0 ) =             
                                                                       
                                                               +  +1                             (39)
                                        { }
                                              ∀

                                            (38) holds

This problem has the solution (Campbell (1993), Obstfeld (1994a)):
                                                                             Ã         !      1
                                       ³ ´− 1 ³ ´ 1                                   1−(1)

                       (   )   =                   = 
                                            1−(1)     1−(1)
                                                                                                     (40)
                                                                                 

Then the value function can be determined given the solution to equilibrium wealth. This solution
in turn depends upon the equilibrium price of output,  . But this price can be determined using
the Euler equation for the return on the asset paying output,  (Epstein and Zin (1989)):
                              ½                                 ¾
                                               
                                         −        (−1) 
                             (+1  )        (+1 )   +1 = 1                        (41)


                                                          ii
                   
where +1 ≡ (+1 + +1 ) and +1
                                             
                                          ≡ (+1    
                                                  + +1 ) . Similarly, the equilibrium price of
the consumption asset can be determined using the Euler equation for its return
                                ½                         ¾
                                                 
                                           −        
                                (+1  )       (+1 ) = 1                                  (42)

So these solutions to the value functions give us  value functions in terms of  sets of country state
prices,  . However, in a Pareto competitive equilibrium with heterogeneous agents but identical
preferences, these state prices must be equal across agents (See for example, Varian (1978), p. 152.)
Using our notation above, these equilibrium state prices correspond to the common ∗ . Therefore,
all agents share the same in the Euler equations (41) and (42). As a consequence, consumption
growth rates are equated:
                                             
                                           (+1  ) = (+1
                                                            
                                                                 ) ∀  

Thus, in the equilibrium, per capita consumption levels are proportional to aggregate output.
Defining this proportion for country  as  ,

                                                     =    ∀                           (43)

   In this case, the lifetime expected consumption in the budget constraint (38) becomes:
                        ∞
                        X                       ∞
                                                X                 ³           ´
                   0     ∗  =  0 + 0 ∗   =  0 + 0∗
                         =0                               =1




   We now substitute the value function for each country (40) into the planner problem (33) to
rewrite the problem as:
                                                     X
                                               =       (0  0 )
                                               
                                             { }   =1
                                               ∀



                                                   
                                                   X       
                                                           X
                                            s.t.      =     ∀
                                                   =1            =1
                                          ³           ´
                                    
                                           0 + 0∗   = 0 ≡ 0 + 0∗  ∀

                     0 +0∗
Clearly then  =               as in equation (37), verifying the proposition above.
                     0 +0∗
   Using the definition of wealth, note also that:
                                           ³          ´
                                         +  ∗
                                                       + ∗
                                   =                    =
                                                     

                                                            iii
Therefore, the wealth-consumption ratio is equal for all countries in equilibrium.
   Moreover, the planner weights are equalized across countries. To see why, note that the first-
order condition for period 0 is:
                                                    Ã         !       1
                                                            1−(1)

                                        =                                       −=0                                  (44)
                                   0   1−           
                                                                          
Rearranging equation (44) and using the fact that                       =         ∀    implies that  =  as required
                                                                          
for a utilitarian planner (Varian (1978), pp. 152-154.), thus verifying the proposition.


A.2     The Consumption Allocation with Diﬀering Population Sizes

The consumption allocations above are derived assuming all countries have the same number of
agents or, alternatively, the planner cares about countries equally regardless of size.                           Here we
recalculate the planner allocations assuming that in each country  there are   people and the
planner cares about maximizing over all individual utilities. Individuals in each country are endowed
with the claims to one per capita unit of country output  .
   Proposition 2: Let  be the planner weights on utility of resident  in country ,  be the
state-price for country  at time  , and consumption and utility of agent  in country  at time 
be  and  , respectively, where  is the Epstein-Zin utility given in equation (32). Then the
solution to the planner’s problem:
                                              X        
                                            X
                                      =            (0  1 )                                            (45)
                                      
                                    { }   =1 =1
                                        ∀



                                      
                                     X         
                                                X                      
                                    X          X
                               s.t.      =       ∀                                                           (46)
                                     =1 =1                  =1 =1
                                     X∞                         X ∞
                                   0         = 0                      ∀                           (47)
                                      =0                           =0

is given by:
                                              =    e  ∀

where
                                                          0 + 0∗
                                              =                                                                  (48)
                                                         e  + e∗
                                                              0         0

for  ≡    , the consumption in each country ;   ≡ Σ=1   , the world population;
                                                     ¡       ¢
e =    , the world per capital output;  ≡     , the country  population share;

                                                         iv
          P ∞                                                                      P             ∞
e0∗ = 0 ∗  , the price of world per capita output. and as before, 0∗ = 0 ∗  , the
            =1                                                                                  =1
price of country  per capital output at world prices.
   Proof: The population-weighted planner problem can be solved as a straightforward extension
to the identical sized country version above.              First note that as above the identical preferences
implies that consumption growth rates are equalized or that:
                                   
                                 (+1  ) = (+1
                                                   
                                                        ) ∀    

Therefore, consumption across individuals diﬀer only by a proportional initial condition. Moreover,
since agents in each country are identical, in equilibrium  =  ∀  so each agent holds identical
shares in world output of 0   . As a result, individual consumption can be rewritten:
                                             ³        ´
                                       = 0  e  ∀

where we have used the fact that aggregate world output can be written as world per capita output
times world population or  = e Σ=1   . Using this solution in the individual lifetime budget
constraint in equation (47) and solving for  verifies the consumption allocations in equation
(48).   Moreover, by the competitive equilibrium,  = ∗ as before.                  Thus,substituting the
solutions for the prices 0∗ and e0∗ into the individual value function in (40) and then solving for
the initial period first order condition to the planner problem (45), verifies that  =   ∀   
corresponding to utilitarian planner weights, thereby proving the proposition.
   Discussion: Thus, equation (48) implies the shares in world output are the same as the equal
population case in Proposition 1 except for two diﬀerences.                  First, the shares are weighted by
population shares,  . As such larger countries have higher shares in world output. Second, the
price of world output is now a population weighted average of country output.


A.3     The Set of Pareto Eﬃcient Allocations

The solution to the planner’s problem does not always correspond to a steady state equilibrium.
This tendency becomes more pronounced when the consumption parameters diﬀer significantly.
For these cases, we characterize the set of eﬃcient allocations so that risk-sharing generates gains
for some countries without making others worse oﬀ. These allocations provide the boundaries for
the eﬃcient set.
   Proposition 3: Let  (   ) be the valuefunctions given by the individual Bellman equation
                                                    1     
                                                   1−( 1 )
                                  h            i       
                                         
(39) and let  (0  0 ) =  1 +                         be the value function in the benchmark economy,
                                         


                                                               v
equation (12).   Then the initial consumption allocations that maximize country  utility without
making all other countries worse oﬀ solves the problem:

                                                    (0  0 )                                (49)
                                                 ∀



                                 s.t.  (0  0 ) ≥  (0  0 ) ∀ 6= 
                                           
                                           X           
                                                       X 
                                                   
                                      s.t.    =  ≡     ∀
                                           =1                         =1
                             n                  o
and is given by the set of    b∗  
                                     b∗ ∀ 6=  determined by giving the reservation initial consumption
                                0     0
       b∗ to all  6=  countries (equation (30)):
levels 0
                                          Ã     !
                                            b∗ ½  ∗  ∗ ¾ 1− 1
                                                               1
                                            0        0    0
                                      1=
                                            0     0 0

and giving the residual consumption from the resource constraint to country  (equation (31)):
                                          ⎛           P b∗ ⎞
                                               0 −       0   (         ) 11
                                                                    ∗ ∗  1−
                                         ⎜            6=    ⎟ 0 0        
                             (1 + ∆ ) = ⎝                   ⎠      
                                                     0           0 0

   Proof: Since the eﬃcient Pareto allocation implies common state prices, the consumption
growth rates across countries are shared as above and consumption levels are a constant share of
world output.    Thus, as before, the wealth-to-consumption ratios are equalized across countries
and the problem to determine the boundary of the eﬃcient set in equation (49) can be rewritten:
                             Ã     !           µ ∗¶           µ  ¶
                              0             0             0
                   0       
                                     s.t. 0     ∗ = 0               ∀ 6= 
                  ∀     0               0               0
                                                         
                                                         X
                                                    s.t.   0 = 0
                                                            =1

Using the fact that the gains can be written as:
                                                 µ          ¶½                ¾     1
                                                    0∗         0∗ 0∗        1− 1
                                                                                      
                                    1+∆ =
                                                     0          0 0

the constraints clearly imply that for all but country , the allocations are determined by setting
∆ = 0 so that (equation (30) holds. Maximizing the utility to country  then means allocating
                                               b∗ is determined by equation (31) verifying the
all remaining consumption to country  so that 0

proposition.


                                                            vi
B        Appendix: Model Solutions and Analysis

In this appendix, we describe the solutions to the risk sharing gains as well as asset returns for the
model. To calculate the gains from risk sharing, we require solutions to the value function under
the benchmark economy and the international risk-sharing economy. As noted above, the general
solution to this value function is33 :
                                                                Ã         !      1
                                                                           1−(1)

                                          (   ) = 
                                                                    

for  =  +  where  is the time  expected value of lifetime consumption for investor .
All prices are determined by the Euler equation (8) in the text:
                              ½                                 ¾
                                              
                                         −          (−1) 
                             (+1  )       (+1 )     +1 = 1

        = ( 
where +1                                                                         
             +1 + +1 ) is the return on the asset that pays out consumption and +1 is

the return on any asset. Then clearly the Euler equation for the consumption asset can be written
as in equation (13):                    ½                         ¾
                                                         −
                                         (+1  )  (+1
                                                               
                                                                  ) = 1

       We next describe the solution for  and the value function  (   ) for the case of transitory
only risk before considering persistent risk.


B.1        The Transitory Only Case

When all consumption risk is transitory, consumption growth is given by:

                                                              
                                                +1 =  + +1 
                                          ³         ´
                                           
We then substitute exp(+1 ) =          +1  into the Euler equation for the consumption asset
                                   
and use the definition of returns +1 to obtain:
                             ⎧                                    # ⎫
                             ⎨                     " 
                                               −    +1 + +1 ⎬
                                                               
                             (exp(+1 ))                       =1                                     (50)
                             ⎩                                   ⎭

       Note that since all risk is I.I.D. for the present case, the conditional expectations are the same
as the unconditional expectations.
  33
       We also checked our solution against the solution implied by the guess-and-verify approach substituting con-
sumption growth in the utility function as in Lewis (2000).


                                                          vii
B.1.1   Benchmark Economy Welfare

In the benchmark economy, consumption is trivially given as  =  . Substituting this process
into equation (50) and using properties of log normality yields the price of consumption in the
benchmark economy given in the text as equation (15):
                                                                  
                                                                 1
                                                             1− 
                                                        
                                              =            
                                                                  1
                                                                    
                                                               1− 
                                                       1 − 
              £  1 2 ¤
               e − 2 
where  ≡ exp              e =  + 12  2 and we have dropped the superscript  for
                         for 
parsimony. Using the fact that in the benchmark economy  =  +  , the value function can
then be written:
                                                                          ⎡                   ⎤       1
                                        Ã              !      1                                    1−(1)

                                                        1−(1)
                                                                           ⎢        1         ⎥
                (   ) =        1+                       =  ⎣                 ⎦
                                                                                         1
                                                                                         1− 
                                                                               1 − 

   thereby verifying equation (16) in the text.


B.1.2   Risk Sharing Economy Welfare

In the risk sharing economy, consumption for country  is a weighted share of world output:  =
                       ³         ´
  where  = 0 + 0∗  (0 + 0∗ ). Thus, solving for the value function requires
determining the price of the world consumption asset, 0∗ , as well as the value of country  output
on world markets, 0∗ .
   We begin with the price of world consumption, 0∗ .                    In this case, the common growth rate
across countries is the weighted sum of the country growth rates:

                                                  ∗
                                                 +1 = ∗ + +1
                                                                ∗
                                                                                                             (51)

                                    ¡ 1 ¢2
where ∗ ≡ 1 Σ=1  and  ∗2 =           0 Σ  for Σ, the variance-covariance matrix of consumption
growth rates, and , a -dimensional unit vector.                     Note that treating the world consumption
process as the country-weighted sum of growth rates is an approximation since the sum of the log
of consumption is not equal to the log of the sum of the country consumptions. In the Empirical
Methods appendix below we describe Monte Carlo experiments that suggest our world process
remains close to log normally distributed despite this approximation.




                                                            viii
   Substituting this process into equation (50) and using properties of log normality implies the
price of world consumption described in the text is:
                                                                    
                                                                   1
                                                                1− 
                                                           
                                                          ∗
                                                ∗ =              
                                                                        1
                                                                     1− 
                                                         1 − ∗
              £                    ¤
where ∗ ≡ exp ∗ + 12 (1 − ) ∗2
   We solve for the price of output in world markets in a similar manner. Specifically, we substitute
                                                    
the individual output growth process, +1 =  + +1 , into the Euler equation (8), using the
               ∗
                        ¡        ¢
                          ∗  ∗ and that                   ∗    ∗         ∗
fact that exp(+1 ) = +1                +1 = (+1 + +1 ) where  is the price of

country  output in the open economy. Taking expectations, equating the Euler equation to one
and solving for the price implies:
                                                                     1
                                                                    −
                                                          ∗         
                                                ∗ =               1                                             (52)
                                                                    −
                                     1 − ∗ 
              ¡  1 2 1 ∗2                     ¢                             1 
where  = exp  + 2  + 2  − (    ∗ ) for  ∗ ≡                     Σ=1     , the shock from the port-
folio of consumption growth rates.              This factor reflects the hedging properties of the country’s
output in world markets. As its covariance with the world market decreases, country ’s output
has a better value as a hedge, inducing the price to increase.
                                         ³          ´
   Substituting  =   for  = 0 + 0∗  (0 + 0∗ ) along with the solutions to the
world and country prices implies the value function for country  in the open economy is:
                                                                                                              
                                                               
                                                                                                         1    
                                                          1
                                                         1− 1
                                                                             ⎡                 ⎤     ( 1 )
                                                                                                     1−
                                            ∙       ¸     ( )
                                                            
                                               ∗                                     1
          (∗  ∗ )   =   
                                          1+                    =   ⎣                ⎦
                                                                                           1
                                                                                          1− 
                                                                                  1 − ∗

   corresponding to equation (7) in the text.


B.1.3   Welfare gains

Calculating the welfare gains are straightforward given the value functions.                        Welfare gains are
determined by ∆ in:

                              0 ((1 + ∆ )0  (1 + ∆ )0 ) = 0 (0∗  0∗ )

Substituting the value function in the benchmark economy and the counterpart for the risk sharing
economy into the condition yields the solution in equation (18):


                                                           ix
                                                                                                     
                                                                                          −     1    
                                                                     ⎡             ⎤         1− 1
                                                                                                ( )
                                                                                                  
                                    (                        )                    1
                                                                               1− 
                                        0 (0∗  0∗ )            ⎢ 1 − ∗      ⎥                     0
                    (1 + ∆ ) =                                  =   ⎣              ⎦
                                        0 (0  0 )                         1
                                                                               1−                          0
                                                                         1 − 

B.1.4       Implied Returns

Given the price solutions and the assumed output processes above, the returns follow directly from
                 ∗ = (  +  ∗ ) ∗ , and 
the definitions +1                                           ∗     ∗
                        +1   +1              +1 = (+1 + +1 ) . Similarly, the risk-free

rate is determined by solving the Euler equation for:
                             ½                               ¾
                                              
                                         −
                                
                            (+1  )          
                                                  (+1 )(−1)
                                                                   = 1


B.2        Including Persistent Risk

When consumption includes persistent risk, consumption growth is given by equation (19), repro-
duced here:

                                                     
                                                    +1 =  +  + +1
                                                                         


                                                     +1 =  + +1
                                                    ³         ´
                                                     
We now substitute the new process for exp(+1 ) = +1  into the Euler equation for the
consumption asset as in equation (13), repeated here:
                                 ½                           ¾
                                                  
                                             −          
                                (+1  )        (+1 ) = 1

With persistent risk, it is no longer possible to solve the value function in closed form. Therefore,
we follow Bansal and Yaron (2004) in assuming returns can be approximated using the Campbell-
Shiller approximation34 :
                                                 
                                                +1 = 0 + 1 +1
                                                                  
                                                                      −  + +1
                                                                               
                                                                                                                               (53)

where  = ln(  ), the log of the price-to-payout ratio for the asset, and where 0 and 1
are approximating constants35 .                    For the return on the consumption asset, for example,  ≡
ln(  ), the log of the price-to-consumption ratio while for the asset paying country  output,
  34
       However, these approximations can lead to misleading conclusions.              As pointed out by Hansen (forthcoming),
the true returns from recursive preferences depend upon a nontrivial factorization.
                                  (̄  )
  35
       The constants are 1 =   1+(̄  )
                                                and 0 = (1 + (̄  )) − 1 ̄ , where ̄  is the steady state log price to
consumption ratio.


                                                                     x
 ≡ ln(∗  ) the log of the price-to-output ratio. We use these relationships below to determine
the welfare in the benchmark and the risk sharing economy.


B.2.1    Benchmark Economy Welfare

Since the value function and the return process depends upon the price-to-payout ratio, it is nec-
essary to solve for this ratio,   = exp( ). Once again, in the benchmark economy,  = 
so that exp( ) ≡    Following Bansal and Yaron (2006), we conjecture that the log price-
to-consumption ratio is linear in the persistent risk. Thus,

                                                   = 0 + 1                                       (54)

Substituting equation (54) into the consumption asset Euler equation above (eqn (13)) and taking
expectations implies:
                                                                        1
                                                                 1−    
                                                      1   =                                               (55)
                                                                1   − 1 
                               µ          ¶"              Ã                 !#
                                        1          1 2            2 12          0
                    0
                   = ln() + 1 −              
                                              e −  1 +                       +                    (56)
                                                  2            (1 − 1 )2       1 − 1
                                                          ¡              ¢
where 0 = (1+(̄  ))−1 ̄ and 1 = (  ) 1 + (̄  ) . Note that the appproximating
constants 0 , 1 depend upon the solution to the long run value of  so our solution solves for the
fixed point between the  equation (54) and the constant 0 in equation (56).
   The solution has an intuitive interpretation in light of the solution with transitory risk. The
                                                                                                            0
deviation of the long run price-to-consumption ratio from the eﬀect of the long run constant,
                                                                                                           1−1
is here given by:
                                       "          #                                 
                                                                      c
                                                                                   1
                                                                                1− 
                                                     =   exp(0 )    = 
                                           
              ∙             µ                             ¶¸
      c            1    2                 2 12
where  = exp e − 2      1+            (1−1 )2
                                                                Recall that in the transitory risk case, we had
         
        1
     1−                    £  1 2 ¤
                          e − 2  . Thus, the persistent case increases the certainty equiva-
              where  ≡ exp 
lent risk through increasing the variance by a factor of 2 12  (1 − 1 )2  This factor is the propor-
tion of persistent risk to transitory risk, 2 , grossed up by the eﬀect of the autoregressive coeﬃcient,
, weighted by the approximating constant which is less than one, 1 Defining  ≡ exp( ), the
value function can be found by substituting the solution for the price-to-consumption ratio into the




                                                                xi
wealth equation giving:
                                                         Ã               !       1
                                                                           1−(1)        ³        ´ 1
                              (   )                                         =  1 + 
                                                                                                       1−(1)
                                              =           1+
                                                                   

B.2.2   Risk Sharing Economy Welfare

In the risk sharing economy, we follow the same steps to find the consumption for country  as a
                                                          ³         ´
weighted share of world output:  =   where  = 0 + 0∗  (0 + 0∗ ).
   We begin with the price of world consumption, 0∗ . In this case, the common growth rate
across countries is the weighted sum of the country growth rates:

                                                    ∗
                                                   +1 = ∗ + ∗ + +1
                                                                        ∗


                                                    ∗+1 = ∗ + ∗+1
                                                                                                                            ¡ 1 ¢2
where ∗ ≡     1 
                Σ=1      , ∗ ≡   1 
                                        Σ=1       , ∗ ≡     1 
                                                                    Σ=1        and ∗ ≡   1      
                                                                                                 Σ=1    so that ∗2 =           0 Σ
               ¡ 1 ¢2 0
 and ∗2 =         Σ  for Σ and Σ , the variance-covariance matrix of transitory and persistent
shocks, respectively, and , a -dimensional unit vector. Note that this specification assumes the
autocorrelation in persistent shocks  are common across countries.                                    We also solved the model
relaxing this assumption, though it significantly complicated the analysis without altering the
results much.
   With this process for world consumption, the log price-to-consumption process can be rewritten:
                                                                              
                                                                              X
                                                            =   
                                                                    0    +            
                                                                                                                                  (57)
                                                                              =1
                                                  ∗
Substituting equation (57) and the world process +1 into the consumption asset Euler equation
above (eqn (13)) and taking expectations implies:

                                                                               1
                                                                          1−  
                                                               
                                                                1 =
                                                                         1 − 1∗ 
                                 µ      ¶"              Ã
                                                                ∗2  ∗2
                                                                          !#
                                      1         1                              0∗
                    
                     0 = ln() +  1 −     e∗
                                              −    ∗2
                                                         1 +         1
                                                                             +
                                               2            (1 − 1∗ )2      1 − 1∗
where the approximating constants 0∗ , 1∗ are the same as before but correspond to the world
price-to-consumption ratio. The solution to this fixed point problem determines  ≡ exp( ).
   Next, we require the price of country  output in world markets. For this purpose, we solve
for the price-to-output ratio given by:
                                                                              
                                                                              X
                                                     ∗ = ∗
                                                             0 +                ∗   
                                                                                 1 
                                                                              =1


                                                                        xii
    Substituting this price-to-output equation into the Euler equation and taking expectations
yields:
                                             ( − 1 −  ) + ( − 1)(1  − 1)
                                                                                
                                   ∗
                                    1 =                                                   
                                                              1 − 1∗ 
                                        P
              [ ln  + ( − 1 −  )        + ( − 1)(0 −               ∗       1 ∗2  1 ∗2
                                                                   0 (1 − 1 )) + 0 +  ] + 2  + 2 
    ∗
     0    =                                                                                                     
                                                               1 − 1∗
Solving the fixed point for the new approximating constants, 0∗ and 1∗ determine the equilibrium
∗ = exp(∗ ). Then the country share is given by:
                                      ³           ´       ³         ´
                                       0 + 0∗      0 1 + 0∗
                                 =                =                                                          (58)
                                      (0 + 0∗ )    0 (1 + 0 )



B.2.3     Welfare gains

We can now calculate the welfare gains as before using the  solutions. The general form for the
welfare gains is given by ∆ in:

                                0 ((1 + ∆ )0  (1 + ∆ )0 ) = 0 (0∗  0∗ )
                                                                    
                                                                                                          
                                                                1 
                                             ⎡            ⎤    1− 1                                      1 
                                                                  
                                                                                      "             #   1− 1
                                                   0∗                                                    

                                0 ⎢ 1 + 0 ⎥                            0       1 + 0
                     (1 + ∆ ) =        ⎣         ⎦                       =
                                 0         
                                          1 + 0                              0         1 + 0
                                                    0

where the share  is given above in equation (58).


B.2.4     Implied Returns

Given the price-to-consumption solutions for benchmark economy,  , and the world economy,  ,
we then calculate the returns using the Campbell-Shiller equation (53) as well as the risk-free rate.


C     Appendix: Empirical Methods

In this appendix we describe the empirical methods used in our analysis.




                                                              xiii
C.1       Data Description

Our analysis requires data for consumption, asset returns, and dividends. Moreover, our framework
considers risk from variations in a common good.            Therefore, we must adjust all consumption,
returns, and dividends to insure they are valued in units of this common good. For consumption,
we use per capita consumption from the Penn World Tables National Accounts measured with a
common Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) price deflator from 1950 to 2009. As such, real exchange
rate variations appear as through PPP deviations that add to the variability in our consumption
data.
       For dividend and equity return data, we use quarterly data from the Total Market Indices in
Datastream-Thomson Financial from 1970 to 2009.              For the risk-free rates we update the series
in Campbell (2003) obtained from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics. To be consistent
with the annual consumption data, we first aggregate the quarterly data to annual. We then use
the common good deflator from Penn World Tables to form real annual equity returns, risk free
rates, and dividend growth rates. Therefore, as with our consumption measures, the real value of
these asset returns incorporate real exchange rate risk through PPP deviations.


C.2       Solutions and Simulated Method of Moments

We solve for the consumption process parameters in our model by fitting target moments from a
reduced Simulated Method of Moments (SMM). We conduct this analysis for both versions of our
model: (a) equity as the ”consumption asset”; and (b) equity as the ”dividend asset”.
       To generate the parameters values, we first calibrate the monthly growth rates  and  to the
annual means of consumption growth and dividend growth.               For this purpose, we calculate the
mean annual growth rates from the data and divide by 12. In trial runs of the SMM procedure
described below, we find that this change makes little diﬀerence in the estimation of the remaining
parameters and greatly decreases the computation time.
                                                                                            h        i
    We then use the reduced SMM to fit the remaining parameters for each country:     
                                     h                    i
for the ”consumption asset” case, and         for the ”dividend asset” case. Implementing
the SMM procedure involves the following steps. For every set of parameter values, we first solve
the model using the analytical solutions for returns in the benchmark economy. We choose a set of
targeted moments to best represent both consumption and asset pricing data36 . We then compute
  36
       See Gallant and Tauchen (1999) for a discussion on eﬃcient method of moments and problems with moment
selection.


                                                      xiv
a weighted diﬀerence between a targeted set of model generated moments and the data moments
using a weighting matrix. To treat all targets equally, we report the estimates using the identity
matrix.37 The set of parameter values that minimizes this diﬀerence is the SMM estimate.
       For the ”consumption asset” model, we choose the following set of target data moments for each
country: the standard deviation of log consumption growth ( ), the first order auto-correlation
of log consumption growth ( ), the mean equity premium (( −  )), the mean risk free rate
(( )), the standard deviation of the market return (( )), and the standard deviation of the
risk free rate (( )). Using these six moments per country, we estimate the three parameters
capturing the transitory risk,   , persistent risk,  , and degree of persistence,  . As a practical
matter, we find that estimates of  are quite similar across countries so we equate them in the
analysis reported in the paper.
       For the ”dividend asset” model, we first follow Bansal and Yaron (2004) in setting the sensitivity
of dividends to persistent risk  = 3. For this version of the model, we augment the number of
targets over the six moment ”consumption asset” set to include the standard deviation of dividend
growth ( ), and the first order auto-correlation of log consumption growth ( ). Using these
eight moments per country, we estimate the same three consumption parameters along with the
standard deviation of monthly dividend growth  . Once again, the  estimates are similar across
countries so that we set them equal in the reported results.
       Our estimation requires a set of preference parameters.          For this purpose, we use parameter
estimates that have been found to fit asset returns best in the US. We therefore take the parameters
from Bansal and Yaron (2004) of IES = 1.5,  = 10, and monthly  = .998 or annualized  = .985.
As is required from our model, these parameters are the same across all countries.
       The model is estimated at the monthly level and therefore the simulated data from the model
must be time-aggregated to match the annual data moments. To time-aggregate, we compute the
growth between the levels at  and  + 12, given the realizations of 12 monthly growth rates.38
To match our annual consumption, dividend growth and asset return moments, we then time-
aggregate the model-generated data from monthly to annual frequency.                     Parameter estimates
and simulated model moments are the averages of 500 simulations, each with 840 time-aggregated
monthly observations.
  37
       We also implemented the reduced SMM procedure using a diagonal matrix with typical components equal to the
sample variance. This procedure gain qualitatively similar results.
  38
     By comparison, we multiply monthly rates times 12 when we annualize as opposed to time aggregate.




                                                        xv
C.3       Monte Carlo Experiments

As noted in the Appendix B, the solution for the world equilibrium approximates the aggregate
world consumption growth rate as the weighted sum of the individual country growth rates. This
approximation treats the log growth rate of the sum of outputs as the sum of the log growth rates
of output. For example, in the equally-weighted model, the world consumption growth rate is
                     ≡        1         
assumed to follow:          Σ=1        Since each of the processes are conditionally log normal
and the solution to the Euler equation assumes log normality, this approximation may render the
solution approach invalid.
    To evaluate this approximation, we conducted a Monte Carlo experiment                            First we used the
                                                                                         
processes for the individual log-normally distributed growth rates                         to generate 1000 draws.
                                                              . On this simulated series, we
We then constructed the resulting world growth rate process 
calculated the skewness and kurtosis moments.                 We found that these moments matched closely
the normal distribution, suggesting that the approximated world growth rate is close to being
log-normally distributed.


D     Appendix: Persistent Consumption Risk Correlation

In this appendix, we detail the identification of correlation in the shock to persistent risk,  .


D.1       Consumption Asset

The consumption process with persistent risk is given by:

                                            
                                           +1 =  +  + +1
                                                                


                                            +1 =  + +1

       
where +1 v  (0   ) and +1 v  (0  ).
    Then clearly the covariance of consumption across any two countries  and  is given by equation
(21) in the text:
                                                                           
                          (   ) =     (     ) +            (   )
                                                                         1 − 2
In order to identify the correlations from  separately from , we require an independent observation
of these correlations. Recall that the Campbell-Shiller approximation of returns in equation (53)
states:
                                         
                                        +1 = 0 + 1 +1
                                                          
                                                              −  + +1
                                                                       



                                                          xvi
where here  ≡ ln(  ), since equity is assumed to payout consumption. Moreover, we have
solved above in Appendix B for the the log price-to-consumption ratio  as

                                                              = 0 + 1 

where 0 and 1 are given by equations (56) and (55), respectively.                                   Substituting these solu-
tions into the equation for  and the result into the Campbell-Shiller approximation in (53) and
rearranging implies that equity returns for country  can be written in the form:

                                                    
                                                   +1 = 0 + 1  + 2 +1 + +1
                                                                                       



where 0  1  2 are given by:

                                                      0 = 0 + 1 0 − 0 + 

                                                      1 = 1 1  − 1 + 1

                                                      2 = 1 1

Calculating the covariance of equity returns between any two countries  and  using this solution
yields:
                                                                           "                   #
                                                                              1 1
               
          (+1  +1 )            =              
                                                    (+1  +1 )+                 + 2 2   (+1  +1 )
                                                                                            
                                                                               1 − 2

given as equation (23) in the text.
    Combining the consumption covariances in equation (21) with the equity covariance in equation
(23), we solve for the correlation in the persistent shock as:
                                               "                                     #
                                         
                                                                 
                    (   ) =            (   ) −         (   )
                                                           
                                                                   
               ∙                            ¸−1
                   1 1 −1
where  ≡          1−2
                                + 2 2         . Substituting the solutions for 1 for the 1  1  2  2 parameters

and using the fact that   1 and 1 and 1 in our analysis verifies that   0.                                        Since the
                 À          and since (   )  (     ), the correlation on the
data implies                                                       

persistent risk, (   ), must be high.




                                                                    xvii
D.2        Dividend Asset

The consumption process with persistent risk in dividends is given by:

                                            
                                           +1 =  +  + +1
                                                                


                                             +1 =   + +1
                                            
                                           +1 =  +   + +1

       
where +1 ∼ (0  ), +1 ∼  (0  ), +1 ∼ (0  ), +1 ⊥ +1
                                                                          
                                                                              ⊥ +1 and  is the growth
rate of dividends.
       The covariance of the consumption process across countries is the same as before as given by
equation (21). However, now equity pays out dividends so we must solve for the price-dividend
                                                    
ratio. Defining the log price-to-dividend ratio as  ≡ ln(  ), we conjecture the form of the
process:
                                                 
                                                 = 0 + 1                                     (59)

Substituting the return process into the Euler equation and solving for the constants implies39 :
                                                                    1
                                                               −   
                                                  1   =        
                                                              1 − 1 
              
       where 1 is the approximating constant for the dividend paying asset.                  Substituting the
solutions for 1 into equation (59) and the resut into the Campbell-Shiller equation (53) generates
equity returns of the form:


                                          
                                         +1 = 0 + 1  + 2 +1 + +1

where 0  1  2 are given by:

                                      0 = 0
                                                   
                                                 + 1 0 − 0 + 

                                      1 = 1
                                             
                                                 1  − 1 + 

                                      2 = 1
                                             
                                                 1

       
where 1 is the approximating constant counterpart to 1 for the dividend paying asset. Calcu-
lating the covariance of equity returns between  and  implies:
                                                         "                 #
                                                             
                                                                         
                (   ) =   (   ) +     1 1
                                                                  + 2 2   (   )          (60)
                                                           1 − 2
  39
       The correlation does not depend upon 0 so its solution is ommitted to save space.


                                                          xviii
Using the expression for dividend growth in equation (25), the covariance between dividend growth
in country  and  can be written:

                                                                                  
                             (   ) =   (   ) +              (   )         (61)
                                                                                1 − 2

Given the covariance in equity returns (equation (60)) and the covariance in dividends (equation
(61)), we can now solve for the correlation in persistent consumption risk, (   ), in terms of
the equity return and dividend growth cross-country correlations:
                                             "                                     #
                           
                                       
                                                                 
                   (   ) =           (   ) −         (   )
                                                         
                                                                
             ∙                                ¸−1
                 1 1 − 
where  ≡            1−2        + 2 2         . Given our parameterization,   0 when    1, a condition
that is satisfied by the BY assumptions that  = 3. As with the consumption asset case, the data
                                                                                               
relationships imply high correlations in persistent risk,  . That is, empirically we find   

     . Moreover, (   )  (   ). As a result, (   ) is high and near
one.




                                                                  xix
