                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION, RELATIVE
                   PRICES AND OUTPUT ADJUSTMENT
                       IN THE OPEN ECONOMY




                         Joshua Aizenman




                      Working Paper No. 1787




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




I would like to thank Robert Aliber, Rudiger Dornbusch, Wilfred
Eth-ier, Jacob Frenkel, Irving Kravis, Paul Krugman, Richard Marston
and Michael Mussa for helpful comments; all errors, however, are
mine. Financial support by the G.S.B., University of Chicago, is
gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #17 87
                                                    January 1986



               MDnopelisticConpetition, Pelative Prices and
                   Output Mjustnnt in the Open Economj


                                 ABSTRPCT




     The purpose of this paper is to explain price and output dynamics in an

open economy characterized by a monopolistic competitive market structure in

which pricing decisions incur costs. That lead producers to pre—set the price

path for several periods. The paper derives an optimal pricing rule,

including the optimal pre-setting horizon. It does so for a rational

expectation equilibrium, characterized by staggered, unsynchronized price

setting, for which the degree of staggering is endogenously determined. The

discussion focuses on the critical role of the degree of domestic-foreign

goods substitutability in explaining price and output effects of monetary and

real shocks.




                                                    Joshua Aizeninan
                                                    G .S .]3., University of thicago
                                                    1101 East 58th Street
                                                    thicago,   IL   60637
1.   Introduction1

     Empirical studies have documented a remarkable difference between the

behavior of price levels and the exchange rate.2 The exchange rate between

the dollar and other reading currencies follows approximately a random walk

process3, whereas changes in goods prices are autocorrelated. As a result,

exchange rate innovations tend to be associated with shocks to relative

prices, implying persistent deviations from purchasing power parity (PPP

henceforth) .

     Debate continues, however, on the economic interpretation of these

observations. Do they demonstrate that the PPP doctrine is irrelevant? Do

deviations from PPP follow a random walk?5 Almost any attempt to model

international transmission must use some version of the law of one price, and

the above empirical regularities raise question about the gap between such

regularities and current modeling strategies. Random, non-persistent

deviations from PPP can be readily explained in models that recognize the

potential role of transportation costs and other costs of' goods arbitrage.6

Thus, it is the persistency of observed deviations from PPP that raises doubts

regarding the usefulness of the PPP doctrine. There are two different

interpretations for deviations from PPP: first, as deviations from the law of

one price; next, as an index number problem. In other words, even if' the law

of one price holds for each good, the difference in consumption basket across

countries implies that changes in relative prices will result in deviations

from PPP. Clearly, the first interpretation causes more headaches in

explaining international transmission. This paper will concentrate on this

interpretation and, in order to simplify, will assume a one industry world.

     The different behavior of the price levels and the exchange rate can be

explained in terms of models, like that of Dornbusch (1976), that recognize
                                      -2-



the possibility of sluggish price adjustment in the goods market. In such an

economy, the exchange rate behaves as an asset price, adjusting

instantaneously to "news". The different speed of adjustment between the

goods and the asset markets implies that sustained shocks to the exchange rate

will result in persistent changes in relative prices.

     An issue that deserves further exploration is the pricing rule used in

the goods market. This rule ultimately underlies the evolution of both the

real exchange rate and output. The purpose of this paper is to examine some

factors determining the pricing rule, and the implications of the pricing rule

for the adjustment path in response to nominal and real shocks. Specifically,

I postulate a stochastic monopolistic competitive economy, where pricing

decisions are carried out every several periods due to the presence of

transaction costs. These costs can reflect the expenses of collecting and

processing information as well as more costly consumer searches made necessary

by the presence of' more volatile prices. The price-setting decision periods

are assumed to be distributed uniformly over time. This distribution results

in price paths that differ across firms, according to the timing of their most

recent pricing decision. Following the construction of the building blocks

describing the economy, we drive the optimal pricing rule. Such a rule is

characterized by two elements. First, for a given frequency of pricing

decisions the firm needs to solve for the optimal path of prices to be pre—set

at the beginning of each pricing cycle. Second, the firm needs to solve for

the optimal frequency of pricing decisions.

     Armed with the optimal pricing rule, I study in the next step the

implications for the aggregate economy. Specifically, I investigate the

adjustment of output, exchange rate and prices to nominal a'nd real shocks and

to what extent that adjustment depends on the market power enjoyed by each
                                        —3—




producer.The discussion focuses on the relevance of the PPP doctrine and the
nature of the intermediate-run deviations from relative PPP. The doctrine of

relative PPP postulates that in a world of stable relative prices, exchange

rate depreciation should match inflation rate differentials.7 The paper

demonstrates that, in a market characterized by monopolistic competition and

costly pricing decisions, we obtain systematic deviations from relative PPP in

the intermediate run, although in the long run prices adjust according to the

relative PPP doctrine. The effective duration of the "intermediate run" is

shown to depend on the degree of substitutability of domestic and foreign

goods, and the volatility of the exchange rate. Both of these factors affect

the degree of price staggering. A larger degree of substitutability between

domestic and foreign goods would reduce the degree of monopoly power enjoyed

by each producer and thereby reduce the pre-setting horizon. Consequently,

the larger the degree of substitution, the lower is the degree of price

staggering. As a result, with perfect substitution we would approach a

flexible pricing equilibrium, where exact PPP would hold all the time. It is

important to note, however, that quite apart from the degree of goods

substitutability, relative PPP is shown to be the underlying long-run pricing

rule.

        The analysis also shows that unexpected monetary shocks can generate

persistent aggregate output and relative price shocks, whose nature is

determined by the degree of substitutability of domestic/foreign goods.

There is a trade—off between price and output adjustment. A smaller

substitutability between domestic and foreign goods implies that a given

monetary shock induces a greater price shock but a smaller output shock.

Smaller substitutability is shown to be associated with a longer pricing

cycle. Thus, a greater degree of substitutability raises the magnitude but
                                      _)4 —




reduces the duration of the output shocks resulting from a given monetary

innovation.

     For simplicity of exposition, we focus in the paper on the pricing

strategy of domestic goods, assuming that imported goods can be supplied

elastically at a PPP price. This would be the case, for example, if each

agent could import foreign goods, priced at their PPP level, directly. An

alternative modeling strategy is to allow for a symetric treatment, in which

foreign goods are sold domestically only by dealers, each of which has limited

market power. In such an economy we would expect that the presence of gains

from reducing the frequency of pricing decisions would generate staggered

domestic prices for both domestic and foreign goods. The properties of such

an equilibrium are studied in Appendix B, which shows that, apart from the

added complexity, the deviations from PPP generated in such an economy are

similar to those analyzed in the paper itself. Appendix B also demonstrates

that the pricing cycle tends to be longer for home goods relative to the

duration of the pricing cycle of foreign goods. This finding is consistent

with empirical findings (see, for example, Katseli (19814)).

     A growing body of current research has recognized the importance of a

limited degree of goods substitutability in explaining transmission of macro

shocks. Svennson (1985) takes this line of research in a closed economy

context, while Dornbusch (1985) and Giovannini (1985) address it in an open

economy framework. These authors study adjustment to macro shocks in a

monopolistic competitive economy, where some prices are pre—set one period

before the realization of shocks. A novel aspect of the present paper is in

assessing those questions in an economy characterized by a staggered,

unsynchronized price setting. An important element in the present analysis

will be the endogenous derivation of the degree of staggering, and the
                                            —5—




      emphasis on the role of the market power of sellers in determining the

      persistency of deviations from PPP, and the induced output shocks.

           Section 2 of the paper describes the model. It starts with a formulation

      of the producer problem in a flexible price equilibrium. This equilibrium is

      used as a benchmark for the equilibrium obtained in the presence of costs of

      pricing decisions. The section ends by determining the rational expectation

      equilibrium for the case of a stable covariance structure where pricing

      decisions are made in an unsynchronized manner. Section 3 studies the

      stochastic properties of prices and deviations from PPP. Section 1 adds the

      money market equilibrium, analyzing the output effects of monetary shocks.

     • Section 5 evaluates the adjustment of prices and output to real shocks.

      Section 6 provides concluding remarks. Appendix A and B derive the optimal

      pricing formulas and the pre-setting horizon.




'I
                                                  —6—




2.     The Model

       Let there be     9.       domestic producers, organized in a monopolistic-

competitive manner.8 All of them face the same demand curve and share the

same technology. Demand facing producer k is given by




                                             9.         P.               *

(1)                                    Dk
                                            j1
                                                              I
                                                         k           k




                                             *
where    E is the exchange rate, P is the foreign price of importables, and

 P. is the price charged by producer j                   .   The demand facing producer k

reflects two sources of potential competition: all the other domestic

producers (as reflected in the first term); and foreign goods, priced
                             *
domestically as E P (as reflected in the second term).9                      An alternative

presentation of the demand facing producer k is:




(1')                                )](E p*) p ,              where           -    1) +
            Dk 'j1
                   jk
being the own price—demand elasticity. We assume that                        > 1

        Production technology is given by


(2)                                                               y<1

where Lk corresponds to the labor input used by producer k                          .     The domestic

price deflator is denoted by P , where
                                                   9.             1/9.
(3)                                         P[njip.]
                                                  '
                                                —7—




        In order to abstract from considerations concerning the labor market we

assume that the real wage in terms of the domestic product is given. To

simplify presentation, we neglect both the potential role of traded input in

the production process, and the possibility that labor is paid according to a

CPI index, reflecting the share of foreign goods. The country is taken to be
                                                                                      *
small enough to face a given foreign price, assumed to be unity (P 1) . The
only source of uncertainty is the exchange rate (in Sections 4-5 we will study

the adjustment to monetary and productivity shocks).

        Consider a hypothetical flexible equilibrium, under which a producer k

sets his price              at the level that would maximize profits. The flexible

equilibrium price is denoted by k This equilibrium will be used as a

benchmark for subsequent discussion. Producer k is assumed to take the

price of his competitors as given. To simplify notation, lower-case letters

denote the logarithmic value of the corresponding upper—case variable (i.e., x

  log X). Maximization of profits reveals that:



                                                         +


                                                                 jk

                                                                 —               1)
where        log   (   —1      q1) / [(         —
                                                    1) +     1        ;
                                                                              - 1)    +   1   —   1




                                   +B   (-          1)                    1
                                                                 wherez— •'
                                     - 1)   +   1    -   1
                                           -8-



      Several observations are in order. First,           and 6 are linked

together by an additive property:

(5)                                  +   (z — 1) 6    1




      Thus, in a flexible price equilibrium k diverges from § by a weighted

average that corresponds to the exchange rate (weighted by ) and to domestic

producer prices (each weighted by 6) .         This additive property corresponds to
the homogeneity postulate: an equi-proportional rise in all competitors'

prices raises       at the same rate. The parameter a corresponds to the

elasticity of demand with respect to the price of foreign goods. Notice that

as a approaches infinity,        approaches unity, while 6 and

approaches zero. Thus, at the limit of perfect substitutability we find an

exact version of PPP: that is, a given change in the (domestic currency

price) of foreign goods results in an equal change in the price of domestic

goods (in a flexible-price equilibrium).

      If all domestic prices are flexible, our assumptions regarding domestic

producers imply that all producers will charge the same price,           .    From (4)

we obtain that in such a case:


                                                 0
(6)
                                                 a


      Equation 6 defines the relative price that is observed in a flexible

equilibrium. This price will be shown to define the long run relative PPP

price. Notice that the extent to which the flexible equilibrium deviates from

the law ot one price corresponds to the absolute value of                    Ps the
                                                                 00/a.
substitutability between domestic and foreign goods increases, we approach the

law of one price (as a -   '°, e/a   -   0).
                                      —9—




    We proceed by assuming the presence of gains from pre-setting the price

path for several periods. Those gains represent savings in the costs of

frequent collection and processing of new information as well as the cost of

changing prices)0 A related discussion, though in a different context, can

be found in Mussa (1981); Rotemberg (1982) and Sheshinski and Weiss (1977).

These authors consider the role of the cost of changing posted prices, whereas

the present analysis focuses on the role of fixed costs related to each

pricing decision. As a result, their analysis resulted in a policy of pre-

setting a price for the relevant pricing horizon, whereas the present paper

sets a price path for the pricing cycle. This difference is relevant for the

rational expectation solution in a staggered pricing equilibrium.11

    For simplicity of exposition, we focus in the paper on the pricing

strategy of domestic goods, assuming that imported goods can be supplied

elastically at a PPP price (p* E). This would be the case, for example, if

each agent could import foreign goods, priced at their PPP level, directly.

An alternative modeling strategy is to allow foreign goods to be sold

domestically only by domestic dealers, each of which has limited market

power. The properties of such an equilibrium are studied in Appendix B, which

shows that, apart from the added complexity, the deviations from PPP generated

in such an economy are similar to those analyzed in the paper.

    Suppose that, due to the presence of gains from pre-setting the price

path, producers make a pricing decision each n periods (The economic

determination of n is studied in Appendix A). At the beginning of each

pricing cycle, a producer sets the price path for the next n periods. The

price in period d that was pre-set h periods ago is denoted by             .   For

example, a producer who starts a pricing cycle in period t should decide the

path of (p, p1, p1 )              .   Figure 1 describes the price prevailing
                                                3




                                                10 1                 n-i
                                                ( t+i
                                                    1
                                            .   Pt
                                                    2
                                                Pt
                                                    3
                                                Pt
                                  .

                             .

                     .
          F
              t-j,__                            Pt

                                                    n—2
                I                               Pt
Ft(l)           I
                                                 P
                                                    n—i
                I
                                                \)
                I-
    t—(n—2)
                     I   I   I     I  I   I  I
t—(n—i)                          t-4 t-3 t-2 t-i t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4   t+(n1)
               t—j




                                           Figure - 1
                                                 -10--




in our economy. At time t n prices are observed, as described by the

vertical vector of p (0              j    n -1) .        The points Ft_i specify the timing

of the pre—setting of the price p as indicated on the horizontal axis (t-

i). A producer charging p in period t is pre-setting prices at period

t for the next n periods, as described by the horizontal vector

(Pj) 0        j   n —   1   .       In   doing so he uses his information regarding all

the prices that have already been set, the expected path of the exchange rate

(corresponding to the domestic price of foreign goods) and the prices that

other competitors are expected to set in the future. Appendix A shows that

the optimal pricing rule is:


                                                          ; oi   n —
(7)
                                    Pj               )
                                                                       1




      where       is the expectation operator, conditional on the information

available in period t           .
                                     Equation (7) corresponds to a rule that pre—sets
prices at the expected flexible equilibrium path.

      We assume a stable stochastic structure, and unsynchronized price

setting. Thus, at period t we can find n types of domestic producers,

differentiated only by the timing of their price pre-settirig decision.

Assuming a large number of identical domestic producers, whose price setting

decision periods are uniformly distributed over time, implies that at each

period there are m producer's who set the price path for the next n

periods, where 9./n = m

      Consider a producer that pre-sets prices today for the next n periods.

      From (Li) and (7) we find that




(8)                p =              +e      +   Sm
                                                             p   + S (m - 1)
                                                                               p
                                                        —ii—



       Such a producer is faced with m producers that pre-set prices j

periods ago (hence their present price is p) ,                                      and rn—i producers

of his type. Thus, (8) can be rewritten as:




                                      0
                                             0 + a e + b                  ,L
                                                                         n-i
                                                                                J
                                                                         Ji



                  where0          6                    ;a a                    ; b=bm
                       °
                                  i-S     (rn—i)               i-B (rn—i)           i-B (rn—i)




       Notice that a + (n-i) b               1     .   For large         we find from the definitions

             a                             1 -     a
that a                        ,   b                        .    Note that the values of the
           1 —   (l—)   / n                n — (1—a)

parameters "a" and "b" drop with the degree of staggering (n) .                             "a"   rises and


"b" drops with the degree of substitutability between domestic and foreign

goods (ct)

       We proceed by imposing the following structure': the exchange rate

follows a random walk process with a trend:

                                                                               2
(10)
                              ez e1 +                       ,        N   (
       To simplify, the exchange rate path is taken at this stage to be

exogenously given. Section 14 determines the exchange rate endogenously, by

adding the money market.12 Each producer is assumed to know all present

prices, and the structure of the economy. From equation (7) it follows that

if a producer pre—sets prices for period t j periods ago, he did so at the

exDected flexible equilibrium leveL But                         the f'Iexible equilibrium        price t
                                                      -12—



          0
t   is Pt       thus:


(11)                                             p                   p
        Invoking the assumption of rational expectations, we can solve the system

defined by (9)—Cu) recursively. By applying the expectation operator

Et(fll) to (9) we find, (using (11)) that:

                               n—i
                                                 a                                    n-i
(12)                          pt          8 +
                                           o
                                                     E          e + b (n—li
                                                         t—(n—1) t                    p
        Thus:


(12')
                                          n-i    -_—+E
                                                   o
                                                   e
                                                              e
                                         Pt          a t—(n—1) t


        Alternatively:

                                               n-i                            o
(12'')                                     Pt -          E            e
                                                             t-(n-1) t -a

        Next, applying Et(fli) to (9), using (12'), we obtain:

                                                                                  8
                                                                             o                 n-2
(13)
                 n-2_-8
                Pt     o
                              +aE t—(n—2)e+
                                          t
                                                     b       lIE        e ÷ —1 +
                                                                 t—(n—i) t   a
                                                                                      b (n-2) Pt


                                          Applying (10) to (13):


(13')
                          n—2 8
                         Pt
                                    —+E
                                    a
                                                   a
                                        t-(n-1) t i-b(n-2) £t_(n_2)
        alternatively:

                                   n-2                           o   —
                                                                          b
(13'')                             Pt     Et_(n_2)et -                    a+b t—(n—2)
                                                                a

        Following this process recursively, we find that (for n—2 j                              0):



(la)                    pta—
                         J
                          •
                           0
                             +E
                               8

                                          t (fll)et+
                                                                n-2
                                                                      ______
                                                                      a + (n-l-k)b        Et_k
                                                                k j
                                                —13-



The resultant pre—setting rule is now specified by (12') and (lL).

      Several observations are in order. P relative PPP pricing rule implies

equality between domestic price changes and the expected changes in the

exchange rate. This holds precisely for the pre—setting of prices n—i

periods ahead, (12'), where the price is set such as to equate the expected

relative price (p—e) to the "non—stochastic" equilibriuin3, _2_                   This

implies that                   is allowed to adjust fully to expected depreciation.h'

This pricing rule reflects the fact that a producer who pre—sets the price for

period t in period t-(n-i) (at level p1) is taking into account the

expected price of his competitors. His best estimate for the price that his

domestic competitors would charge at period t equals his own price. This

observation stems from the fact that the price of his domestic competitors

would deviate from his own price (p1) only by the innovations

ctJ
      (n - 2   >,   j   >,   0) that are orthogonal to his present information set.

Consequently, a producer who pre sets prices for period t at period t—(n — 1)

would treat his domestic competitors symmetrically. This implies that the

pricing rule would follow the expected relative PPP version of equation (6),

as is shown by equation 12''. For a pre-setting horizon shorter than n—i

we obtain a pricing rule under which deviations from relative PPP reflect the

interaction between the market structure and inovations in the exchange

rate. For example, a producer who pre-sets the price for period t at

period t-(n-2) knows that some other producers have already set their price

in period t-(n-1) for t at the level p1 .                   The producer has an

informational advantage relative to those that have already set their prices,

because he knows the innovation in the exchange rate                        Using the
                                                                Ct(n.2) .
logic of footnote 15, he expects that the producers who have not yet pre-set

their price for period t to set it at the level that he sets. There are two
                                                  —1 L_




forces at work: on the one hand a larger substitutability with foreign goods

(larger a) encourages him to adjust his prices (relative to p1) by the

innovation, ct(n2) . On the other hand, a larger substitutability with

other domestic producers (8) discourages him from doing so because, by

adjusting his price by the innovation, he is likely to lose costumers to

producers who have preset their prices at period t-(n—1) (assuming

tt—(n—2) >0) . As is revealed by equation 13", the producer will adjust his

price by a portion a/(a+b) of the innovation, reflecting the relative strength

of these two forces. The expected relative PPP pricing rule would set

                                                             deviates from a relative PPP
    at       +
                 E(fl2)e           .     Thus, actual

rule by Ct ( 2)       —       .        Note that as we approach a perfect substitutability

between domestic and foreign goods (that is as a -'                cx)   ,   a ÷ 1 and b ÷ o.
In such a case,          approaches zero, and one gets an exact expected PPP

pricing rule. This result holds for all horizons, because 1kb                        1   as

a        (for kn) .      In       general, a smaller substitutability with foreign goods

and a shorter pre—setting horizon (i.e., smaller j in equation 114) will

magnify deviations from the expected PPP pricing rule. For example, a

producer that set p (j < n-i), will adjust its price relative to the last
                   j+1                             a
pre-set price            ) by a portion                           of the exchange rate shock
                                                   a-t-(n-1—j)b
that occurred between period t-j and t-(j+1). Note that the shorter the pre-

setting horizon (smaller j in p) , the smaller the price elasticity with

respect to the exchange rate. This result reflects the fact that a shorter

pre-setting horizon (smaller j) means that more producers had already set

their price for period n. Thus, there is a greater potential loss associated

with an attempt to adjust p according to £tj

    Next, we turn to the derivation of the domestic price deflator in our

economy, which corresponds to a simple average of the p
                                                            —15--




                                                                    j•
                                                                          p

       where      refers to the price level. Note that applying (15) to (9) we

find that:


(16)                                 p e÷ a e÷ b "                        -
       Combining (111) (for jo) and (16) we solve for the price level:

                               O                                         n-2
(17)
                       -           0 +                              a            _____
                       Pt                 Et(nl)             e+                  1-jb     Eti

       From (17) we find that relative prices, or in our case deviations from

the law of one price, are:

                                               8             n-2
                               -                   0          r            a      1+j
(18)
                       et_ Pt
                                          —
                                              —i-—
                                                        +     L (1—
                                                             J o
                                                                          _      1—   jb t—j

       Or, alternatively:

                                      8                n—2
(19)
                           -
                           't —
                                          0        +
                                                              n-a        n-1-j
                                                       jo                n—1—j +      ja et_
3.     The Stochastic Properties of Deviations from PPP

       The previous section has derived the reduced form for average prices and

deviations from PPP. From (17) we see that a current exchange—rate

shock (ce) would affect present average prices by                                     .   It   would also affect

future average prices, j periods ahead, by                                            b   (ojn—2) .     Thus,
its net effect on prices would increase over time, at an accelerated rate.

After n periods, it would achieve its full effect on the price level. The

opposite path applies for the effect of' an exchange rate shock (c) on

relative prices (e -       )   .     It       would at once affect relative prices by

(1- ) .    Its   impact would diminish over time at an accelerated rate. Figures

2a - 2b plot the effect of an exchange-rate shock (c 1) on relative prices
                    0
            -           0
e
 t          Pt +                                                                             0
                                                                                        0-
                                                                               et    -p+—
                                                                                      t a




                                               cx --o                                                       a+o
    1                                                                           1

.9
                                             1                                 .75




.5                                                                              .5
                                                                                                      S..




                                                                           t                                                             t
        0       1       2                                                            0                1
                            3   4    5     6        7     8       9   10


                                                -   2a
                                    Figure                                                                    Figure —2b

                                The effect of                 1                                             The effect of   E       =1
                                                          0                                                                     0
                                on relative prices                                                          on relative prices

                                                                                                 (drawn for    l,   yl/2, 222, fl4)
             (drawn for         l,       'y1/2,          922,     fl11)
                                         —16—




for the case in which y       1/2 ,     1,   9.   22, n           11 and 14      It allows for

different elasticities of substitution between domestic and foreign goods

(ci    0, 1/2, 1, 5, 10, w)      Note that in the first part of the cycle the

exchange-rate shock represents a relative price shock, and there is high

degree of persistency in the resultant path of relative prices. At some

stage, however, we enter a second stage of the cycle, in which the shock to

relative prices dies down at an accelerated speed. A lower substitutability

between domestic and foreign goods (dcz<o) prolongs the first part of the

cycle, making the second part shorter. Consequently, the decay of the

relative price shock that takes place in the second period is more abrupt.16

This dependence of the path of relative prices on a can be shown to be

independent of the specific parameter values in this example. A possible

persistency measure is the duration of the time (relative to the cycle length, n—i)

needed to eliminate half of the effect of an exchange-rate shock on relative

prices. From (19) we find that it will take j                 n-2a        periods to eliminate

half of the effect of an exchange rate shock on relative prices.                     It can be

shown that for large n


(20)                           [J*_ cij / (91)
                                                          1   +a

Thus, j     exceeds half of the pricing cycle       (-.   (.9i.)) by           1+a
                                                                                     .   A   smaller

value of the substitutability between domestic and foreign goods (smaller )

magnifies the effect of a given exchange rate shock on relative price by

"prolonging" its effective influence on deviations from PPP.

       We can now apply (17)-(l8) to obtain a solution for the covariation of

exchange rates and prices. It can be shown that

                                                              2
(21)                   coy             ; e_ eti)                  +       a2
                                               —17-



(22)
               coy (e_ — (et_i_                 )     ;
                                                          e_ ei) (1-. —)                 a
       The covariation of prices and exchange rate depends on the sum                        of   two

components: the first reflects the trend, the second the volatility of the

exchange rate weighted by the elasticity of the contemporaneous price with

respect to the exchange rate, —           .   Thus, for inflationary countries the
first term will tend to dominate .            For such countries,         j.t     will   be tightly

related to monetary expansion, and we would expect monetary growth to be

tightly correlated with changes in the exchange rate and prices. For

countries with low and similar inflationary trends, the first term in equation

(21) will tend to be of lesser importance, and the covariation will depend on

  •    For a low degree of substitutability of domestic and foreign goods, and a

longer pricing cycle (a larger n) ,            —    will   tend to be small, implying a

small covariation of prices and exchange rates.

       Appendix A derives the optimal pre-setting horizon, n (equal also to the

extent of contract staggering), which is shown to decrease with a2 2 •                              A

larger degree of substitutability between domestic and foreign goods (da>o

which implies da>o) ,       as well as a more volatile exchange rate will reduce

the pre—setting horizon. At the limit of perfect substitutability (ci÷a) n

is shown to approach one, and relative PPP holds at all time. Thus, a

necessary condition for generating deviations from relative PPP is a limited

degree of substitutability between domestic and foreign goods. A lower

substitutability (dcz<o) will raise n and reduce a, implying that relative

prices e_ p will behave as a moving average of a higher order. For a

large n we might find that relative prices could be approximated by a low-

order, autoregressive process, corresponding to the findings reported in

Frenkel (198la). Similarly, one can show that a higher substitutability among
          ..J.
UJLII1ie ,OUU             a J.L)W'r   [IdLt UI IaUUC' j)     17-   d   iUWeL LI1L IdI.t dilU
                                                                       ,......_
                      ,
                                                                                                                                     a
            a
                                                                                                                                                                                         SensitIuitg_g.f__fl
                                                                                                                                    II                                    with resoect In J.
       40                                        •
                                               MthMllqQL
                                             ULpJ                                                                                   '4
       35                                                                                                                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                                    12                                                                         ••                    .         *
       30
                                                                                                                                    tO
       25
                                                                                                                                     S
       20
                                                                                                                                     6
       I5
                                                                                                                                     4
       10

                                                                                                                                     2


                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                         0.4   0.6     0.5            I            1.2           1,4           1.6         IS        2         22
                                 2           3            4            5             6          7          •          S      to


                                                                                                                                    50
       25
                                                                                                                                    45
                                                               SensItiultvJf__n
                                                     with resoect to         r
                                                                                                                                    40
       20
                                                                                                                                    55                                     Sefl$liWitU_OLJI
                                                                                                                                                              with rewect Is
'no                                                                                                                                3°
       Is
                                                                                                                                   25
(3
                                                                                                                                   20
       tO
                                                                                                                                   '5
                                                                                                                                   I0




                                                                                                                                        0.1     0.2     0.1           04            0.5              0           0.7            05       0.5        0.
       0000     0.005    0.010       0.015   0020        0.025       0.030       0.010   0040 0.045        0.050   0.055   0.060
                                                                                                                                         n
            0                                                                                                                      200
      30
                                                                                                                                   'so
      70
                                                                                                                                   160

      60                                                                                                                           140
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SeosItlultg
      20                                                             SsniiII.lIu.f       n                                         120
                                                                                                                                                                                    WIth resoect p K
                                                        with resoect to          p
      40

                                                                                                                                   so
      10

                                                                                                                                   IC
      20
                                                                                                                                   40
      10
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
       0.01       0.05           0.03        0.13             0.17                                                            0     0-
                                                                           021           0.25       0.25       0.13        0.37      0.05      0.1    0.2       0.3          0.4            05                       1.5         2       2.5        $
                                     -18.-




a lower cost of price adjustment reduce the optimal pre-setting horizon.

Figure 3 summarizes simulation results, describing the dependence of optimal n

on the economic structure.18

    The elasticity of average prices with respect to the exchange rate plays

a key role in the covariation of the exchange rate and relative prices. In

the presence of a longer pricing cycle, we find a tighter covariation. If

  approaches zero, as would be the case for smaller degree of substitut-

ability or smaller exchange rate volatility, most of the short-run variations

in relative prices can be explained by variations in the exchange rate.

     As     gets smaller, the observer will tend to reject the PPP hypothesis.

Even for "intermediate" values of — ,        in   an economy continuously subject to

variations in the exchange rate, PPP would be frequently (almost always)

violated. But as our pricing rule (l) demonstrates, this observation is fully

consistent with a long-run view of PPP.


L. Output, Deviations From PPP and Monetary Shocks

    The purpose of' this section is to assess the importance of degree of

goods substitutability in determining the output consequence of monetary

shocks. The resultant output shock is proportional to the induced deviation

from PPP. The discussion will identify two channels that link the degree of

goods substitutability to the output effect of a monetary shock. A lower

degree of goods substitutability will reduce, firstly, the responsiveness of

output to a monetary shock and secondly, will result in a longer goods prices

pre—setting horizon (n), and consequently in a higher degree of persistency of

output shocks. This raises the effective duration of the output shock induced

by a given monetary shock.

     The analysis in the previous sections considered the exchange rate path

as being exogenously given, focusing on the resultant deviations from PPP.
                                           —19—




Because the focus of this section is the link between monetary shocks and

deviation from PPP, it takes the path of monetary shocks as exogenously

given, solving for the resultant exchange rate and output path.

       Let us define domestic output as the sum of the output of all produces


                  and let Y° denote the non-stochastic output level (i.e., the
       k1 t,k ,

output level if all the stochastic shocks are zero). From equation 1 we

obtain that:


                                                                     0
                                                         -
(23)                       log   —
                                     log   Y°
                                                  cz(e       p   +



Thus, aggregate output deviates from its deterministic level in proportion to

the stochastic deviation from PPP, the factor of proportionality being the

degree of domestic/foreign goods substitutability. To further understand the

link between money and output, let us complete the money-market specification.

To simplify, let us take the simplest form of the demand for money:



(2U)




where output is given by



(25)                                        cz(e —



       The supply of money is assumed to follow a random walk:



(26)
                                     m mt_i +
                                                -20-




          Money—market equilibrium (m m) allows us, for a given pre-setting

horizon (n), to derive the path of prices and the exchange rate. To simplify

notation, let us solve for the case where the prices are pre-set for two

periods (n        2) .   Applying equation 17 we find that in such a case

                                    +
(27)                                    Et_i e+ (e -                Etiet)
          Combining equations 23-27 allows us to solve for the rational expactation

path of the exchange rate, obtaining that:

                                                        Tit
(28)                           et -E t—1 et                    a         a
                                                       a(1 -         +

By applying the definition of a             to equation 28 we find that a higher degree

of goods substitutability reduces the exchange rate shock induced by a

monetary innovation. Applying equations 27-28 we obtain that the stochastic

deviation from PEP and output are given by:


                                   —
                                        +
                                            8                   1-       2
(29)                          e - Pt               t                         a
                                                               - a
                                                                   .) +


                                                                         a
                                                              c&(1 - —)
(30)                         log Y - log Y0
                                                                -
                                                                     )+a
                                                                     a



          Inspection of equations 29-30 reveals that a smaller degree of goods

substitutability (d         < 0, d a < 0) raises the exchange rate and relative

price effect but reduces the output effect of a given monetary shock.            Thus,

there is a trade-off between a price and a quantity adjustment. It is

noteworthy that for small substitutability between domestic and foreign goods

(iz   <   1) we observe an overshooting of the exchange rate (i.e. de/dn > 1) •19
                                                       —21—



Equations (28)-(30) can be used to infer the conditional variances, denoted

by
        V1(i.e., Vt1(X) Eti[(Xt - Et                          1(Xt))2 I):



                                                  a2
(31)                              [cL(1 —
                                                  )] Vi(e)             Vi(y)

(32)                       (1 -     a)2   V1(e) Vti(e -                       t   +
                                                                                      0




        Note that the volatility of the exchange rate exceeds relative price

volatility by (1_)2.            Figure U plots the dependency of the three

conditional variances on the degree of substitutability of domestic and

foreign goods. A smaller substitutability is associated with greater

volatility of prices and smaller volatility of output. Our analysis can be

extended for a general length of the pricing cycle (n). Following the steps

described in the derivations of (28)—(30) we find that:


                                                       n—2                1

(33)               e - Et (n 1) e                      ko a + (1-a)           a k + 1        nt-k
                                                                              n 1-k b




                                —         0
                                              0
                                                    n—2 1ak-.-1
                                                          ni-kb
(314)
                       e p  -         +              v
                                                    k=o
                                                             ct+(1-a) a k +       1       1t-k
                                                                       n 1-k b




                                                       n—2 a[1
                                                                      ak+ 1
(35)                              -                                   n 1—k b
                     log              log     Y
                                                               cz.s-(1—c&) a k +      1
                                                       kO                n i—k b
    vt-i




       Vt_i (e)




1




                  Figure 4
                                          -22-



       Inspecting (33)-(35) reveals that a given monetary shock             1)


will generate relative price and output dynamics similar to those described in

Figure 2. The impact effect of the shock is reflected in a depreciation of

both the real and the nominal exchange rates and a positive output shock.

During the admustment we observe gradual adjustment of relative prices, which

will mitigate the initial       output shock. The exchange rate path is

determined by a .     If   a<1 we observe an overshooting, and the exchange rate

will appreciate during the adjustment. As in Section 3, we observe an

adjustment which accelerates over time till the adjustment is accomplished

(after n-i periods).20 The cycle length is determined by the degree of

staggering (n), in a manner described in Appendix A.      As is shown there,

lower goods substitutability raises optimal ri.     This would prolong the outpit

effect of a given monetary shock. Thus, the degree of goods substitutability

has two opposing effects on the responsiveness of output to monetary shocks.

A higher degree of goods substitutability raises the magnitude but reduces the

duration of the output shock induced by a monetary innovation. At the

limiting case of perfect goods substitutabiltiy (a -* 1, a    ÷ ai) we     are in the

flexible equilibrium case (n      1), where monetary shocks do not affect

output.


5. Output, Deviations From PPP and Real Shocks

       The purpose of this section is to evaluate the path of adjustment to real

shocks. Suppose, -for example, that productivity varies over time. Thus, q in

equation 2 is subject to stochastic shocks, implying that the long—run

equilibrium relative prices ( , see equation 6 and footnote 13) change over

time. Let us denote by o the o       at   the time t that corresponds to

Suppose that the evolution of productivity is summarized by a random walk path

of 0
                                                           -23—


                                                   0           0
                                                       t÷1         t
(36)                                               a


Following the steps described in the derivations of (28) -                                       (30) we find that:


                                                             n-2 (a-i)
                                                                             ak+ 1
                                                                                      b
(37)                     e       -
                                      E(l)e                  k-o
                                                              - a
                                                                  +         (1-a)   a k +
                                                                                    ni-kb
                                                                                             1




                                                             n-2   ak+1
                                                                  a—
                     —
                             —
                                             —                r.   ni-kb
(38)
                     Pt              Et(fli)(Pt)             k-o a + (1-a)           a k +       1   tt_k
                                                              -
                                                                                     ni-kb
                                                                   n-2
                                                                                    ak+1
                         —                             —               r          ni—kb
(39)
               e     -
                                 _E        i)(et -
                                                                       -o
                                                                             a + (1-a) a k     + 1
                                                                                           n 1-k b

                                                             n-2  ak+ 1
                                                                 a—
                                                              r   ni-kb
(J4o)
                         y       -
                                        (n 1)t
                                                       -
                                                             k-o
                                                              -
                                                                    a +     (i-a)   a k +
                                                                                    ni-kb
                                                                                             1       ttk



Suppose, for example, an adverse supply shock occurs at time t.                                           It leads to a

rise at time t in the prices of those producers that start a new pricing cycle

at time t and a corresponding drop in output. The price level rises by

        na +   (1-a)a            and output drops (y -                                    If the substitutability
between domestic and foreign goods is small (a < 1), we need exchange rate

appreciation to regain equilibrium. (e (a —                                   i)t).          If the substitu—

-tability is significant enough (a                         i) , the drop in output is large enough

to induce a depreciation which will mitigate the induced output drop.

Independently of the direction of the exchange rate adjustment, we will
                                                                                                 —
                                                                                                     —         =
                                                                                                                   Pt
t
observe a rise in the relative price of domestic goods                                                   et)
    time t +    1   we observe a further adjustment of prices, exchange rate, and

output. The direction of adjustment is the same as in t. The effect of a
                                                                              1
            -(n-i) (e
                        -       - (et -
                                                                             It

                                                                             'I
.4




.3




.2




                                                                   es=. 5


.1




             1     2        3       4     5       6        7   8        9         10
                                                                                       t
      0

                                               Figure   5-a
                        (drawn    for 8=1, y=1/2, t=22, n=11,


                                                                            10
          Et(flYt — Yt




2.5




 1




      0            2        3       4     5       6        7



                                              Figure S-h
                                             —24—




staggered price path is that the adjustment at t +        1   exceeds the adjustment at

t, and we observe an accelerating adjustment to the new long—run

equilibrium. In the long run (i.e., after n—i periods) the effect of

is that prices rise by          ,   output   drops by -r and the exchange rate

depreciates by (a-1)t .      Figures   5a-b describe the adjustment path of'

relative prices and output to an adverse—productivity shock.


6. Concluding Remarks

     The present paper has demonstrated that observable deviations from PPP

can be explained by the presence of optimally staggered prices in a monopo-

listic competitive economy. In such an economy, PPP holds as a long -run

proposition.

     Among the limitations of the paper is the lack of a dynamic analysis of

the path that brought the economy into a symmetric staggered pricing

equilibrium. Suppose, for example, that weobserve in the present period an

unexpected change in the stochastic structure. We can expect such a change to

trigger a resetting of the price path by some producers. The tendency to

reset the price path should be stronger for those producers that had pre—set

prices most recently. Such an attempt would tend to destroy the initial non—

synchronized equilibrium. An interesting task would be to derive the

equilibrium path that corresponds to such an adjustment.

     One of the key assumptions used in this paper concerns the timing of

pricing decisions. It was assumed that the various producers are distributed

uniformely over time, so that at each point in time a fraction () of the

producers determine the time path of prices. With this assumption the

complexity of the problem was reduced significantly. In practice, however, it

is evident that in many industries the pricing decisions are made at specific

}JLLUU JJ. L,i.LtI 4—L...l—                      .1.. I...
                   LLjd.L, d.L ULtiIiL1L1 J. LyU1L.Ly
            4.......
                                                       LJy L11uLL.-Ly eii .Le
                                     —25—




considerations (like the season of the year, the end and the beginning of the

school year, and the like). Furthermore, it was assumed that each producer

sets price for precisely n periods. Again, in reality one typically

observes that the length of the pricing cycle differs across sectors in the

economy. Such considerations were not allowed in the present analysis, and

their incorporation would constitute a useful extension. Finally, since the

present paper modeled explicitly the behavior of various producers in a single

industry the analysis deals really with deviations from the law of one price

rather from the broader concept of purchasing power parity.
                                            —26-




                                         Appendix A



       The purpose of this Appendix is to study the optimal price-setting

rule. This is done in two stages. First, assuming a given pre-setting

horizon (given n) we find the optimal pre-setting rule. Next, we evaluate
                                    21
the determinats of optimal n


       a. The optimal pre-setting rule

       We found in the text that in a flexible equilibrium the optimal price is

          given by (14). This solution was arrived at by solving the following

problem:




(Al)                                      Max r(pk)




       where                    r         k°kk -             • Lk



       If producer k charges k instead of                ,       his       profits can be

approximated by


(A2)                        r
                                     r(k)      -
                                                   r2
                                                             -



       (A2) corresponds to the second-order Taylor expansion of profits around
                                                                                     2
                   are profits at the optimum, and                     -
 k r0                                                                            :       2


evaluated at        .   Suppose now that producer       Ic wishes to pre-set t+k in


period         (ph) .   Assuming risk neutrality,                  is the solution of
                                                   —27—




(A3)                                       Max           r

                                           t+k


                                           Or, applying (A2)




                                                     —
(A3')                    Max Et                              r2 t+k -    t-,-k
                         t+k
        Note that


(A11)
                                  k        2i
                                                 (E t÷k —
                                                                      k2 + Vt        -
                                                                                    t+k
                    Etl(pt+k_ t+k

where Vt (Xt÷k) is the variance of Xt÷k ,                         conditional    on information

available at period t          Because the path of                        is independent from

            profits will be maximized by:
 t+k

                                            t+k = Et t+k

        b. The optimal pre—setting horizon (n)

        We derive optimal n in several steps. First, we derive the expected

loss from pre-setting                 in period t             .    Next, for a given n we measure
the cost of pre-setting prices per cycle as the net present value of expected

losses during the cycle. Finally, we specify the costs of pricing decisions

to obtain the n.p.v. of profits in our economy. Optimal n is the result of

minimizing this last expression.

        Applying (A3)-(A5) we obtain that expected profits in period t+k

resulting from charging                ,    are:

(A6)
                    Er
                                  =
                                      Et
                                           r t+k - r2E(p+k_                 Etpt+k)


        Therefore, the expected loss from pre—setting the price for period t+k

is:
                                                      -28-




(A7) -r2 Et
                        -
                            Et       )2

        This result is measured in terms of nominal profits in period t+k                           .   We


obtain a real measure by deflating r2 by                                       the price level. For
                                                                   t÷k
large numbers of'     producers,           assuming that we are close to the flexible

equilibrium, we can approximate



(A8)                   2
                                 r

                                              2
                                                    (—1)       (1_I)
                                                                   y
                                                                         [ y(6—1)      ji
                                                                                        .1_i



        We denote by Ht+k the loss in real terms:

                                                           -                   2
(A9)
                                     Ht+h         r2 Et t+h - Et         t+h
        Notice that              =
                                     t+h          and Et t+h t+h                   Using these facts, we

can apply (l1) to obtain a measure of                             in a rational expectation

equilibrium:


(AlO)                  Ht÷h =              . Et                              j2         h1
                                                           1- kb £t+h_k            ,




        Or, alternatively:

                                                       hi
                                             a2 2                  1
(All)
                            Hth r                                          2 ' h1
                                                       k=o        (1-kb)

        If a typical producer pre-sets the price path for n periods, the

expected net present value of the loss from pre-setting (in terms of the

beginning of the cycle) is:


(A12)                                (n)             Hth / (i+r)h for n2

                                                  (1) z 0      for n=1
                                                  -29—




         where r denotes the real interest rate, assumed to be exogenously

given. Applying (All) we find that



                                            n—i h-i
                                    2
                                                                              h' , n2
                                                          1
(A13)               (n) r     a2
                                            hi kzo (1—kb) 2           (i+r)
and (1)O.
         To derive a measure of expected profits, we should include in our

consideration the role of the cost of pricing decisions. Suppose that each

pricing decision involves cost c             .    To simplify derivation, suppose that in

period zero we start a new pricing cycle. The net present value of profits,

resulting from following a policy of pre-setting the price path every n

periods, is:

                                                                      1
(A114)                    D         -              [2 (n) +    ci           h n
                                            h0                      (i+r)

         where     is the net present value in a flexible-price equilibrium (i.e.,

where                   for all t       ,   and     co)    .    We   use          as a benchmark. To

obtain net profits, we adjust               by the n.p.v. of costs resulting from pre-

setting the price path (n.p.v. of                 (n)) and the n.p.v. of the cost of

pricing decisions (n.p.v. of c). A strategy of n1 will minimize the n.p.v.

of         (to zero), at a cost of maximizing the n.p.v. of c. Alternatively,

setting the price path for the entire future (n -                    ) would        maximize the

n.p.v. of 2 (n) ,       minimizing the n.p.v. of c. In general, we will balance
the two costs at the margin, and n is found by maximizing D. Following

some tedious calculations we find that


(A15)
                                    n              <,           >0.
                                    A(acj)

         A rise in ao    implies that for a given pre-setting horizon, the costs
                                             -30-



of pre-setting have increased d(aa              >0) ;    motivating a cut in the pre-


setting horizon. If we take the limit of perfect substitutability between

domestic and foreign goods    (ct ÷   a) ,     we find that 2(n) ÷      for
n>1 (because      ÷     .    Therefore,       in this limiting case optimality calls

for n1 , which is the case where =                  ,   and PPP holds at all times.22

Thus, a necessary condition for generating deviations from PPP is a limited

degree of substitutability between domestic and foreign goods.
                                            -.31—




                                      Appendix B



       The analysis in the text focused on the pricing behavior of domestic

goods and assumed that foreign goods could enter the market priced at their

PPP level. The purpose of this Appendix is to analyze deviations from PPP in

an economy in which domestic prices of both foreign and domestic goods are

treated symmetrically: each seller pre—sets the price path for several

periods, resulting in a staggered price equilibrium for both domestic and

foreign goods. The discussion is intended to demonstrate that, apart from the

added complexity, the resultant deviations from PPP are similar to those

analyzed in the text.

       Consider an economy composed of a large number of producers and dealers

selling foreign goods. Each of them is small enough to take the average

prices of domestic and foreign goods as given. Let us denote by         and

the corresponding domestic average price of domestic and foreign goods.

       The demand facing a domestic producer (k) is given by:




                                        —
(31)
                                            k




       where '      corresponds to the elasticity of demand with respect to the
price set by domestic competitors, whereas '        corresponds to the elasticity
of demand with respect to the price set by foreign competitors. Note that

&'     represents   the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign

goods. Production technology is the same in this case as in the text:
                                               -32-



(B2)
                                                (Lk)1



       where      denotes labor input employed by producer k .   For simplicity

of' exposition we assume that labor is paid according to a domestic product

deflator (P)

       Analogously, domestic dealer selling foreign goods priced at Pf faces a
demand given by


                                           p          -
(33)
                                                    ()
Invoking the small country assumption, we assume that each dealer can import
                                                                  *
foreign   goods at a given international price, taken to be one (p    1)

       We solve this model as we did the model in the text. First, we derive

the flexibile price equilibrium. Then we study the equilibrium for the case

where domestic and foreign producers pre-set the price path for n and m

periods, respectively.

       Profit maximization in a flexible equilibrium implies that dealers of

foreign goods would charge:



(Ba)                                       p. e + h


                                       1        1
       Where h    —   log   (1—                       -
                                  8'       ' +&

and lower-case letters denote the logarithmic value of the corresponding

upper—case variables. Domestic producer k, operating in a flexible

equilibrium, will charge
                                                              —33-



(B5)                                          p '       + 5'           + ' p.         where:



                       h +          log                                  ,                +   (   —   1)'
                                                             ')
                                                                                      1




                       1 +          (     —   1) (' +                                1 +( — 1) (' +Th')



                — 1)       '

and '
             1 +   (   —       1)   (' +
                                                    ;       where            l/y




       Notice that ' and 5' are related by an additive property: ' + 5'                                                    =   1




       If all producers operate in a flexible price environment, we find that

the price of the domestic good (p) deviates from the PPP level of foreign

goods Ce) by:



(B6)                                p-e = h [i +
                                                               1
                                                                                 +   log
                                                                       1)'
                                                                             j
                                                            (—                       C - 1)           '




       and the price of the domestic good deviates from the domestic price of

foreign goods by:



(B7)                                                —              1
                                                                         [h +        log      ]
                                                        '
                                                             C — 1)



                                                                                                          '
       Both measures of deviations from PPP approach zero as                                                  approaches
infinity, as would be the case if domestic and foreign goods were perfect

substitutes.
                                                —3I—



        Suppose now that, due to the presence of gains from pre—setting the price

path for several periods, domestic and foreign producers make pricing

decisions every n and m periods, respectively. Thus, they pre-set the price

path for n (and m) periods. Assuming that producers and dealers are risk

neutral, Appendix A demonstrated that a producer (or a dealer) that pre-set

the price for period t i periods ago will charge:



(B8)                                       P= E. t

        Thus, the resultant price for foreign goods is:



(B9)                                             E_1 e+ h


        Applying equations (B5) and (38) we find that a domestic producer that

pre—set prices at period t in a staggered, unsynchronized equilibrium will

set its price at:



(BlO)                        p e' + b'             p + a'



                       +—t ,,              5,                           _,
        where   e'              , b'   =               and    a' =                .   Note that a'
                     1-—5'                 n—B'                       m(1-—)
                                                                             B'
                        n                                                 n

and b' are related by another additive property:



(Bli)                              (n—i) b' +          m   a' =   1



        We assume that the only source of uncertainty is the foreign exchange

rate, which follows the random walk process (equation 10).
                                                                         —35-



        For a given n and m we can solve for the pricing behavior. The

duration of the pricing cycle (n and m) is determined endogenously in a manner

described in Appendix A. The resultant deviations from PPP will have

statistical properties similar to those described in the text. For example,

if m n, by solving equation BlO recursively (applying equation ii) we find

that (for k       n):
                                         0'                                           n-2
                          j               o
                                                        ÷
                                                                                          '   a       (1+1<)
(B12)
                      Pt                 a' n                   Et   (       1) et+ L             1-k b' etk

                                          n-i
                                                            k
Using the fact that                                 p In we obtain:
                                          ko
                                8'                                              n—2                       2
                      -          o              +
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                 v a (li-k)
                               a' n                     t_(fl_i)e+              k=O n (1-k b')


        The resultant deviations of domestic prices from the PPP price of foreign

goods (p*i- e -   )           is equal to:


                                                                     n—2                              2
                               —              0'
                                                °                        v           a (li-i)
                                                                                      ,




                                                                                                  j
                                     —
.   ;                 e_       p_ — a'                          +                —                            1
                                                    n                                n (1 —           b') t_j


        A comparison between equation B14 and equation 18 from the text reveals

that allowing for a symmetric treatment of the pricing of both domestic and

foreign goods does not affect the nature of the resultant deviations from

PPP. These follow a path similar to the one described in figures 2—3.

        The case of equal degrees of price staggering (n                                                  m) is useful as a

benchmark for the assessment of the relative duration of the pricing cycle of

each class of goods. As is shown in Appendic A, a rise in volatility reduces

the length of a pricing cycle. As equation A9 shows, the appropriate

volatility measure is the expected (squared) discrepancy between the pre—set

price and the corresponding flexible price [Et(ph -
                                                                                                              t+h   J
                                                                                                                        .   In   what
                                                   -36-



follows we compare this volatility measure as it relates to home and foreign goods

(sold domestically).23 This comparison is conducted for the case where m                      n.

With equal pre—setting horizon (h), this volatility measure is shown to be

larger for traded goods, implying that the benchmark case where m                     n is

suboptimal. Thus, the presumption is that the pricing cycle is longer for

domestic goods.

        Applying B4 and 9 we find that for foreign goods, sold domestically:


                                                              h
                                    —                                        h   a2
(B15)
                    Et                  t+h j2 E[ j1 tj                 j2




        From B8 and 12 we get that



(B16)             Et[Pft+h -
                                   f,t+h     j2           I
                                                              , i?           t+j
                                    -
                                    —        ía' (h÷1—j)12        2

                                        j1   11—(h—J)b'



        Notice that an exchange rate innovation                       affects 315 by means of a

unitary coefficient, whereas it affects 916 at a lower rate

(because                 < 1   )   Consequently, the volatility measure that is

relevant for the assessment of the costs of pre-setting prices is higher for

foreign goods (sold domestically). Thus, domestic production tends to

mitigate the drop in profits that results from exchange rate volatility,

implying a longer optimal duration of the pricing cycle of' domestic goods

relative to the pricing cycle of' foreign goods sold domestically.
                                      -37—



                                    Footnotes



1.   This paper extends a previous study (entitled "Monopolistic Competition

     and Deviations from PPP", NBER W. P. #1552), by studing the output and

     price effects of real and monetary shocks.

2.   For a summary of empirical regularities, see Frenkel (198lb) and Mussa

     (1979).

3.   For a test of the explanatory power of'    various   exchange-rate approaches,

     see Meese and Rogoff (1983).

4•   For studies on the nature of deviations from PPP see, for example, Isard

     (1977), Frenkel (1981a), Kravis, Heston and Lipsey (1982).

5.   Empirical evidence (Frenkel (198lb)) has shown that deviations from PPP

     follow an AR(1) process, with an autocorrelation of .9, close enough to

     unity such that one cannot reject the random walk possibility.

6.   For such a model, see Aizenman (198)4) and Benninga and Protopapadakis

     (19814).

7.   For a discussion on relative and absolute PPP, see Frenkel (1976). For a

     review of the PPP doctrine see, for example, Officer (198)4) and Dornbusch

     (1985).

8.   Monopolistic competitive equilibrium in an open economy was studied by

     Flood and Hodrick (1983). They focused on the role of inventory

     adjustment in explaining the business cycle. Dixit and Stiglitz revived

     the interest in monopolistic competition whereas Dornbusch (1976) revived

     the interest in pre-set pricing models of floating exchange rates. On

     monopolistic competition in the context of trade models see I-lelpman and

     Krugman (1985).
                                        -38-




9.   To simplify, we neglect the role of fluctuations in present income in

     determining the demand. Thus, our analysis corresponds to the case where

     the demand is determined by the permanent income and the real interest

     rate, both of which are assumed to be constant. In general, we can

     further enrich the analysis by allowing the demand to be a function of

     both income and relative prices.

10. We consider the case where the we do not allow for pre-set prices

     contingent on future (presently unavilable) information. At the extreme

     case, where we would make optimal use of all future information in a

     contingent pricing system, we would converge on the flexible equilibrium

     economy, described earlier. This paper does not attempt to provide a

     theoretical justification for the existence of non-contingent prices.

     Rather, their existence is taken for granted, and the present work

     attempts to analyze the statistical properties of the resultant

     deviations from PPP. For studies on goods price rigidities, see Canton

     (1979, 1985) and the references thereupon.

11. The present formulation is related toFischer (1977), who studies the

     determinations of contracts in the presence of two-period staggered

     contracts. The new aspect of the present discussion is in allowing for

     endogenous determination of the extent of' staggering prices, focusing on

     the role of the degree of substitutability between various goods and the

     stochastic structure in explaining the nature of the resultant

     equilibrium. Our approach is closer to Fischer (1977) than to Taylor

     (1979), who considers a staggered equilibrium that sets one price for the

     pre—setting horizon, which is taken to be exogenously given. The issues

     addressed in this paper can be casted in terms of Taylor's framework,

     where each pricing decision set a price (and not a price path). This
                                                   —39-.




      paper apply Fischer's formulation because it allows for a more tractable

      analysis regarding the role of goods substitutability in the

      determinations of the optimal frequency of pricing decisions and the

      implied path of the purchasing power ratio.

12. The random walk choice is motivated by the empirical regularities

      observed in the last decade.
                        8       9
13. Notice that
                        a           ,   equal to the relative price obtained in a
                               a
      flexible equilibrium (p — e              ,   see (6)).

11. Note that as the substitutability between domestic and foreign goods

      rises (a         a) ,
                              2 approaches zero, in accord with absolute PPP.
15. Note that

      Et(l) (P,)              Et(nl) [Et(P)I = Et_(fl_l)                    n_l for ojn-1
16. It is noteworthy that the convex adjustment of relative prices(i.e.
       2           —
           [et —
                       < 0 is a result of the staggered nature of the price path
             2
      (Aj)

      set by various producers. For example, in Dornbusch (1976)2the speed of

      adjustment of relative prices diminishes over time (i.e.
                                                               Li   —
                                                                      Pt' > 0).    [e
                                                                  2
                                                                                 (Lij)

17.     rise in labor share (d y           >    0) imply a higher share of the variable factor,

      enabeling a more flexible output adjustment to shocks to relative prices. This

      has the effect of reducing the costs associated with pre-set prices, prolonging

      the length of the pricing cycle.

18. The simulations are conducted for initial values of a=8=1, y=.5,                      L=22,
      r=0, c=1.        I am indebted to Jae Sun Yi for helpful assistance in the

      computation.

19. It can be shown that if the income elasticity of the demand for money is                      E



      overshooting will take place if a(1 -                )   +   <   1.   Thus, a smaller income

      elasticity of the demand for money raises the needed exchange rate adjustment.



20. It can be shown that
                                           _140_




     2[ -                                                     Using definitions it follows
            (1—a) a k + 1]/(tk)2
                                         sign [cx(1+b)-a].
                  n 1-k b

     that S >   1       necessitates cz(1i-b)-a>O.

21. The problem of an optimal pre-setting horizon is related to the question of

     optimal labor contract length, as addressed by Gray (1978). A new aspect of

     the present discussion is the focus on the role of' market structure (degree of

     goods substitutability) and the presence of endogenous staggered prices.

22. Alternatively, as           ÷ o   we find that a   o .   In such a case 2 - o   ,   and

     n      .   This      result reflects our assumption that the only uncertainty sources

     are shocks to the exchange rate. In a more general analysis, which allows for

     the presence of productivity and domestic demand shocks, as a            a we would

     find that n would approach its closed economy optimal value, whereas as

     a-w fl÷        1



23. Note that the appropriate volatility measure (equation A9) is the result of

    multiplying the price volatility measure by r ,            reflecting   the second order

     term in the Taylor expansion of profits. In what follows we assume r to be

     equal for both sectors, focusing on the relative price volatility.
                                         —41-.




                                         References

Aizeriman, Joshua, "Modeling Deviations from PPP," International Economic Review, 25,
     19814, 175-191.

Benninga, Simon and Aris Protopapadakis "The Equilibrium Pricing of Exchange Rates
     and Assets When Trade Take Time." Working Paper, University of PA, 19814.

Carlton, Dennis, W. "Contracts, Price Rigidities and Market Equilibrium,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 87, 1979, 1034—1062.
-


                , "The   Rigidity of Prices" Working Paper, 1985.

Dixit, Avinash and Joseph Stiglitz, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
     Diversity "American Economic Review, June 1977.

Dornbusch, Rudiger,"Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
     Economy 84, 1976: 1161—76.

______________ "Exchange Rate and Prices" Working paper, presented in the NBER
     Summer Institute, 1985.

_____________   "Purchasing Power Parity,"NBER WP no. 1591, 1985; New Paigrave
     Directory of Economics, Forthcoming.

Flood, Robert P. and Hodrick, Robert J., "Optimal Price arid Inventory Adjustment In
     an Open Economy Model of the Business Cycle," NBER Working Paper Series, No.
     1089, March 1983.

Fischer, Stanley, "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability," in Karl Brunner and
     Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Stabilization of Domestic and International Economy,
     Vol. 5, Carnegie-Rochester Conferences on Public Policy, a supplementary series
     to the Journal of Monetary Economics, Suppl. 1977, 107—47.

Frenkel, Jacob A., "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal Aspects and
     Empirical Evidence," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78 (May 1976), pp. 200—
     2214. Reprinted in Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry G. Johnson, eds., The Economics
     of Exchange Rates: Selected Studies, Reading, Mass., Addison—Wesley, 1978.

_____________ "The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parities During the
     l970's,"European Economic Review, 16 (February 198la), pp. 145-165.

___________ "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Role of 'News': Lessons
     from the 1970's," Journal of Political Economy, 89 (August l981b), pp. 665—705.

Giovannini Alberto, "Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices", Working paper,
     Columbia University, 1985.

Gray, J0 Anna, "On Indexation and Contract Length," Journal of Political Economy,
     February 1978, 86, 1—18.

Uelpman Elhanan and Paul Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade, MIT Press,
     1985.
                                      -42-



 Isard, Peter, "How Far Can We Push the Law of One Price "American Economic Review,
      December, 1977.

Katseli, Louka, T., "Real Exchange Rates in the 1970's,'t in J. F. 0. Bilson and R.
     C. Marston, eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, NBER Conference Report,
     University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Kravis, Irving B., Alan Heston, and Robert Summers, World Product and Income:
     International Comparisons of Real GDP, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University
     Press, 1982.

Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff, "The Out-of-Sample Failure of Empirical Exchange
     Rate Models" printed in Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics Jacob
     A. Frenkel, (ed.) the University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Mussa, Michael, "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments, and Monetary and Fiscal
     Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating," Scandinavian Journal of
     Economics, 78 (May 1976), pp. 229_2L8. Reprinted in Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry
     C. Johnson, eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates, Reading, Mass., Addison-
     Wesley, 1978.

_____________ "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and
     Theories of Foreign Exchange Market" In Policies for Employment, Prices and
     Exchange Rates, K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer (eds.), Carnegie—Rochester
     Conference Series, Vol. 11, 1979.

_____________ "Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational Model of
     the Inflationary Process." American Economic Review, 71. December 1981:
     1020—27.

Officer, Larry, "Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rates," JAI Press, 1984.

Rotemberg, Julio, J. "Sticky Prices in the United States" Journal of Political
     Economy, Volume 90, No. 6, December 1982, 1187-1211.

Sheshinski, Eytan, and Weiss Yorarn, "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment,"
     Review of Economics Studies     June 77: 287_3011.

Svensson, Lars E. 0., "Sticky Goods Prices, Flexible Asset Prices, Monopolistic
     Competition, and Monetary Policy" Working Paper, Institute for International
     Economic Studies, University of Stockholm, February 1985.

Taylor, John B., "Aggregate dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of Political
     Economy 8, February 1980: 1-17.
