                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  VERTICAL INTEGRATION AND MARKET STRUCTURE

                                        Timothy F. Bresnahan
                                          Jonathan D. Levin

                                        Working Paper 17889
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17889


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012




This paper was prepared for the Handbook of Organizational Economics. We thank the editors, Robert
Gibbons and John Roberts, for helpful comments and discussions, and the Ewing Marian Kauffman
Foundation (Bresnahan) and the National Science Foundation (Levin) for their support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Timothy F. Bresnahan and Jonathan D. Levin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Vertical Integration and Market Structure
Timothy F. Bresnahan and Jonathan D. Levin
NBER Working Paper No. 17889
March 2012
JEL No. D23,L14,L22,M20

                                            ABSTRACT

Contractual theories of vertical integration derive firm boundaries as an efficient response to market
transaction costs. These theories predict a relationship between underlying features of transactions
and observed integration decisions. There has been some progress in testing these predictions, but
less progress in quantifying their importance. One difficulty is that empirical applications often must
consider firm structure together with industry structure. Research in industrial organization frequently
has adopted this perspective, emphasizing how scale and scope economies, and strategic considerations,
influence patterns of industry integration. But this research has paid less attention to contractual or
organizational details, so that these two major lines of research on vertical integration have proceeded
in parallel with only rare intersection. We discuss the value of combining different viewpoints from
organizational economics and industrial organization.


Timothy F. Bresnahan
Stanford University
Department of Economics, Room 325
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
tbres@stanford.edu

Jonathan D. Levin
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
jdlevin@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

        Vertical integration occupies a central role in organizational economics. Williamson
(2005) calls it the "paradigm" problem for explaining the distribution of firms and markets in
modern economies. In this chapter, we review research on vertical integration decisions and their
consequences, and offer some perspective on the current state of knowledge.1
        Our discussion bridges two very different literatures. Research in organizational
economics generally treats vertical integration as an efficient response to contracting frictions.
This approach is often associated with Coase (1937) and Williamson (1971). Research in
industrial organization has taken a complementary approach, emphasizing patterns of integration
at the market or industry level. Some of this work, following Stigler (1951), draws attention to
scale and scope economies as rationales for integration, while other strands emphasize strategic
motives, and the idea that integration can be a tool for consolidating or extending market power.
        Theoretical work in the first tradition argues that certain features of transactions create
particular problems for arms-length contracting. These can include difficulty anticipating future
contingencies, ambiguity in the nature of tasks and decisions to be carried out, the need to use
specific assets, or an inability to measure and verify transaction outcomes. In Section 2, we
describe some of the "building block" models that link these types of transactional frictions to
problems of hold-up, decision-making externalities, and incentive distortions, and offer
explanations for when and why internal organization might lead to more efficient outcomes.
        The ideas in these models have been the starting point for a long sequence of empirical
studies dating back at least to Monteverde and Teece (1982), Masten (1984), Joskow (1985,
1987) and others. The typical strategy in the empirical literature has been to relate observed
integration decisions to measures of contractual frictions, or more often proxies for these
frictions. In a very few cases, an attempt is made to link the integration decision to economic
outcomes such as productivity, investment, and innovation, or to observed transaction costs such
as the incidence of disputes.




        1
          Readers may also be interested in the surveys by Gibbons (2005), Joskow (2005), Klein (2005), Shelanski
and Klein (1995), and Lafontaine and Slade (2008). Perry (1989) is an earlier survey of industrial organization
research on vertical integration. Helpman (2006) and Antras and Rossi-Hansberg (2009) review recent work on
multinationals and cross-country integration decisions.

                                                            1
       Many studies along these lines report statistically significant correlations between
integration decisions and proxies for contracting difficulties. In Section 3, we discuss the extent
to which these findings can be viewed as strong supportive evidence for the theory. We highlight
a number of difficulties in relating the evidence to the theory. One is that the relevant theoretical
variables (for instance, the importance of non-contractible decisions or the marginal returns to
specific investments) can be inherently hard to measure (Whinston, 2003). In other cases, the
sources of variation that identify the parameters of interest appear to reflect important omitted
variables. Finally, even if one accepts the directional results, the lack of evidence linking
integration decisions to realized transaction costs makes it hard to assess the quantitative
importance of the effects.
       Empirical research also has faced a tension between testing specific predictions derived
from the theory and trying to explain broad industry patterns of integration. Most contractual
theories of integration aim to isolate particular mechanisms. The models tend to focus on simple
environments, for example two parties structuring a supply relationship with the surrounding
market held fixed. This means that the clearest empirical analogues are marginal decisions at the
firm boundary, such as whether a firm should make or buy a particular input. Moving from this
level of analysis to explain the organization of an entire industry requires additional steps
because the availability of suppliers or the existence of functioning markets or contracts needs to
be treated as an outcome of the analysis rather than a fixed parameter.
       This higher-level industry perspective on vertical integration has been adopted in much of
the industrial organization literature. Here, decisions about integration are often considered in the
context of broader models of industry structure, competition or technological change, but
typically with much less attention to contractual issues and the ways in which vertical integration
might differ from sophisticated contractual arrangements. In Section 4, we discuss this research,
which has an empirical component as well, consisting most often of industry case studies or
historical analyses of industry evolution. Using the case studies to communicate the key
analytical themes, we distill three reasons why industry structure and firm structure are
interdependent.
       The first relates to the presence of scale or scope economies. Many theories of industry
structure are framed in terms of trading off the successful exploitation of scale economies versus
the benefits of competition. If that tradeoff calls for a large number of distinct firms in one or


                                                      2
both of the industries where firms might be vertically integrated, the contracting problems
emphasized in some organizational economics theories decline in importance. This leads to
models in which market size or thickness is an important determinant of vertical integration.
       Second, competitive strategy can be a key factor in vertical integration decisions. A rich
set of models in industrial organization emphasize the use of vertical integration as a way to raise
entry barriers in one or both of the associated markets. Another class of models focuses on mixed
structures, where a firm in industry A might be vertically integrated with a firm in industry B
while also serving other firms in B as a disintegrated market supplier. Such structures create
complex strategic problems of supplying, or being supplied by, one’s competitor. These models
lack foundational theories regarding why integration, rather than complex contracts, is needed to
implement a particular strategy, but they nevertheless capture trade-offs that commonly arise in
industry case studies and are discussed frequently in competition policy.
       Third, the industrial organization literature has taken up the special case of vertical
integration with complementary innovators. This literature deals with the tradeoff between the
benefits of coordination associated with integrated production, and the benefits of getting
multiple diverse draws, which favors separation into multiple independent inventors. The
distinction has organizational implications because contracting to coordinate ex ante calls for
identifying and selecting a partner ex ante. Market organization of innovation can use ex post
market selection. We use the production of scientific research as an example to illustrate this
trade-off and how it brings together organizational and industry-level ideas.
       We conclude our review by noting that the two literatures on vertical integration have
remained largely separate despite the potential benefits of cross-pollination. We provide some
suggestions for how insights from organizational economics might inform traditional analyses of
market structure, and how a broader industry level perspective at times might enrich
organizational economics.

2. Contractual Theories of Vertical Integration

       In his famous essay on the nature of the firm, Coase (1937) proposed to study why and
how economic activity divides between firms and markets. He argued that firms exist to reduce
the costs of transacting through markets. Their size and scope depends on the extent of which
they offer a transaction cost advantage. Therefore a decision to vertically integrate rather than


                                                     3
sourcing inputs or selling outputs should reflect the respective transaction costs of internal and
market organization.
        To go further, one needs an explanation for why market transactions are inefficient, and
why the inefficiencies cannot be remedied with better contracts or pricing mechanisms. One also
needs to explain why integration might yield an improvement in some cases, but not all. Finally,
a satisfactory theory should match observed patterns of integration and offer some hope for
empirical testing and measurement. Essentially all contractual theories, from transaction cost
economics to formal models of hold-up, decision rights, and incentives, reflect these goals.

        A.       Transaction Cost Theories

        The transaction cost theory of integration was developed by Williamson (1971, 1975,
1985), Goldberg (1976), Klein, Crawford and Alchian (1978), Joskow (1985) and others
beginning in the 1970s. The theory expands on Coase's original idea by describing a wide set of
transaction inefficiencies and potential organizational responses.2
        A starting observation is that market contracts are inherently incomplete. Parties can plan
for some contingencies, but not every contingency. This means that in a great many transactions
there will be room for opportunistic and inefficient behavior as the transaction proceeds. The
concern may be especially severe when complexity or uncertainty make it difficult to specify
contractual safeguards, or when parties cannot walk away without incurring substantial costs.
        Transaction cost theory argues that integration can be an effective response when these
features are present. One reason given by Williamson (1971) relates to decision-making. When a
dispute arises within an organization, it can be settled by a senior manager. In contrast, a dispute
between separate entities must be resolved by negotiation or litigation. To the extent that
managerial authority makes it easier to resolve disputes or make adaptations, integration can be
the efficient response to uncertainty or contractual incompleteness (Williamson, 1971, 1979).
        A related rationale for integration is that it might mitigate potential holdups. If parties
anticipate the possibility of future haggling or disputes, they may have little incentive to make
specific investments for fear the investment could be wasted or expropriated (Klein, Crawford




        2
          The chapter by Tadelis and Williamson in this volume provides a more detailed account of transaction
cost economics. See also Joskow (2005) and Williamson (2010) for recent overviews.

                                                            4
and Alchian, 1978; Williamson, 1985). To the extent that integration allows a firm to protect
specific investments, it again can be an efficient response to contractual incompleteness.
        These stories provide a motive for vertical integration but not a corresponding cost.
Williamson (1975, 1985) suggests a related but distinct set of inefficiencies inside organizations.
These include low-powered incentives, and rent-seeking and informational bottlenecks that arise
in managerial hierarchies. An implicit assumption in transaction cost theory is that these
problems are relatively insensitive to the complexity, uncertainty, or specificity of particular
transactions. So integration becomes optimal when hazards are more severe, but non-integrated
production may be preferred for relatively straightforward transactions.3
        An important point in many transaction cost analyses is that the set of potential
organizational responses to transaction frictions is very large. In addition to full vertical
integration and “spot” contracting, responses can include contracts of varying duration and
specificity, joint ventures, partial ownership through financial investment, partial control through
seats on a board or voting arrangements, or shared ownership of assets or intellectual property. In
fact, part of the appeal of transaction cost economics is that it offers such a broad and inclusive
framework for matching organizational responses to transaction frictions. From an empirical
perspective, however, this richness poses some challenges.
        The sharpest predictions of the theory are that transaction characteristics such as
specificity, uncertainty, and complexity should favor vertically integrated production. Perhaps
the canonical example of specificity is a coal-fired electricity plant located next to a coal mine
(Joskow, 1985), which is also a good example to illustrate the subtleties of empirically testing
transaction cost theories of integration. Coal-fired electricity plants are expensive to build, have a
long lifetime, and are designed to burn particular types of coal. Before investing, the owners
want to ensure a steady and reliable input supply. There are, however, a variety of ways to do
this. Some plants vertically integrate, while others sign long-term contracts with the neighboring
mine. There is relatively little evidence that the integrated plants out-perform their counterparts
(Kerkvliet, 1991). So even in cases where specificity is apparent, vertical integration may be
only one of several possible responses, and not necessarily the most effective.



        3
          Williamson (1985) also emphasizes that the frequency of a transaction can be important, in the sense that
one-time transactions are less likely to be integrated than repeated transactions.

                                                             5
       This same point can be seen in another classic example from the transaction cost
literature: the acquisition of the Fisher Body Corporation by General Motors (Klein, Crawford
and Alchian, 1978; Coase, 1988, 2000; Klein, 1988, 2000, 2007; Langlois and Robertson, 1989;
Casadesus-Masanell and Spulber, 2000; Freeland, 2000). Fisher Body supplied metal car bodies
to GM in the early days of the auto industry. In 1919, GM acquired a stake in Fisher and the
companies signed a contract committing Fisher to supply its output exclusively to GM. The
contract was for ten years, on cost-plus terms. After it was signed, production expanded as the
demand for cars grew, and in 1926, GM purchased the remainder of Fisher Body, dissolving the
contract and integrating the firms.
       The question of why GM decided to integrate Fisher Body has been the subject of
extensive debate. Klein, Crawford and Alchian (1978) interpret the episode as a canonical
example of a holdup leading to integration. They observe that the relationship involved
substantial specific investments in manufacturing and human capital. They also argue that rising
demand raised Fisher's opportunity costs, so that they began to hold up GM by, among other
things, using a relatively costly manufacturing process. This left GM with no option but
integration. Coase (2000) and Freeland (2000) provide a very different interpretation. They point
out that Fisher and GM had a tight relationship. A Fisher brother sat on GM's board and GM paid
for the construction of at least one Fisher plant. Rather than a hold-up arising from the cost-plus
contract, Freeland and Coase argue that the cause of integration may have been a dispute about
whether to expand an existing plant or build a new one that fit GM's expansion plans.
       The episode demonstrates the subtleties in trying to formulate sharp empirical tests based
on transaction cost theory. The historical research makes it clear that even before integration,
Fisher and GM were closely intertwined. It is not obvious that things would have proceeded
much differently if the companies had integrated in 1919 or not at all. Moreover, although
different accounts are at odds over many issues, they are all consistent with the broad claims of
transaction cost economics. In this sense, the same inclusiveness of the theory that makes it
useful for organizing historical accounts also makes it difficult to reject.
       A somewhat different issue, but one that turns out to be important for applied work, is
that transaction cost theory tends to treat individual transactions in isolation, “holding fixed” the
characteristics of the transaction and the surrounding market conditions. The difficulty in applied
work is that transaction characteristics, and market structure, are often best viewed as


                                                      6
endogenous variables. For instance, firms may have a choice about whether to use standard or
customized inputs or to cooperate with other firms in their industry to create “standardized”
contracts or technologies. We return to this point in Sections 2.5 and 4.3.

        B.       The Property Rights Model

        The property rights model (Grossman and Hart, 1986; Hart and Moore, 1990; Hart, 1995)
is one of the first formal theories of integration that makes precise assumptions about the limits
of contracting.4 The model focuses on how integration changes the incentives to make specific
investments. In the property rights theory, a firm is defined as a collection of physical assets.
Decisions to integrate upstream or downstream are associated with shifts in asset ownership. An
example would be a manufacturer that purchases a supplier and takes control of its physical
plant, or that integrates downstream and takes ownership of distribution outlets. Contracts are
assumed to be incomplete. When open issues arise, ownership strengthens a party's bargaining
position. As a result, it has a stronger incentive to undertake ex ante specific investments.
        The standard version of the property rights model has three stages. The relevant parties
first decide who should own which assets. Other decisions, or some of them, are left to be
decided later. Then the parties make investment decisions. The investments are specific --- some
of their value is lost if the relationship breaks down. After investments are sunk, the parties
bargain over the outstanding terms and trade. Bargaining is assumed to be efficient, so the
surplus-maximizing trade is made regardless of asset ownership.
        Although bargaining leads to an efficient trading outcome irrespective of the distribution
of assets, ownership does affect the terms of trade. Because it conveys the right to use an asset in
the event of breakdown, ownership of an asset means that a party gets a larger share of the
bargaining surplus. Under the typical assumptions about payoffs, the model leads to sharp
predictions about investment incentives. A move toward integration increases the investment
incentives of the acquiring party, but lowers the incentives of the acquired party. Determining
whether integration is optimal, and which party should be the owner, requires a comparison of
the costs and benefits, which can be complex.




        4
          The chapter in this volume by Segal and Whinston provides an overview of the property rights model, as
well as many extensions and related models.

                                                            7
         Although the hold-up mechanism seems similar to transaction cost theory, the property
rights model leads to distinct empirical predictions (Whinston, 2003). For instance, transaction
cost theory predicts that integration will be a response to specificity, where specificity refers
(somewhat loosely) to a gap between the value of the ongoing relationship and the value of the
parties' outside alternatives. In the property rights model, the gap per se is not consequential for
predictions about ownership (Holmstrom and Roberts, 1998). Instead, the relevant quantity is the
degree to which ownership affects the marginal returns to non-contractible specific investments.
         Perhaps because of these subtleties, the specific predictions of the theory have not
received a great deal of empirical attention. Whinston (2003) emphasizes the difficulty in
measuring or proxying for the marginal returns to investment. Moreover, ownership in the model
conveys residual rights of control --- that is, the right to make decisions that are not otherwise
specified in a contract. In many settings, it is not obvious how to characterize or measure the
importance of these rights. Similarly, the model focuses on investments that are both
noncontractible and inalienable. Identifying important investments that are inherently non-
transferable (e.g. investments in human capital) and yet important enough to drive vertical
integration decisions can be tricky.
         Holmstrom (1999) also has emphasized another issue with the property rights model,
which may help explain why it has been more influential as a theoretical building block than as a
framework for empirical work. Taken literally, the model suggests that individuals (e.g. the ones
investing in human capital) should own the productive assets. Clearly this is not the right frame
of reference for thinking about large organizations that own many assets and coordinate many
activities, where shares of ownership are often widely dispersed and separation of ownership and
control is common.5 One could associate the actors in the property rights theory with larger
entities, and still think about hold-up of specific investments as being a rationale for vertical
integration, but in the context of the model one then needs an explanation for why investments
cannot be shared or contractually specified.

         C.        Decision Rights Models




         5
           The separation of ownership and control in large organizations relates closely to many of the issues raised
in this chapter, though we will not pursue it here. Berle and Means (1932) is an early and classic reference.

                                                               8
         One major contribution of the property rights model is that it offers a precisely
formulated argument for why and when ownership conveys the right to make decisions. Many
earlier accounts (e.g. Simon, 1951) simply assume that managers enjoy a degree of authority to
make decisions.6 In the property rights model, a firm's owner has to bargain with employees,
who are free to walk away. If they do, however, they leave the firm's assets behind. This can give
a firm’s owner some degree of bargaining power over the firm’s employees. In contrast, a
supplier that walks away takes productive assets with it. Of course, in the property rights model,
the key decision rights are never exercised because of the efficient bargaining assumption, so
ownership “matters” only through ex ante investment incentives.
         An alternative, and in some ways simpler, modeling approach assumes that bargaining is
not efficient, or that there is no bargaining at all. Examples of this approach include Hart and
Holmstrom (2010) and Baker, Gibbons and Murphy (2011). In these models, ownership is
associated with the right to make certain residual decisions (the presence of physical assets is no
longer very important). Roughly, these models predict that ownership should be allocated in a
way that ensures more efficient ex post decisions (cf. Segal and Whinston, in this volume).
         In Hart and Holmstrom (2010), for instance, there are two business units that can benefit
from coordinating their actions. Integration means that the units are placed under a single
manager. The manager can force the units to coordinate, but (by assumption) may fail to respect
the private preferences of the divisional employees. If instead the units operate under separate
ownership, the respective managers will cater to their employees but the units may fail to
coordinate. There is a trade-off between the coordination benefits of internal organization and the
incentive or appropriation benefits of non-integration.7
         This type of “decision rights” approach hearkens back to a much older, although less
contractually grounded, set of models in industrial organization. For instance, in the classic
double marginalization model of Spengler (1950), a non-integrated upstream supplier will

         6
            This view has been controversial. For instance, Alchian and Demsetz (1972, p. 777) write: "It is common
to see the firm characterized by the power to settle issues by fiat, by authority, or by disciplinary action superior to
that available in the conventional market. This is delusion. The firm does not own all its inputs... [An employer] can
fire or sue, just as I can fire my grocer by stopping purchases from him or sue him for delivering faulty products."
          7
            Similar trade-offs also appear in the literature on internal capital markets (e.g. Stein, 1997). A related
model in Hart (2009) explores how integration might provide a way to avoid costly hold-ups, as in the transaction
cost account of Klein (1996). In Hart’s model, vertically related parties write a contract to trade at a future date. But
they are unable to get the price right for every contingency. A situation can therefore arise where one party might
threaten to walk away, triggering a (costly) renegotiation. The optimal ownership structure therefore is one that
minimizes the likelihood of a hold-up.

                                                                9
choose its markup without regard to the profits of a downstream producer. The resulting trade is
inefficient. Integration helps resolve the inefficiency, because pricing decisions are coordinated
in a way that leads to a jointly profit-maximizing transfer price.8
         The double marginalization model and related models of incentive conflicts within
vertical supply chains share the feature that integration shifts authority from separate managers
to a single coordinating entity. What it leaves unexplained is why integration does a better job of
restoring efficiency than a sophisticated non-integrated contract (Tirole, 1988). Nevertheless, it is
a workhorse for applied economists because of its clear predictions (for instance, the potential
inefficiency will be larger and the incentive to integrate greater when there is substantial market
power both upstream and downstream). In this sense, the approach taken in recent decision rights
models may be a promising framework for empirical research, particularly for studies where it is
possible to observe decision processes and outcomes in integrated and non-integrated situations.

         D.       Incentive Theory Models

         A complementary set of vertical integration models focus on how integration decisions
shift the financial incentives of workers and managers. As a simple example, we can consider a
firm contracting with a sales agent. Suppose for the moment that non-integration is associated
with the agent having high-powered incentives --- for instance, a contract under which the agent
buys the product at a fixed price and keeps the proceeds from its sales. Conversely, integration
means that the agent becomes a salaried employee with low-powered incentives. Whether
integration is optimal will depend on how important it is to provide incentives for the sales agent,
and whether monitoring can substitute for high-powered financial incentives.
         This type of agency model has been the dominant paradigm in research on franchising
arrangements and related distribution integration decisions. It has several attractive features.
First, internal organization often does seem to feature low-powered incentives relative to market-
based exchange. Second, the basic logic of incentive theory models is familiar, and the relevant
quantities --- the sensitivity to incentives, the difficulty of measuring or monitoring behavior, the
degree of risk-aversion, and so forth --- are in principle objects that can be proxied or quantified.



         8
          Related models focus, for instance, on the inability of non-integrated firms to coordinate investment or
marketing decisions, or to price complementary products efficiently. Tirole (1988) and Perry (1989) provide
extensive coverage of these types of models.

                                                             10
       One element that is missing, however, is why integration should be equated with low-
powered incentives in the first place. Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) provide an answer. Their
argument is that financial incentives generally are part of a broader incentive environment. Other
elements might include decisions about asset ownership, or the set of tasks that are permitted or
excluded. Holmstrom and Milgrom show that under certain conditions, asset ownership by the
agent (e.g. non-integration) can be complementary to providing high-powered financial
incentives. Conversely, taking assets away (integration) makes it desirable to use low-powered
incentives. From this perspective, integration is likely to be associated with broader shifts in
incentives and other organizational variables even if asset ownership per se is not the primary
driver of incentives (see also Holmstrom, 1999).
       The incentive system model is particularly useful for thinking through shifts in incentives
and organizational design that might accompany integration decisions. For example, privately
funded startup firms in Silicon Valley often compensate their workers and managers with equity
or options. The work atmosphere can be intense. These firms attract workers and managers who
are drawn to the high-pressure, high-powered incentives of starting a new business. If a large
firm acquires the startup, it may seek to align the startup's activities and efforts with its own.
Measuring alignment can be difficult, so the logic of the model suggests that an acquisition will
be followed by a shift to lower-powered incentives and perhaps the subsequent departure of
some of the original managers and employees.
       The challenge in making the theory operational for empirical work is that its predictions
are again very rich. Many outcome variables should move together as a response to underlying
shifts in the environment. As a result, most of the research linking agency considerations to
integration decisions has tended to focus on simpler although perhaps less interesting
predictions.

       E.      Capabilities Theories

       The theories we have described focus mainly on decisions at the boundary of the firm,
and often deal with cases where firms integrate to internalize the transfer of some tangible good
or service. In contrast, research on business strategy and organization theory frequently
emphasizes the idea that firms may seek to expand or acquire other firms to leverage their
internal capabilities or exploit superior management capabilities (e.g. Penrose, 1959; Cyert and


                                                      11
March, 1963; Wernerfelt, 1984). These theories rest on two premises. The first is that
organizations develop certain capabilities or know-how that is embodied by managers and
employees, or in organizational routines. The second is that capabilities or knowledge cannot
easily be traded or shared across firm boundaries.
        These ideas have received less attention in economic theory, although there is a range of
work that speaks to related issues. In Lucas’ (1978) model of firm size, managerial talent is a
scarce resource that can be leveraged by creating hierarchical organizations. Lucas uses the
model to derive predictions about the size distribution of firms in the economy. Subsequent work
has adapted his model to study the optimal organization of hierarchies (e.g. Garicano, 2000).
Clark (1985) and Bloom and van Reenen (2007) provide evidence that managerial practices can
be an important factor in explaining productivity differences across firms.9
        These theories address the first piece of the capabilities view --- that firms differ in
managerial know-how and this difference is important for production --- but not the second. That
is, they do not address why integration, as opposed to contractual arrangements, is required to
leverage managerial talent. One natural hypothesis is that managerial authority tends to coincide
with firm boundaries, an idea that is captured in the model of Hart and Holmstrom (2010)
discussed in Section 2.3, and is a common presumption in less formal analyses.
        A complementary line of research argues that vertical integration allows information
flows that cannot occur across firm boundaries (Malmgren, 1961). For instance, Arrow (1975)
considers a model in which information can be transmitted within an integrated firm but not
between disintegrated firms. Again, the model side-steps the question of why transmitting
information or knowledge across firm boundaries might be difficult. One potential justification is
that employees who interact regularly in a firm develop a body of shared knowledge that
facilitates further communication.
        Another difficulty with sharing knowledge or information across firm boundaries is that
once information is shared, it cannot be rescinded, creating an appropriability problem. Indeed,
Cohen and Levinthal (1990) argue that the ability to "absorb" information can itself be an
important organizational capability. In Section 4.4, we will argue that identifying situations in



        9
          These papers look at comparable firms and have observable definition of “better” managerial capabilities.
As Clark (1985) points out, to understand complementarities between different organizations one needs a definition
of managerial capabilities that includes the task to be carried out as well as effectiveness at pursuing that task.

                                                            12
which firms have an advantage in coordinating the production and dissemination of knowledge is
particularly useful for thinking about the organization of innovative industries.

3. Empirical Evidence on Vertical Integration Decisions

        Since the 1980s, many empirical studies have attempted to test or apply contractual
theories of integration. The studies vary in the details but share common features. The general
approach is to predict observed integration decisions using transaction characteristics identified
in the theory. The integration decisions lie at the firm boundary --- whether to buy certain
inputs, to use a contracted sales force, to franchise retail outlets, or instead to bring these services
in house. These studies focus on integration decisions at the firm level, holding fixed the nature
of the goods and services being contracted on, the contracting environment, and the surrounding
market structure.
        These papers also share common measurement challenges. Testing contractual theories of
integration requires empirical measures of concepts such as the degree of specificity, the
importance of noncontractible investment, and the potential for opportunism and hold up.
Testing also requires variation in their incidence. The variation might be across firms or across
the transactions of a single firm. But its source needs to be plausibly exogenous to the integration
decision itself. It is also necessary to identify the set of possible contracting outcomes. The
undertaking is complicated by the possibility of a wide range of contractual solutions to a given
problem. Most studies try to capture moves closer to or further from integration with some sort
of binary classification, and they avoid fine distinctions among contractual arrangements.
        Virtually all the studies we discuss report statistically significant correlations between
integration decisions and proxies for theoretically-relevant transaction characteristics. This
correlation has been viewed as favorable evidence for contractual theories. A more skeptical
perspective, however, is that these analyses often do not provide a very sharp test of the theory.
In some cases, the empirical proxies used to capture complexity, specificity, or the potential for
opportunism do not have an obvious relationship to the theoretical concepts. In other cases, the
source of identifying variation seems to be earlier or concurrent decisions made at the firm or
industry level, raising concerns about a causal interpretation.
        Perhaps the main limitation of this work, however, is that very few studies provide any
quantitative (and sometimes not even qualitative) sense of the transaction costs or incentive


                                                      13
distortions associated with different contractual forms. As a result, it is frequently unclear
whether the difference between integration and non-integration is really that important in any
economic sense. In Section 3.6, we argue that this last concern requires combining evidence on
integration decisions with specific ex-post measures of transaction costs or performance, and that
this approach is a key direction for future research.

        A.      Sourcing Complex and Specific Inputs

        Some of the earliest empirical studies look at industrial make-or-buy decisions in search
of evidence that firms might seek to integrate the production of complex or specific inputs. Two
classic examples are Monteverde and Teece (1982) and Masten (1984).10 Both studies relate
make-or-buy decisions to empirical proxies for hold-up and opportunism and thus, are usefully
representative of a much larger empirical literature.
        Monteverde and Teece (1982) studied how Ford and General Motors source auto
components. They used a probit regression to relate sourcing to measures of transaction
specificity and complexity. A component is “specific” if the procuring firm is the exclusive
purchaser of that component. An engineering cost estimate is used to proxy for complexity, or
“technical know-how”. Because many components consist of parts procured in different ways,
Monteverde and Teece defined a component as “made” rather than “bought” if the cost fraction
of the component produced internally exceeds a given threshold. Their main finding was that
both specificity and complexity are positively correlated with internal sourcing.
        Masten (1984) examined a single large aerospace project that required nearly two
thousand inputs. Masten also constructed measures of specificity and complexity, in his case on
an input-by-input basis. Here too, an input is specific if the general contractor is the exclusive
user. Inputs are classified as complex or not complex based on a survey of the procurement team.
Masten found that both measures are highly correlated with sourcing. In fact, over ninety percent
of the “specific and complex” inputs were sourced internally, versus less than one percent of the
“non-specific and non-complex” inputs.
        These pioneering studies highlight some of the challenges in testing contractual theories
of integration. One challenge is to find empirical measures of transaction frictions that


        10
         Related work on industrial or government procurement decisions includes Walker and Weber (1984);
Masten, Meehan and Snyder (1989, 1991); Crocker and Reynolds (1993); and Levin and Tadelis (2010).

                                                         14
correspond closely to the conceptual ideas in the theory. For instance, both studies use measures
of technical or engineering complexity as proxies to indicate that purchasing a component is
complicated. The relationship is clearly imperfect. Computers are very technically complex and
yet most firms readily source computers from external vendors. From a theoretical perspective, it
would be better to define complexity in terms of communication or information about a
transaction. Are there many possible contingencies? Does performance involves a great many
details that are difficult to communicate or incorporate in a contract? Is it difficult to identify the
responsible party if problems arise? Is there substantial room for asymmetric information? These
notions each require a different approach to make operational. For example, the idea that
complex transactions may involve asymmetric information calls for an empirical treatment that
recognizes one party may have superior information at the time of contracting. This idea, so
important in the rest of the economics literature on asymmetric information, appears essentially
nowhere in the empirical literature on vertical integration.11
        Defining "specificity" is also problematic. Monteverde and Teece (1982) and Masten
(1984) use what is most naturally viewed as an outcome (the demand for an input by only one
customer) to proxy for a primitive (the specificity of the investments associated with the
exchange relationship). The fact that the input has a sole user may reflect some fundamental and
fixed attribute of the input (and in a study that focuses narrowly on a single firm, that may be the
obvious source of variation on which to focus), but it may also reflect broader market forces. For
example, variation in the efficient scale of production relative to demand needs may play a large
role in determining whether an input is classified as specific. If the input is efficiently produced
at large scale relative to the demand of individual users, we might expect to see several firms
using the same input, even if it is produced by only a single supplier, creating the type of
bilateral market power emphasized in the theory. In contrast, if production of the input is
flexible, users may adopt customized versions irrespective of whether the market to supply the
input is highly competitive or very concentrated.


        11
            Many of the most successful approaches to asymmetric information are based on data sets in which the
econometrician, by gathering data later, can observe an outcome that only one party could observe at the time of
contract (e.g. Einav, Finkelstein and Levin, 2010). This approach is beginning to be deployed in the few studies of
vertical integration which look at outcomes of this sort. Below, we look at a paper by Arora, Gambardella,
Magazzini and Pammolli (2009) that looks at pharmaceutical development for licensed (i.e. contracted) versus in-
house chemical entities. They interpret the observed lack of difference in success rates between licensed and in-
house developed drugs as evidence against any "lemons" theory of asymmetric information in the licensing market.

                                                             15
         Note that the important part of this argument for analytical purposes is not the specific
point about scale. It is the movement of the argument from firm to market. In the firm-level
theory, an input is made rather than bought because producing it requires specialized equipment
or knowledge, or a specialized location, or because the input itself has no alternative use, and
moreover because this specialization leaves parties open to opportunism if the input is bought
instead of made. In the market-level alternative theory, some inputs are sold to multiple buyers
because that is the efficient market organization, and this causes their use to be less "specific".
This arrangement might be optimal because of scale economies in production, or because the
market is organized in a way that facilitates the pricing and distribution of standardized products,
or because regulatory or legal uncertainty favors standardized transactions.12
         These problems illustrate the difficulty of distinguishing aspects of a transaction that are
primitive from those that follow from design decisions or market equilibrium. Baldwin and Clark
(2005) have tried to tackle this problem from an engineering perspective. They argue that within
a production process it is possible to identify the engineering interfaces that are more or less
amenable to a market transaction. One suspects this approach could prove powerful in certain
instances, particularly if it is possible to measure performance along a chain of production (e.g.
failure rates, delays, etc.).
         We have emphasized the difficulties in measuring transaction frictions, but difficulties in
measurement also arise on the left-hand-side of transaction cost regressions. In the case of auto
manufacturing, US manufacturers traditionally relied on a partial outsourcing model in which
suppliers compete for contracts each year. Japanese firms adopted a very different approach
involving close relationships with a set of closely coordinated suppliers (Asanuma, 1989). The
economic and engineering problems faced by firms in this industry in different countries are not
all that different, but history and broader institutional issues led these firms to adopt very
different organizational modes. Depending on which country one looked at, one might arrive at
very different views of what it means to “buy” rather than “make” a component.



         12
            One can also raise issues of causality with reference to a single firm. If the market supplies a small set of
input varieties, a producer may be able to tailor its design to utilize these varieties rather than a specific input.
Relatedly, Novak and Stern (2009) point out that if there are complementarities in production, manufacturers may
internally source clusters of inputs if they anticipate difficulties in coordinating design changes that require large-
scale modifications.



                                                                16
         B.        Specificity, Market Thickness and Hold-Up

         Empirical researchers arguably have had more success in linking integration decisions, or
at least the use of more complete vertical contracts, to measures of market structure such as the
availability of multiple suppliers in the upstream market. Two emblematic studies are Stuckey
(1983) and Joskow (1987). These studies get around many of the problems discussed above by
identifying settings where parties make large investments in specific assets --- in each case,
specialized production facilities --- and there appears to be substantial potential for hold-up in
subsequent price negotiations due to the limited availability of trading partners.13
         Stuckey (1983) focuses on aluminum manufacturing. The primary input in this process,
bauxite, is very costly to transport. Thus, it is efficient to locate aluminum refineries close to
bauxite mines, and indeed the largest refineries are mine-mouth plants. Because refineries and
mines require substantial sunk investments and have long lifetimes, Stuckey argues that
integration is a natural response to the threat of costly breakdowns. He documents that
integration of co-located mines and refineries is indeed common. Hennart (1988) provides an
interesting comparison: the production of tin. Relative to aluminum, tin production has much
lower capital and transport costs, less specialization of refineries, and also much less vertical
integration.
         Joskow (1987) studies coal-fired electric utilities. He points out that utilities located in
the eastern United States have relatively easy access to multiple coal suppliers, while utilities
located in the West have fewer options. As a result, western utilities are more exposed to costly
hold-ups, and are more likely to take contractual precautions. Geographic variation in market
structure therefore provides a source of identifying variation. The dependent variable in the study
is the duration of supply contracts, as vertical integration is relatively uncommon. Joskow shows
that utilities in the East have relatively short contracts, while contracts in the West can last
fifteen years or more. Over such a long duration, the value of energy can be expected to vary
widely. Thus, the costs of long-term contracting might be considerable, especially if the
contractual price only poorly tracks the spot prices that would have prevailed (Joskow, 1988).




         13
            Acemoglu, Aghion, Griffith and Zilibotti (2010) take a less direct approach to assessing the relationship
between investments and integration, but one that is motivated by the property rights theory, studying the
relationship between technological intensity and integration in British manufacturing.

                                                              17
Presumably this cost is weighed against the benefit of protecting investments in choosing
contract duration.14
         In the aluminum and coal examples, asset specificity is closely related to market
structure. In Stuckey (1983), co-location and high transport costs ensure that refineries have few
alternative suppliers. In Joskow (1987), firms in the West cannot rely on a thick spot market and
competition to avoid hold-up. In each case, a concentrated market structure, i.e. few ex post
options, provides an empirical proxy for potential opportunism.
         The availability of alternative suppliers can depend a great deal on the relevant time
horizon. A firm may have many options if it plans well in advance, but few on short notice,
creating what Masten, Meehan and Snyder (1991) refer to as "temporal specificity". Pirrong
(1993) argues that differences in the incidence of temporal specificity can explain organizational
arrangements in ocean shipping for different commodities. Grain and fertilizer are at one
extreme. They can be carried using general-purpose vessels and have liquid spot markets. The
thickness of the market leaves little room for haggling over prices, and both commodities are
commonly shipped under spot contracts. In contrast, iron ore requires specialized vessels to ship
and the number of mines and steelmakers is limited. Integration and long-term contracts are the
norm. Either steelmakers own their own shipping subsidiaries, or they secure a shipper for a long
period of time, with the agreement typically negotiated prior to the construction of the
specialized ship.

         C.       Decision Rights and Coordination

         One of the central ideas in transaction cost theory and in models of the optimal allocation
of decision rights is that integration might help firms adapt to contingencies that are anticipated
in a broad sense but not in specific detail. Testing this proposition calls for a setting in which
such contingencies arise frequently and with enough similarity to facilitate statistical analysis,
but with sufficient variation to prevent easy contracting in advance. Several studies have made
progress by looking at integration decisions in transportation industries, where scheduling poses




         14
           A related line of work uses variation across firms within an industry, or across local markets, to test
whether integration decisions are related to the number of available suppliers or to upstream concentration. See for
instance, Lieberman (1991), Ohanian (1994), or the additional studies discussed in Section 4.



                                                              18
a coordination problem that often has to be solved in real time in a fashion that allows adaptation
to changing circumstances and events.15
         Forbes and Lederman (2009) study the relationships between major U.S. airlines and
their regional affiliates. Some carriers own their regional affiliates, while others use long-term
contracts. The organizational structure is revised infrequently, but numerous issues such as
scheduling must be resolved on an ongoing basis. Forbes and Lederman focus on the possibility
that weather disruptions might be a particular source of conflict. They argue that when there is a
disruption, a carrier may want to adapt local flights to keep their network running as smoothly as
possible. Regional carriers may not internalize broader problems on the network. Forbes and
Lederman use cross-route variation in weather patterns to proxy for the incidence of conflict.
They find that major carriers are more likely to use wholly-owned regional operators on routes
with worse weather. Integration is also more common on routes that are more intricately linked
to the network, where the need for coordination is arguably larger.16
         In a subsequent paper, Forbes and Lederman (2012a) tighten this story by relating
integration decisions to ex post measures of performance, in this case flight delays. They find
that integrated regionals experience fewer delays than non-integrated ones, particularly on airport
days with adverse weather conditions. The finding is consistent with the idea that the national
airline, not the regional carrier, disproportionately bears the costs of delay and that opportunistic
behavior by the regional carrier hinders adaptation in certain contingencies. Although delays do
not translate immediately into dollar costs of disintegrated supply, the paper is unusual, and
admirable, in completing the link from plausibly exogenous market conditions to integration
decisions to ex post performance.17
         Problems of adaptation also feature prominently in studies by Lafontaine and Masten
(2002), Nickerson and Silverman (2002) and Baker and Hubbard (2003, 2004) on organizational


         15
             Gil (2007) provides a related analysis of adaption in the movie industry, where the market for any given
movie is initially uncertain but realized over time, leading to a question of how long theatres should continue to
exhibit the movie when the box office receipts are being shared with (disintegrated) movie distributors.
          16
             Forbes and Lederman (2009) do not provide much direct evidence on the costs of integration that
encourage carriers to sometimes rely on contracts with non-integrated affiliates. They hypothesize that arms-length
contracting keeps the employees of the regional firm at a distance from the generally quite powerful unions of the
parent carrier.
          17
             In a further related study, Forbes and Lederman (2012b) analyze an industry shift from revenue sharing
contracts with regional carriers to capacity utilization (or "per flight") payments. They show that this shift was
associated with the adoption of flexible regional jets and argue that the change in contract was needed to reduce
haggling with the regional carriers over what flights to fly.

                                                              19
arrangements in the trucking industry. In trucking, costs are reduced by minimizing driving
distance and maximizing the likelihood of full loads. These features mean that efficient matching
of trucks and loads can create substantial value, and often the matching needs to be done in real-
time based on the location of trucks and loads. One conjecture is that when load matching is
more important, we might expect a greater prevalence of trucking employees driving company-
owned trucks rather than independent operators contracting for loads.
       Consistent with this broad hypothesis, Nickerson and Silverman (2002) find that
employee drivers are more common in "less-then-truckload" (LTL) carriage, where they argue
there is more need for coordinated scheduling. Baker and Hubbard (2003, 2004) find a similar
relationship between the use of employee drivers and difficulty in finding backhauls, where
again the potential for miscoordination and haggling may be greater. In an interesting extension,
Baker and Hubbard (2003) look at the adoption of information technology in the form of on-
board computers. They point out that on-board computers had ambiguous implications for
organization form. On the one hand, by allowing companies to track driver locations, they
facilitated load matching and more efficient capacity utilization, favoring an integrated structure.
On the other hand, they allowed for improved monitoring of driver activities, facilitating arms-
length contracting.
       The work of Baker and Hubbard (2003, 2004) and Pirrong (1993) raise the interesting
question of whether vertically integrated control structures have a natural advantage in solving
complex coordination or matching problems. In transportation, scheduling and load-matching
problems are frequently tackled using optimization models that incorporate various constraints
on allocation and dispatch. Economists immediately understand that solutions to these types of
problems have a market analogue, for instance with multipliers on different constraints
corresponding to implied prices for different routes. What is the incentive to shift from market
control to operations research control? Pirrong points to the problem of having sufficiently thick
markets to generate reliable prices. Another rationale might be the difficulty of solving complex
scheduling and matching problems in a decentralized fashion, although arguably this type of
problem might be addressed with more sophisticated market mechanisms.

       D.       Agency, Incentives and Monitoring




                                                    20
        Empirical researchers have also explored the extent to which incentive contracting
theories of integration have predictive power. The large literatures on retail franchising decisions
and sales force integration are typical in this regard.18 Here, researchers have attempted to link
organizational decisions by the parent firm --- such as whether franchise outlets are company-
owned --- to the importance of franchisor and franchisee effort, and to difficulties in monitoring
this effort. Because direct measures of the marginal returns to effort and the ability to monitor
typically are hard to come by, most researchers rely on proxies. For example, studies have found
that more “remote” outlets (e.g. those in rural areas, or without neighboring outlets, or farther
from headquarters) are more likely to be franchised as opposed to company owned (e.g. Brickley
and Dark, 1987; Minkler, 1990; Kehoe, 1996). Other studies report correlations between
franchise ownership and variables such as employee-to-sales ratio or the experience required of
new franchisees.
        A common issue in interpreting these findings is that (once again!) the empirical proxies
may not relate very tightly to a particular theory. For example, the cost of monitoring remote
outlets may be higher, making it desirable to provide higher-powered revenue incentives.
Alternatively, remote outlets also may be less integral to the chain's reputation, making it less
important for the parent to exercise control. The set of individuals interested in obtaining a
remote franchise and the potential customers at remote outlets also may be different from nearby
franchises.19 This ambiguity can lead to multiple explanations for a reported correlation.
        Some studies have been able to mitigate the "proxy" problem by identifying cases where
there is compelling cross-franchise or cross-location variation in the nature of tasks. Shepard's
(1993) study of gasoline stations in Massachusetts is a good example. Shepard views the choice
of organizational form for gasoline stations as resolving a trade-off between resolving double-
marginalization problems in pricing and providing incentives for the station operators. She
argues that incentives are likely to be more important at stations that offer ancillary services such



        18
             On franchising decisions, see for example Caves and Murphy (1976), Brickley and Dark (1987), Norton
(1988), Minkler (1990), Lafontaine (1992), Lafontaine and Shaw (2005), and Yeap (2006). Studies of sales force
integration include Anderson and Schmittlein (1984), Regan (1999), and John and Weitz (1988).
          19
             Other studies proxy for franchisee effort using measures such as the employee to sales ratio (Norton,
1988) or the amount of franchisee experience required (Lafontaine, 1992). Related work adopts proxies for the
importance of franchisor effort such as advertising expenditures (Lafontaine and Shaw, 2005) or the number of years
a chain went before franchising any outlets (e.g. Lafontaine, 1992). It is not entirely obvious why the variation in
these variables should be unrelated to other factors influencing franchisee ownership.

                                                            21
as auto repair or full-service gasoline. Consistent with this logic, Shepard finds that the stations
offering ancillary services are less likely to be company-owned.20
         Studies of retail organization also face difficult problems of selection. For instance, a
common hypothesis in research on franchising is that parent companies should tend to own
outlets where revenue is highly variable, as a way to shelter franchisees from risk. The evidence,
however, is highly inconclusive (Lafontaine and Slade, 2008). Of course, finding a convincing
proxy for risk is not easy, but even apart from this measurement problem, one may be concerned
about selection. For instance, franchise operators may vary substantially in their risk attitudes,
and those with greater risk tolerance (or perhaps greater wealth) may be drawn to the more risky
outlets and also prefer to have ownership.21
         A broader issue with the contractual literature on franchising is that it does not provide
much evidence on whether outlet ownership has first-order operational effects. After all, a
statistical relationship between incentives and ownership structure does not necessarily establish
that the incentive problems under one organizational form are large. From an incentive
perspective, a company-owned McDonald’s might be radically different from a franchisee-
owned McDonald’s, or it might be pretty much the same. To assess the difference, one needs to
know if there really is substantial variation in effort or behavior across franchises and whether it
covaries with organizational form. Absent such information it is difficult to infer whether agency
considerations are really the central issue driving franchising decisions, or whether issues such as
capital structure and financing are more important. The best way to address these questions
would be to incorporate direct measures of outlet performance into the analysis.

         E.        Knowledge and Information Transfers

         In contrast to empirical work on transaction specificity and incentives, the literature that
tries to link vertical integration decisions to knowledge and information flows is less well
developed. One likely reason is that the relevant variables --- organizational capabilities or
know-how, managerial ability, and internal processes --- can be difficult to measure, a pre-

         20
             Yeap (2006) takes a similar approach to studying franchising decisions by fast food chains. Her central
finding is that restaurants where food preparation is done on site and table service is supplied are more likely to be
franchised. See also Slade (1996).
          21
             The same concern can be voiced about Shepard's (1993) study to the extent that the operators of auto
repair stations are relatively entrepreneurial and may prefer to be owners --- although Shepard does try to provide
auxiliary evidence that weighs against selection bias.



                                                               22
requisite for empirical work. (Bloom and van Reenen’s (2007) survey measures of management
practices are an interesting and promising exception.) As discussed earlier, the theory is also less
sharply organized in terms of generating specific testable hypotheses.
        One area where there has been some progress is the study of organizational structures in
the pharmaceutical industry. Knowledge creation in pharmaceuticals happens in the early stages
of drug discovery and in subsequent stages of development and clinical trials, and there are
further stages of production and distribution. Several studies have found evidence for economies
of scope at various stages of the chain, which they attribute to firms developing specialized
capabilities.
        Henderson and Cockburn (1996) focus on the first stage of drug discovery, using data on
development projects gathered from large pharmaceutical firms. Their dataset is unusual in that it
contains information on projects that do not succeed as well as those that do. The number of
patents provides a measure of success. By this measure, projects taking place in firms with larger
overall research programs appear to be more successful, and Henderson and Cockburn argue that
this can be attributed in part to scope economies. Their work suggests that complementarities
across research projects may help explain the boundaries of pharmaceutical firms.
        Subsequent to their study, the industry underwent a major shift toward early stage drug
discovery taking place outside of the large pharmaceutical firms, in academic laboratories or
smaller entrepreneurial firms. This shift creates a potential market or contracting friction.
Relatively few firms appear able or willing to push drugs through to commercial use, whether
because of scale economies or differences in capabilities at the later stages of drug development,
so a licensing market has emerged where drugs invented in one firm are transferred for
development or commercialization in another. A natural concern is that the licensing market
might suffer from problems of expropriation or asymmetric information.
        Arora et al (2001) investigate whether licensing transactions might be subject to a
“lemons” problem of asymmetric information. They gather a dataset that includes ex post
outcomes that might not have been forecastable by (all) parties at the time of contract. They look
at the later stages of drug trials and commercialization for licensing agreements signed before
phase I clinical trials. It appears that contrary to the lemons hypothesis, success rates do not
differ between products that are out-licensed and those retained in-house for further




                                                     23
development. Arora et al. also conclude, perhaps less surprisingly, that there are economies of
scale and scope at the firm level in the later stages of drug development.
         Concerns about organizational capabilities are also the key to Azoulay's (2004) case
study of outsourcing in the pharmaceutical industry, where firms increasingly rely on contract
research organizations to perform clinical trials for new drugs. Azoulay looks at how the
decision to outsource varies with the nature of the trial. He argues that the incentive systems and
capabilities of large pharmaceutical firms and contract research organizations are fundamentally
different. Contract research organizations are organized to efficiently gather and analyze large
quantities of routine data, whereas pharmaceutical firms are better equipped to manage trials that
require the production of new knowledge rather than just new data. The data appears to be
consistent with this story. For instance, Azoulay finds that studies that involve more academics,
and hence may be more skewed toward knowledge production rather than data production, are
much less likely to be outsourced.
         These interesting results suggest connections between knowledge transfer and
organizational capabilities and integration in one specific industry. Even so, one might argue that
these papers are not yet fully testing what is arguably the most interesting hypothesis related to
integration in innovative industries. Specifically, smaller, newer firms might have the advantage
of flexibility and diversity (particularly with respect to new drug ideas), whereas larger
established firms might have superior commercialization and regulatory skills. These differences
might be behind the pattern of licenses, alliances, and entry and growth of firms of different
types.

         F.     When and How Do Vertical Integration Decisions Matter?

         We have already highlighted one of the main limitations of the empirical literature. By
and large, it focuses on the decision of whether to vertically integrate, but not on the implications
of this decision for economic outcomes or realized transaction costs. This focus leads to
questions about when integration has first-order incentive effects (e.g. in the case of franchising)
or effects on decision-making or adaptation (e.g. in the case of sourcing different types of
inputs), or important effects on innovation and productive efficiency.
         Quantifying the effects of integration decisions poses some challenges. One difficulty, of
course, is the econometric problem of selection. If firms choose to integrate when they think it


                                                     24
will lead to productivity benefits, finding the right variation to identify the effect of integration
on productive efficiency is going to be difficult. In the case of coal contracts, for example, one
might like to measure the costs and benefits of longer contracts holding fixed the market
environment. Most utilities with short duration contracts, however, are in the eastern United
States, while the utilities with longer duration contracts are co-located or in the western United
States.
          A second difficulty with measuring the effects of integration is that most empirical
studies focus on “borderline” cases where integration is a close call. Of course, integration may
have both a large efficiency benefit and a large efficiency cost, but this is not guaranteed. Thus, a
more promising strategy may be to look at decisions that are complementary to integration. For
instance, as emphasized by Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994), small variations in the environment
might lead firms to make large changes to a cluster of policies if there are important
complementarities.
          These difficulties notwithstanding, there is a variety of evidence that sheds some light on
differences across integrated and non-integrated firms. One example comes from research on
manufacturing productivity. 22 For instance, Hortacsu and Syverson (2007) compare integrated
and non-integrated concrete and cement plants. They find that integrated plants are larger and
more productive in the cross-section, that plants that become integrated are more productive, and
that the event of becoming integrated is associated with an increase in productivity. They argue
that the source of these productivity advantages may be tied to better logistics coordination, a
benefit that is associated more with size than with vertical integration per se.23
          Further evidence along these lines is provided by Atalay, Hortacsu and Syverson (2012),
who use establishment-level data from a broad range of industries. They again show that
integration, plant size, capital intensity and labor productivity are positively correlated. The
paper also includes a striking finding about commonly owned plants in vertically related


          22
             Less work has been done on behavioral or operating differences between integrated and non-integrated
manufacturers. For instance, Mullainathan and Scharfstein (2001) study the capacity decisions of vinyl chloride
monomer (VCM) manufacturers, some of whom are integrated downstream into the production of waterproof
plastic, of which VCM is an input. They present evidence that non-integrated VCM producers react more strongly to
market demand for VCM, whereas integrated producers focus on internal demand needs, and argue that this might
be explained by differences in managerial focus and attention.
          23
             Related work by Van Biesenbroek (2007) on automobile manufacturing finds that component integration
is associated with higher productivity, especially in plants that have adopted flexible manufacturing techniques. His
results also are consistent with the view that integration facilitates greater coordination in the production process.

                                                              25
industries. There is relatively little transfer of physical goods from one plant to another. Instead,
plants within the same firm in vertically related industries are overwhelmingly involved in
"merchant" operations in which they transact across the firm’s boundary.
         This observation strongly suggests that much common ownership of vertically related
plants is driven by the sharing of intangible assets such as managerial skills, know-how, or other
information, or is related to the financing of the firm.24 This general story is also consistent with
work on large diversified firms, such as that of Schoar (2002), who provides evidence that plants
in diversified firms are more productive than those in single-segment firms.25 This sort of
evidence pushes us away from a primarily operational or commodity-flow understanding of
vertical integration.
         Relating these papers to the theory calls for telling where exactly the trade-offs arise in
making integration decisions. To what extent can managerial know-how be leveraged and where
do the benefits drop off? Does an increase in scale or scope feed back into productivity? These
analyses also do not make much contact with the types of contractual concerns on which
theorists have focused. They also differ from those discussed above in that there is little explicit
measure of what happens at the firm boundary or at the divisional boundary within a vertically
integrated firm. Instead, an inference is drawn from firm scale and scope. Thus, the interpretation
in terms of the underlying theory is necessarily indirect, although a natural direction is toward
theories that involve spreading a fixed managerial input over a range of production activities
(e.g. Lucas, 1978).
         The productivity and incentive consequences of vertical integration also have received
attention in research on healthcare organizations. In the United States, healthcare systems have
become significantly more integrated over the last twenty-five years, through partnerships
between general and specialist physicians, physicians and hospitals, and hospitals and specialty
care units, among others. Although one explanation for this integration is that physicians and

         24
            In an effort to make this finding more direct, Hortacsu and Syverson (2007) also examine the white collar
(non-production) workers in the plants they study. Their inclusion might tie the inference closer to a theory about
management. However, many of the white collar workers in manufacturing plants are not, typically, managers of
the manufacturing production process, but rather managers of the market or nonmarket processes by which
intermediate inputs flow into the plant and outputs flow out of it.
         25
            More surprisingly, however, she finds that existing plants become less productive following an increase
in firm diversification. She hypothesizes that this result also can be explained by management, to the extent that a
new acquisition leads to a shift in managerial focus away from existing lines of business. This interpretation is
consistent with another systematic merger fact, which is that many mergers are followed by spin-offs of the acquired
business (Ravenscraft and Scherer, 1987).

                                                             26
hospitals are attempting to improve their bargaining power with respect to insurers, another line
of thought holds that integrated systems are able to successfully resolve contractual inefficiencies
and can provide more efficient, coordinated care.
       The current literature seems to be broadly inconclusive (Gaynor, 2006), but some studies
offer interesting specific findings, some of which are consistent with contractual theories.
Afendulis and Kessler (2007), for instance, look at the problem of integrating diagnostic services
and treatment. They find that in the case of coronary artery disease, patients seen by cardiologists
whose practices also provide surgical treatments were more likely to receive angioplasties, and
these patients received generally more expensive care but did not have better health outcomes.
Afendulis and Kessler interpret this result as consistent with moral hazard or incentive
contracting theories of integration.
       In more recent work, Afendulis and Kessler (2011) look at how changes in Medicare
reimbursement policy affected skilled nursery facilities that were and were not integrated with
hospitals. They find that a shift to prospective payment (essentially fixed price reimbursement,
rather than cost-based reimbursement) led to significantly greater declines in health care costs for
the integrated facilities. The mechanism that enables integrated hospitals to better respond to
changes in external financial incentives is not entirely clear, and indeed, studies have reached
mixed conclusions on whether hospitals that are more broadly integrated generally have lower
costs (Cuellar and Gertler, 2006; Ciliberto and Dranove, 2006).
       Ciliberto (2006) uses integrated and non-integrated hospitals to offer a more specific test
of hold-up theories, by looking at the decision to “invest” by offering outpatient and diagnostic
services. These services rely on referrals from primary care physicians, so the hypothesis is that
hospitals that are integrated with their physicians might be better positioned to internalize
referrals, which might support investments in service provision. Ciliberto indeed finds that
vertically integrated hospitals added more of these services following integration. The effect is
strongest in areas where HMO penetration is higher, which is roughly consistent with the idea
that the returns to integration might increase with the prospect of holdup.
       What are the efficiency consequences of this finding? The perspective Ciliberto (2006)
takes is that the potential for hold-up leaves non-integrated hospitals investing too little in
outpatient and diagnostic services, and integration resolves the inefficiency. An alternative
interpretation, closer to the view in Afendulis and Kessler (2007), is that offering these services


                                                      27
provides a mechanism for physicians to capture rents. These rents could arise from failures of the
physicians to act as the perfect agents of patients in making referrals or from problems in the
setting of prices paid for these services by third-party payers.
       The example illustrates the difficulty of moving from even cleanly measured behavioral
effects to efficiency or welfare interpretation in a complex market and organizational
environment such as health care. Nevertheless, we expect that this topic will, and should, receive
a great deal of attention in coming years.

4. Vertical Integration and Market Structure

       A recurring theme in our discussion of the empirical literature on vertical integration is
the connection between integration decisions and market structure. This link has not been the
focus of contractual theories of vertical integration, but it is a major focus of research in
industrial organization. In this section, we distill some of the key ideas, and relate them to work
in organizational economics.
       The theories we examine bring several different sets of ideas to the foreground. One set
of ideas relates to the determination of horizontal market structure, typically based in firm-level
costs or in strategic interaction among firms. In some circumstances, cost efficiencies or strategy
decisions that impact horizontal structure also affect vertical organization. Another set of ideas
concerns the creation of institutions supporting market exchange, and the importance of these
institutions for supporting disintegrated forms of production. The final set of ideas pertains
specifically to innovative industries and the efficient organizational and market structure for
coordinating and spurring innovative activity.
       Apart from their focus on industry-level outcomes, the industrial organization theories we
describe differ from the organizational theories in paying far less attention to contract-theory
foundations. They tend to assume, without spelling out exact reasons, that integration offers
more control than a market contract, or a greater ability to coordinate decision-making. For this
reason, one can think of the two sets of theories as complementary inputs in a full explanation of
vertical integration, even if this complementarity has not always been fully recognized.

       A.      Scale Economies and the Extent of the Market

       An important line of research in industrial organization relates vertical integration to
fixed costs and market size. This approach has its roots in Adam Smith's dictum that "the

                                                      28
division of labor is limited by the extent of the market" (Young, 1928; Stigler, 1951; Bresnahan
and Gambardella, 1998). The central idea is that vertical integration decisions are closely
connected to the horizontal structure of the constituent industries.
       This point can be understood in a simple model that involves the production of two
complementary inputs subject to scale economies. Suppose the market for the final product is so
small (relative to the scale economies) that it can support only a single firm in each of the two
input markets. Because of the horizontal structure in each of the two markets, the vertical
relationship between the two producers is bilateral monopoly. If this relationship leads to
inefficiencies because of haggling, hold-up, incentive distortions, or any of the other reasons
explored above, the efficient vertical relationship calls for integration. The same problem,
however, may not arise if the product market expands. Suppose that final demand becomes
sufficiently large (relative to scale economies) to support a competitive market structure in both
layers. With this horizontal market structure, the bilateral monopoly problem need not arise, and
the efficient vertical structure may involve disintegrated specialists.
       Note that this argument blends two very different bodies of theory. It requires a theory of
horizontal industry structure, drawn from industrial organization, and a theory of bilateral
contracting, drawn from organizational economics. Like most theories we discuss in this section,
the elements are simple. But they focus attention on the joint determination of firm and industry
structure and the interaction between ideas from the two fields.
       Stigler (1951) developed this basic idea into a theory of industry evolution. He argued
that in the early and innovative phases of an industry, firms have to be vertically integrated
because there are no markets for the relevant inputs -- the costs of organizing those markets, he
assumes, are higher than the costs of coordinating the production of the inputs within the firm.
As the industry becomes larger, what had formerly been internal inputs are supplied by new,
vertically disintegrated industries. In addition to the trade-off between efficient horizontal scale
and vertical market power, Stigler’s theory adds the idea that market institutions to support
disintegrated trade are themselves endogenous and have to be developed over time.
       Many historical accounts of particular industries resonate with Stigler’s theory. One
example is Rosenberg’s (1994, 1998) account of how design procedures for chemical processing
plants evolved over time. Initially, manufacturing firms that operated chemical processing plants
undertook plan design themselves. Plant design is complex and represents a plant-level fixed


                                                     29
cost, but much of the knowledge needed to design a single plant can be used to design other
plants. Thus, the potential existed for a separate disintegrated design industry that could allow
the acquisition of this knowledge to be shared across multiple plants.
       As Rosenberg (1994, 1998) points out, this potential was not immediately realized
because it required the creation of a new market boundary --- identifying exactly what services
specialized engineering firms would provide in plant design. Ultimately, however, specialized
engineering firms did emerge. Their emergence subsequently changed the degree of scale
economies in chemical manufacturing because firms no longer needed to have many plants to
spread the fixed costs of maintaining a plant design capability. The change in scale economies
helped facilitate a less concentrated industry structure in a number of distinct chemical
processing industries (Arora, Fosfuri and Gambardella, 2001).
       Another example in which one can see evidence for Stigler’s (1951) ideas comes from
the integrated circuit industry. These circuits must be designed and then manufactured. A few
decades ago, the creation of an interface between computer-aided design and computer-aided
manufacturing permitted the design and manufacture to be done either by the same firm or by
different firms. As the manufacturing facilities are very large and some products have very short
production runs, the creation of the interface led to a great deal of vertical disintegration. Firms
that specialize in design but do not manufacture are now able to contract with firms that
specialize in manufacturing, but not in design.
       Scale economies play a role here because many products with small markets may be
produced in the same large manufacturing facility. There are also individual products with very
large markets, such as Intel microprocessors. Firms selling the products with the largest markets,
such as Intel, are vertically integrated. This permits them to strategically align manufacturing
process improvements with product design improvements, presumably with less contractual
frictions than might arise in a situation of bilateral monopoly between layers of production. So
here variation in the “extent of the market” across products (rather than over time) generates
patterns of integration consistent with the Stigler theory.
       In addition to historical case studies of individual industries, there have been some
attempts to statistically test relationships between vertical integration and varying measures of
scale economies or horizontal concentration. Holmes (1999) takes an interesting approach by
asking whether vertical disintegration is more prevalent in geographic areas where


                                                     30
manufacturing industries are “localized”. For each plant, he measures localization as the amount
of employment at neighboring plants in the same industry. Roughly, the idea is that in areas
where an industry is localized, there is the potential for specialized suppliers to thrive and
support a disintegrated vertical production structure. Holmes finds that vertical disintegration
(measured by the share of purchased inputs in production) is indeed higher in areas where there
is more local employment in a given industry, broadly consistent with Stigler’s hypothesis.
         An alternative cross-sectional approach has been to test whether industries that are more
highly concentrated or have larger firms are also more vertically integrated. Levy (1984) is an
older but carefully executed study along these lines. Levy looks at the relationship, across three
digit industries between vertical integration (as measured by value added divided by sales), and
covariates such as average firm size, demand growth and concentration. He reports that
industries with larger firms, more demand growth and more concentration are all more likely to
feature vertical integration (see also Elberfeld, 2002). Even with careful execution, however,
these types of correlations are very difficult to interpret as sharp evidence for or against any
particular theory, because there are so many factors that can influence cross-industry
relationships between vertical integration and other industry characteristics.26
         One of the elaborations of Stigler’s (1951) general approach to thinking about vertical
integration occurs when complementary goods are produced with very different levels of scale
economies. This can lead to the common industry structure in which one or a few firms supply a
“general specialty” or “platform” input that is complementary to a potentially large number of
products or inputs produced by other firms (Stigler, 1951; Bresnahan and Gambardella, 1998). A
typical trade-off here is that any efficiency benefits that might come from the platform provider
integrating into complementary markets must be weighed against the potential for reduced
competition.
         Consider for instance a setting in which differentiated products rely on the same
complementary platform. Standard models of market structure in differentiated products
industries give rise to an equilibrium in which firms enjoy some market power to cover the fixed
costs of product differentiation, and a trade-off occurs between achieving scale economies in a


         26
            Acemoglu, Johnson and Mitton (2009) take a somewhat different approach by asking whether firms in
countries that are more financially developed are more or less likely to be vertically integrated. They find no direct
relationship between financial development and the prevalence of integrated firms, but they do find a higher
prevalence of integration in countries that have both greater financial development and higher contracting costs.

                                                               31
particular product versus having product variety and competition across products. If the
horizontal industry equilibrium has many more firms than scale economies in the complementary
layer permit, vertical integration that forecloses the platform to competing products may have the
effect of eliminating the benefits of competition and differentiation in the market where they are
feasible.
        An example considered by Stigler (1951) is the production and transportation of
manufactured goods. Efficient industry structure in production is likely to involve many distinct
firms, whereas parts of the transportation system are subject to increasing returns and thus are
supplied by only a few firms. Both competition and product diversity drive the production layer
toward multiple firms. Although some manufactured goods (e.g. iPads) may be produced by only
a few firms, and others (e.g. lag bolts) by many, in the aggregate we expect a large number of
firms producing a wide variety of goods. In contrast, scale economies play a much larger role in
determining the equilibrium industry structure for transportation by limiting the number of
railroads, canals or roads that can link any two places as well as the number of ports or airports
that can be built at any given city.
        Note that there is some tension between the industrial organization theories of market
structure in the types of industries we are considering, i.e. those with differentiated products, and
the organizational economics theories. The industrial organization theories take certain firm
boundaries as given. For instance, they offer no explanation for why a single firm could not
control and produce a very wide range of differentiated products. Instead they begin with the
assumption that no firm could integrate all manufacturing processes even if remains an open
question whether each manufacturing firm owns ships or railroad cars. Although this can be seen
as merely a common sense argument, it implicitly relies on some notion of organizational
diseconomies of scale or scope.
        This gap has been met partially by organizational economics theories that explain
“organizational diseconomies of scale.” Williamson’s (1985) suggestion that bureaucratic
decision making is one disadvantage of large firm, Simon’s (1947) idea that larger firm must
undertake more communication, and Radner’s (1992) idea that more complex and larger teams




                                                     32
will make worse decisions have all received some exploration in this regard.27 These questions,
which have received only modest attention in organizational economics, become particularly
important when we consider the joint determination of firm and industry structure.28

        B.       Role of Strategy in Determining Industry Structure

        The simple framework discussed above suggests a relationship between horizontal
concentration and vertical integration that is driven by efficiency considerations --- the size of
scale economies relative to the size of the market. What it neglects is the possibility that firms
might make strategic efforts to limit competition. An industry can be very concentrated and
feature considerable market power because of scale economies or because business strategy
limits the number of active firms, for instance by affecting the potential for entry.29 Indeed, the
fact that organizational economics theories have focused so much on efficiency rationales for
vertical integration suggests that we might want to reformulate Coase’s crack about monopoly
theories: nowadays if an economist finds something — a business practice of one sort or another
— that he does not understand, he looks for an efficient contracts explanation!30
        Once we allow for the possibility of strategic investments, the relationship described
above between market size and concentration can become less clear. Consider the class of
industries that feature what Sutton (2007) has called “endogenous sunk costs”. These are
industries in which firms can undertake strategic investments (in technological innovations or
brand building) to make their products more attractive. If the investment opportunities in
endogenous sunk costs are sufficient (in a sense made precise in the literature), then industry
structure remains concentrated even as demand grows without limit. The link from increased
market size to reduced horizontal concentration to vertical disintegration is broken.
        A very large literature in industrial organization also has pointed to the potentially
important role of vertical integration or vertical contracts themselves in helping to limit

        27
            See, among others, Anton and Yao (1995), McAfee and McMillan (1995), Calvo and Wellisz (1978),
Simon (1951), Williamson (1985), and Radner (1992). Some evidence on the source of scope diseconomies in
technology industries can be found in Bresnahan, Greenstein, and Henderson (2012).
         28
            Another partial solution comes from the industrial organization theories themselves. Models of
horizontal disintegration through competitive entry call for separate firms in order to have competitive outcomes.
Vertically integrating all of the firms in a competitive industry with the same complementor would defeat the
competitive purpose.
         29
            See e.g. Berry and Reiss (2007) and Sutton (2007).
         30
            Coase’s (1972) original line was: “If an economist finds something—a business practice of one sort or
another—that he does not understand, he looks for a monopoly explanation.”

                                                             33
competition or more generally influence horizontal market structure. A classic example might be
a monopoly supplier of an input that integrates or signs an exclusive contract with the supplier of
a complementary input in order to maintain monopoly power in the first market or create it in the
second. The literature has debated two questions about this type of situation. First, is it even
possible for the monopoly supplier to raise prices by integrating? Second, is it anticompetitive,
and as such, should antitrust policy seek to prevent this type of strategic foreclosure?31
         Whinston (2007) provides a lucid and thorough treatment or these issues, which go well
beyond the scope of this chapter. We note, however, that this literature --- although potentially
highly germane if one wants to understand the joint determination of firm and industry structure
--- has by and large not connected with organizational economics rationales for integration, and
indeed often treats vertical integration and restrictive vertical contracts in roughly a parallel
fashion. It is true that in formulating antitrust policy, the potential organizational efficiency
benefits of allowing a contract or merger to go through are sometimes weighed against the
competitive costs, but generally these are treated as distinct phenomena.
         We also note that in addition to strategic theories in which firms integrate as a way to
gain market power in anti-competitive fashion, there are arguments for why strategic integration
might be welfare enhancing. For instance, Teece (1986) has suggested that firms can sometime
integrate to consolidate “good” market power. If a firm has an invention in an area with poor
patent protection, for example, it might vertically integrate into a downstream business with
entry barriers and avoid losing the return on its innovation through competition.32 Another class
of theories, discussed for instance in Perry (1989), consider how vertical integration can facilitate
certain forms of price discrimination that might be efficient --- for instance, by allowing a
supplier to integrate downstream and sell its input at different prices to the integrated
downstream producer than it does to the general market.



         31
             Hart and Tirole (1990) is a classic reference on the first question, which turns on the question of
commitment: after integrating forward, can the supplier really commit to shut off supply to rival downstream firms?
On the second question, the classic argument against government intervention is the "one monopoly rent" story
associated with the Chicago School. The basic argument is that, in some circumstances, a monopolist supplier can
achieve the same profit regardless of whether it integrates forward and raises the downstream price, or simply raises
the input price. Whinston (2007) discusses a range of conditions under which this argument does not hold, and
vertical integration or exclusive contracts indeed can be anticompetitive.
          32
             Of course, the same argument applies to any tactic that might generate market power, and the Teece
(1986) proposal has become a general management doctrine for creating rents at the firm level. See, for example, the
widely cited article by Amit and Schoemaker (1993).

                                                             34
        C.       Market Institutions and Vertical Integration

        The point made by Stigler (1951) that market institutions need to be invented before a
wide variety of firms can participate in them remains only partially explored in organizational
economics. Distinct literatures have taken up this question, many of which raise interesting
issues about vertical integration and market structure.
        A textbook benefit of a well-functioning market is that the price mechanism coordinates
the needs of many parties and determines an efficient use of resources. If matching is less
efficient, a buyer and seller might agree to go around the market. This idea is captured in
Carlton's (1979) model of supply assurance as a rationale for vertical integration. He considers a
setting in which market frictions upset the functioning of the spot market for inputs, so that
buyers cannot be assured of reliable supply. If the problem is severe buyers want to integrate
upstream, or alternatively formulate a non-market forward contract to assure supply.33 So
Carlton’s theory connects vertical integration to the existence of a well-functioning market
interface between layers of production (see also Green, 1986).
        A related observation can be made in the context of transaction cost analyses of
integration. If we consider, for instance, the studies of transportation industries such as trucking
or shipping discussed above, a central problem being solved is logistical --- the efficient short-
run allocation of heterogeneous suppliers to heterogeneous tasks. The existence of market
institutions --- standard contractual forms, pre-existing agreements on exactly what service will
be exchanged, or the availability of comparable reference prices on which to base negotiation ---
can be crucial to support a disintegrated structure because they are necessary to support efficient,
predictable and potentially competitive agreements at low cost.
        The existence of market institutions to support disintegrated exchange is not a given. In
many cases, market institutions tend to co-evolve with industry structure. Financial markets
provide an exceptionally rich set of examples. Consider, for instance, a loan from a bank to an
individual to allow the individual to purchase a house. Historically in the mortgage market, the
same bank extended the loan and then undertook collections and received interest and principal
payments from the borrower. In this setting, selling a loan portfolio would have been an
idiosyncratic and unusual transaction. Yet over time, the development of relatively standard

        33
         Bolton and Whinston (1993) provide an alternative model, based on the property rights theory, that also
shows how supply assurance motives can lead firms to vertically integrate.

                                                           35
securitization contracts allowed the initial originators of loans (banks and later also less well-
capitalized companies) to sell their loans to investors, creating a vertically disintegrated market
structure, albeit one with some potential incentive problems on the part of loan originators.
         The securitization example is useful: one can in fact point to a range of institutions
required to support a disintegrated market structure. These include not only standardized
contracts to facilitate sales of loans, but also effective institutions for transferring foreclosure
rights in the event of a default, rating agencies to limit the potential for adverse selection in the
sale of loans, and functioning markets to allow investors who have bought securities to later sell
them. From this perspective, standard transaction cost variables such as “complexity” and
“specificity” look somewhat different. A particular transaction --- say the sale of a loan portfolio
--- might seem highly complex and specific at one point in time, but much less so once market
institutions are developed to support it.34
         The more general point here is that transaction costs depend on existing market
institutions --- institutions that facilitate search and matching, and institutions that facilitate
contractual and pricing arrangements. As a result, a disintegrated market structure, and
particularly the creation of a disintegrated industry with frequent arms-length exchange, often
requires the creation of market institutions: standards for products and contracts, and
mechanisms for matching buyers and sellers, determining prices, disseminating information and
so forth. Although these issues fall outside the traditional "theory of the firm," they become hard
to avoid when one takes the theory to empirical settings and perhaps deserve more attention from
organizational economists interested in firm boundaries.

         D.       Coordination and Innovation

         A wide range of economically important innovations depend on complementary but
distinct inventions. Computers would not be particularly valuable without applications software,
to take one famous example. New products are more valuable if process innovations allow them
to be produced cheaply. The invention of mass production itself would have been much less
valuable without transportation technologies that permitted large plants to serve geographically
dispersed customers. Research on platform industries, on product and process innovations, and

         34
           At the same time, the creation of market institutions is facilitated by having a degree of standardization in
the underlying products. It may be relatively easy to develop an effective market for loan resale if the loans
themselves are relatively standardized in most dimensions.

                                                               36
on general purpose technologies all emphasize the importance of coordinating complementary
invention and raise the question of whether this should take place within large organizations or
across disparate innovative firms.35 The resulting tradeoffs provide an interesting example of
how organizational theories of integration intersect with market structure considerations.
         A potential benefit of integrating the invention of complementary technologies is that
investments may be better coordinated. A basic price theory intuition is that creators of
complementary inventions may end up in a position of bilateral or multilateral monopoly, and
they may fail to coordinate their pricing and other ex post decisions. This can lead to a form of
hold-up where the full returns on ex ante investment are not appropriated. Arrow (1974)
famously pointed out one problem with contracting over innovation, which is that firms seeking
to reach an agreement may find it difficult to exchange information in a way that protects their
ideas. For these reasons, vertical integration, or a similar contract to internalize externalities in
complementary invention, can increase the private return from innovative activity.
         A second and distinct argument for integration comes from game theory. The multiple
invention problem is a coordination game, and it might have failures to coordinate if the different
inventors cannot be sure ex ante of one another’s plans for invention. In addition, separate firms
may have an incentive to delay investments in order to assess which technologies or standards
will emerge as grounds for coordination. These forces work against decentralized innovation,
and favor ex ante partner selection and contracting.
         A countervailing force comes from the economics of invention with uncertain goals or
methods. Suppose that, in one or more of the complementary inventions, the highest-value
direction of technical progress is ex ante uncertain. Different potential inventors can have
different views about the appropriate direction based on their private information. In such
circumstances, ex ante selection among alternative invention projects can be inefficient even
when there is a fixed cost of inventive effort.36 The alternative is to have invention competition
and then let the market choose the best alternative. The advantage of ex post invention market
selection is that it can choose the best innovative efforts out of a number of initiatives based on


         35
             In the case of truly “infrastructural” inventions, such as those in transportation, communications, or basic
scientific research, the government also has played a considerable role in coordinating innovation. In this chapter,
however, we focus on the tradeoff between markets and integrated firms.
          36
             See Nelson (1961), Evenson and Kislev (1976), Metcalfe and Gibbons (1986), and Klepper (1996) for
models of competition with uncertainty about the direction of technical progress with ex post market selection.

                                                               37
their technical success or their success in meeting market needs. As a result, a market form of
organization may have considerable value when there is substantial uncertainty about the optimal
direction of technical progress, or about the source of that progress,
         The computer industry, which over time has witnessed both a high degree of vertical
integration and considerable disintegration, provides a useful case study of these
considerations.37 The first highly valuable segment of the industry, mainframe computers for
corporate data processing, was pioneered in the 1950s. IBM, which dominated the market for
four decades, was highly vertically integrated in invention and production. Its inventions
included not only the computer, but also a large number of complementary hardware and
software components useful in business data processing.38 As a result, the boundary of the firm
coincided with the boundary between general and specific technologies. IBM sought to supply
all general-purpose components for its corporate customers, including the tools that would let
them invent specific applications.
         What factors might have led to all of the general components, each of which needed
ongoing invention, being supplied by one firm? The key was the ex ante identification of a
desired direction of technical progress for the system as a whole. At the time of IBM’s entry into
computing, the basic technical knowledge associated with the computer itself was largely
public.39 IBM was already the leading seller of business data processing products and
subsequently build a research and invention capability in computers.40 As a result, IBM had
knowledge not only of the technical opportunity but also of demand needs. This information
gave a single firm considerable ex ante knowledge about the set of feasible directions for
improvements in the overall system and the set of products that would be valuable to its


         37
             See Bresnahan and Greenstein (1999) and Bresnahan and Malerba (2002). See also Langlois and
Robinson (1992) on the value of vertical disintegration at the PC industry’s founding.
          38
             These components included data-processing complements (tape or disk storage devices), input and
output devices (printers), and especially software (operating system and database management systems).
Throughout IBM’s tenure as the leading firm in this segment, customers had a high opinion of the way the
complements making up an IBM system worked together but not of the technical level of its computers themselves.
          39
             It is important to point out that this discussion refers to the creation of computer systems for business
use, not to the original invention of the computer itself. Many essential elements of the computer itself were
invented before IBM’s entry. The view, taken by IBM and others, that these essential elements were in the public
domain, was extremely controversial. The controversy was heightened by IBM’s late entry into the computer
business and appropriation of existing knowledge. See Bresnahan and Malerba (2002) for a discussion. The point
here depends on the fact that IBM, already knowledgeable about demand needs, could easily appropriate knowledge
associated with the invention of the computer itself, not on the propriety of that appropriation.
          40
             The earlier business products were mechanical and electromechanical products such as card sorters.

                                                              38
customers. IBM picked reasonable innovative goals from the intersection of these two sets,
allowing it to coordinate multiple inventions in the general mainframe components --- computer,
tape drive, programming languages and operating system --- going forward.41
         The same trade-off worked the other way at the founding of another important computer
industry segment, the personal computer. In that instance, ex ante knowledge about the overlap
of technically feasible inventions and demand needs was much weaker, making coordination
difficult. None of the founders of the personal computer industry, neither the designers of
computers or of disk drives, programming tools or operating systems, had a clear view of the
appropriate direction of technical change ex ante. As a result, the original industry structure was
vertically disintegrated, with considerable independent innovation in each component.
Coordination was achieved ex post invention through market institutions such as voluntary
compliance with interconnection standards.42
         Eventually, the invention of certain key applications such as the word processor and the
spreadsheet helped to clarify the direction of technical change --- namely toward business
applications. That increased clarity led to efforts to coordinate supply by contract, notably in the
IBM PC.43 Those contracts, however, did not specify the direction of technical change, nor were
they exclusive on either side. Innovation in the different components continued to be organized
more along market lines than by contract.44 Indeed, a number of the leading firms involved in
IBM PC contracts, including IBM itself, were later replaced by others through market selection.
The advantage of vertical disintegration of invention, even of the general-purpose components,
was the possibility of component-by-component invention races and the extensive use of ex post
market selection, also on a component-by-component basis.




         41
             Industry historians will point out that this misses important nuances. For example, the later emergence
of applications software companies, especially semi-custom software developers such as EDS, meant that the
distinction between the general and the specific is not such a bright line. Our point that the IBM system was largely
one of vertical integration of the general components is robust, however.
          42
             Once again, we skip important nuances. Some firms, most successfully Apple, had a more vertically
integrated model. See Langlois and Robertson (1992) for more details, and for the observation that the more
vertically integrated efforts failed precisely because of their integration.
          43
             IBM entered with a computer, and sought to contract with the leading firm in each important
complementary technology, successfully so in disk drives, spreadsheets, programmer tools, and microprocessors. In
operating systems or word processors the leading firm would not sign and IBM found other partners.
          44
             Even hardware specifications of the computer itself were set in the market by firms other than IBM. See
Bresnahan and Greenstein (1999) for details.

                                                             39
       This vertical industry structure and component-by-component market selection process
continued through a number of rounds of fundamental innovation. Indeed, some dominant firms
supplying important PC markets were replaced through competition for the market on a
component-by-component basis.45 As long as the overlap between technical opportunity and
demand needs was hard to see ex ante the next round of innovation, the less coordinated model
had considerable advantage.
       Another example of the tradeoffs in coordinating innovative activity comes from the
organization of scientific research. Here the relevant boundary is between firms that undertake
research with the express purpose of commercialization, and universities and other organizations
that undertake research with potentially broader objectives. The resulting industry structure often
locates basic research in non-commercial organizations, with applied research taking place in
firms in a vertically disintegrated structure (though the distinction is frequently blurred). In a
pioneering article, Dasgupta and David (1997) emphasize two points about this structure: first,
that the reward structure for academic scientists is very different than for commercial inventors,
and second, that non-commercial research institutions are organized very differently than firms.
       The structure of incentives facing scientists rewards them less with money and more with
freedom, prestige, and status (Stern, 2004). These peculiar goals are reflected in a large number
of distinctive scientific institutions, including peer review, status based on priority rather than
ultimate commercial success, and openness in publication and the permission of replication.
Because these institutions were designed by scientists, rather than by managers (i.e. individuals
interested primarily in the commercialization of science), they lead to a situation in which
university scientists’ rewards can depend more on other scientists than on the managers in their
own organizations. The incentives created by scientific institutions can enhance productivity ---
openness, for example, lowers the costs of access to existing knowledge by a large group of
potential inventors, while competition to be first pushes each discipline toward more rapid
technical progress. But it also can have disadvantages, for example, if peer review leads to
rewards for work that is highly regarded by one’s peers but not particularly useful or interesting
to others outside one’s narrow field. In contrast, the system of incentives for commercial
innovation is more straightforward, as the market provides a primary metric for success.



       45
            See Langlois and Robertson (1992) and Bresnahan and Greenstein (1999) for details.

                                                           40
       These differences lead to tensions when basic and applied research take place in a
nonintegrated fashion. Commercially-oriented managers experience difficulty incentivizing
scientists to engage in work that is not rewarded by their discipline --- to work on specific rather
than general problems, or to interact with others outside their field. For scientists who are
considering commercializing their inventions or discoveries, there can be a commercial incentive
to keep innovations secret rather than to publish, weakening the reward system of academic
science (Murray and Stern, 2007). And successful structures at the boundary of science and
commercialization, such as university licensing programs kicked off by the Bayh-Dole Act
permitting university scientists to patent inventions that result from government-funded research,
sometimes have been criticized for distorting basic scientific research incentives.
       Nevertheless, there are considerable reasons to think that a system whereby basic
scientific research was left to commercial firms would be problematic. Perhaps the most obvious
are the lack of immediate commercial reward to foundational research, and the spillovers that
result from many scientific breakthroughs. Even when scientific research produces inventions
that are in principle appropriable, they may not be appropriable in their initially planned use. A
large and diverse firm might be able to capture some spillovers from scientific research, but not
all of them. A famous example comes from Bell Laboratories. Bell Labs worked not only on
basic engineering projects but on basic science, discovering (among other things) the transistor
effect. Although the Bell System certainly had uses for a wide range of inventions, the breadth of
use of the transistor was too wide even for highly diverse Bell, so the firm put that fundamental
innovation into the public domain as part of a strategy to avoid government interference.

5. Conclusion

       We have discussed a wide range of economic theory and empirical work related to the
vertical integration or disintegration of production. Theories from organizational economics have
tended to focus on the contractual issues that affect the integration decisions of individual firms,
posing an interesting contrast to resource or capabilities based theories of integration, and to
industrial organization theories that emphasize the relationship between integration decisions and
the determination of horizontal market structure. We have argued that the intersection of these
areas, and in particular how transaction cost issues interact with other forces to determine the
overall structure of industries and markets, deserves more attention. We also see considerable


                                                     41
room for progress in formulating empirical tests of the various theories and in measuring the
incidence and importance of transaction costs under alternative contractual or organizational
arrangements. As better data on contracts and organizations becomes available, most notably in
emerging areas such as the online world and in the rapidly industrializing economies, we expect
there will be many opportunities along these lines.




                                                      42
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Rachel Griffith, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2010. Vertical
Integration and Technology: Theory and Evidence.”Journal of the European Economic
Association, 8(5):989–1033.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton. 2009. “Determinants of Vertical
Integration: Financial Development and Contracting Costs.” Journal of Finance, 63(3): 1251-
1290.
Afendulis, Christopher and Daniel Kessler. 2007. “Tradeoffs from Integrating Diagnosis and
Treatment in Markets for Health Care,” American Economic Review, 97(3): 1013-1020.
Afendulis, Christopher and Daniel Kessler. 2011. “Vertical Integration and Optimal
Reimbursement Policy,” NBER Working Paper 17316.
Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. 1972. “Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization.” American Economic Review, 62(5): 777–95.
Amit, Raphael and Paul Schoemaker. 1993. “Strategic assets and organizational rent,” Strategic
Management Journal, 14(1): 33–46.
Anderson, Erin, and David C. Schmittlein. 1984. “Integration of the Sales Force: An Empirical
Examination.” RAND Journal of Economics, 15(3): 385–95.
Anton, James J. and Dennis A. Yao. 1995. “Start-Ups, Spin-Offs and Internal Projects,” Journal
of Law, Economics and Organizations, 11(2): 362-378.
Antras, Pol and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2009. “Organizations and Trade.” Annual Review of
Economics, 1:43-64.
Arora, Ashish, Andrea Fosfuri and Alfonso Gambardella. 2001. Markets for Technology: The
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy, MIT Press, 2001.
Arora, Ashish, Fabio Pammolli, Alfonso Gambardella, and L. Magazzini 2009, "A Breath of
Fresh Air? Firm Types, Scale, Scope and Selection Effects in Drug Development," Management
Science, 55(10), 1638-1653
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1974. The Limits of Organization. New York: W.W. Norton.
Arrow, Kenneth, J. 1975. “Vertical Integration and Communication,” Bell Journal of Economics,
6(1): 173-83.
Asanuma, Banri 1989. “Manufacturer-Supplier Relationships in Japan and the Concept of
Relation-Specific Skill,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 3(1): 1-30.
Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortaçsu and Chad Syverson. 2012. “Why Do Firms Own Production
Chains?” University of Chicago Working Paper.
Azoulay, Pierre. 2004. “Capturing Knowledge within and across Firm Boundaries: Evidence
from Clinical Development.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1591–1612.
Baker, George P., Robert Gibbons and Kevin Murphy. 2011. “Relational Adaptation,” MIT
Working Paper.


                                                  43
Baker, George P., and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2003. “Make versus Buy in Trucking: Asset
Ownership, Job Design and Information, American Economic Review 93(3): 551-72.
Baker, George P., and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2004. “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-
Board Computers and Governance in U.S. Trucking.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4):
1443–79.
Baldwin, Carliss and Clark, Kim. 2005, Design Rules, Vol. 1: The Power of Modularity, MIT
Press.
Berle, Adolf, and Gardiner Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New
York: Macmillan.
Berry, Steven and Peter Reiss. 2007. “Empirical Models of Entry and Market Structure,”
Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 3, ed. Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter,
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Bloom, Nicholas and John van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
across Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1351-1408.
Bolton, Patrick and Michael Whinston. 1993. “Incomplete Contracts, Vertical Integration, and
Supply Assurance,” Review of Economic Studies, 60: 121-48.
Bresnahan, Timothy and Alfonso Gambardella. 1998. “The Division of Inventive Labor and the
Extent of the Market,” in General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, ed. Elhanan
Helpman, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 253–281.
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Shane Greenstein. 1999, “Technological Competition and the Structure
of the Computer Industry” Journal of Industrial Economics, 47(1): 1-40.
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Franco Malerba. 2002. “The Value of Competitive Innovation” in
Technology and the New Economy, eds. Chong-En Bai and Chi-Wa Yuen, MIT Press.
Bresnahan, Timothy, Shane Greenstein and Rebecca Henderson. 2012 “Schumpeterian
Competition and Diseconomies of Scope: Illustrations from the Histories of Microsoft and
IBM,” in The Rate and Direction of Technical Change 50th Anniversary, eds. Josh Lerner and
Scott Stern, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brickley, James A., and Frederick H. Dark. 1987. “The Choice of Organizational Form: The
Case of Franchising.” Journal of Financial Economics, 18(2):401–20.
Calvo, Guillermo and Stanislaw Wellisz. 1978. “Supervision, Loss of Control and the Optimal
Size of the Firm,” Journal of Political Economy, 86(5): 943-952.
Carlton, Dennis. 1979. “Vertical Integration in Competitive Markets under Uncertainty,” Journal
of Industrial Economics, 27: 189-209.
Casadesus-Masanell, Ramon and Daniel F. Spulber. 2000. “The Fable of Fisher Body” Journal
of Law and Economics, 43(1),
Caves, Richard E., and William F. Murphy, II. 1976. “Franchising: Firms, Markets, and
Intangible Assets.” Southern Economic Journal, 42(4): 572–86.



                                                  44
Ciliberto, Federico. 2006. “Does Organizational Form Affect Investment Decisions?” Journal of
Industrial Economics, 54(1): 63–93.
Ciliberto, Federico, and David Dranove. 2006. “The Effect of Physician-Hospital Affiliations on
Hospital Prices in California,” Journal of Health Economics, 25(1): 29-38.
Clark, Kim. 1985. “The Interaction of Design Hierarchies and Market Concepts in Technological
Evolution,” Research Policy, 14(5): 235-251.
Coase, Ronald H. 1937. “The Nature of the Firm.” Economica, 4(16): 386–405.
Coase, Ronald. 1972. "Industrial Organization: A Proposal for Research." In. V.R. Fuchs, ed.
Policy Issues and Research Opportunities in Industrial Organization. New York: National
Bureau of Economics Research, pp. 59-73.
Coase, Ronald. 1988. “The Nature of the Firm: Influence,” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, 4(1), 33-47.
Coase, Ronald. 2000. “The Acquisition of Fisher Body by General Motors,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 43(1): 15-31.
Cohen, Wesley and Daniel Levinthal. 1990. “Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on
Learning and Innovation,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1): 128-152.
Crocker, Keith and Kenneth J. Reynolds 1993 “The Efficiency of Incomplete Contracts: An
Empirical Analysis of Air Force Engine Procurement” The RAND Journal of Economics, 24(1):
126-146
Cuellar, Alison and Paul Gertler. 2006. “Strategic Integration of Hospitals and Physicians,”
25(1): 1-28.
Cyert , Richard and James March. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Dasgupta, Partha and Paul David. 1997. “Information Disclosure and the Economics of Science
and Technology,” in Arrow and the Ascent of Modern Economic Theory, ed. G. Feiwel, New
York University Press, New York.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and Jonathan Levin. 2010. “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models
of Insurance Markets,” Annual Review of Economics, 2.
Elberfeld, Wallter. 2002. “Market Size and Vertical Integration: Stigler’s Hypothesis
Reconsidered,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 50: 23-43.
Evenson, Robert E. and Y. Kislev. 1976. “A Stochastic Model of Applied Research,” Journal of
Political Economy, 84: 265-281.
Forbes, Silke and Mara Lederman. 2009. “Adaptation and Vertical Integration in the Airline
Industry,” American Economic Review, 99(5): 1831-1849.
Forbes, Silke and Mara Lederman. 2012a. “Does Vertical Integration Affect Firm Performance:
Evidence from the Airline Industry,” Rand Journal of Economics.
Forbes, Silke and Mara Lederman. 2012b. “Contract Form and Technology Adoption in a
Network Industry,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization.

                                                   45
Freeland, Robert F. 2000. “Creating Holdup through Vertical Integration: Fisher Body
Revisited,” Journal of Law and Economics, 43(1): 33-66.
Gaynor, Martin. 2006. “Is Vertical Integration Anticompetitive? Definitely Maybe (But That’s
Not Final),” Journal of Health Economics, 25(1): 175-180
Gibbons, Robert. 2005. “Four Formal(izable) Theories of the Firm?” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 58(2): 200–245.
Gil, Ricard. 2007. “‘Make-or-Buy’ in Movies: Integration and Ex-post Renegotiation.”
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 25(4): 643–55.
Goldberg, Victor. 1976. “Regulation and Administered Contracts,” Bell Journal of Economics,
7(2), 426-448.
Green, Jerry. 1986. “Vertical Integration and Assurance of Markets,” in New Developments in
the Analysis of Market Structure, ed. F.G. Mathewson and J.E. Stiglitz, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Grossman Sanford and Oliver Hart. 1986. "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Vertical and Lateral Integration," Journal of Political Economy. 94:691-719.
Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press, Clarendon Press.
Hart, Oliver. 2009. “Hold-Up, Asset Ownership, and Reference Points,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 124(1): 267-300.
Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmstrom. 2010. “A Theory of Firm Scope,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 125(2): 483-513.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 1990. "Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm," Journal of
Political Economy, 98:1119-58.
Hart, Oliver, and Jean Tirole. 1990. “Vertical Integration and Market Foreclosure.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 205–76.
Helpman, Elhanan. 2006. “Trade, FDI, and the Organization of Firms.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 44(3): 589-630.
Henderson, Rebecca, and Iain Cockburn. 1996. “Scale, Scope, and Spillovers: The Determinants
of Research Productivity in Drug Discovery.” Rand Journal of Economics, 27(1): 32-59.
Hennart, Jean-Francois. 1988. “A Transaction Costs Theory of Equity Joint Ventures” Strategic
Management Journal, 9(4): 361-374.
Holmes, Thomas. 1999. “Localization of Industry and Vertical Disintegration,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 81(2): 314-325.
Holmstrom, Bengt. 1999. “The Firm as a Subeconomy.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 15(1): 74-102.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1994. “The Firm as an Incentive System.” American
Economic Review, 84(4): 972–91.


                                                  46
Holmstrom, Bengt, and John Roberts. 1998. “The Boundaries of the Firm Revisited.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 12(4): 73–94.
Hortaçsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson. 2007. “Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integration,
Foreclosure, Productivity, and Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(2): 250–301.
John, George, and Barton A. Weitz. 1988. “Forward Integration into Distribution: An Empirical
Test of Transaction Cost Analysis.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 4(2): 337–
55.
Joskow, Paul L. 1985. “Vertical Integration and Long-Term Contracts: The Case of Coal-
Burning Electric Generating Plants.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1(1): 33–80.
Joskow, Paul L. 1987. "Contract Duration and Relationship Specific Investments," American
Economic Review, 77:168-75.
Joskow, Paul L. 1988. "Price Adjustment in Long Term Contracts: The Case of Coal," Journal of
Law and Economics. 31:47-83.
Joskow, Paul L. 2005. “Vertical Integration.” Handbook of New Institutional Economics, ed. C.
Menard and M. M. Shirley. Dordrecht and New York: Springer, 319–48.
Kaufmann, Patrick J., and Francine Lafontaine. 1994. “Costs of Control: The Source of
Economic Rents for McDonald’s Franchisees.” Journal of Law and Economics, 37(2): 417–53.
Kehoe, Michael R. 1996. “Franchising, Agency Problems, and the Cost of Capital.” Applied
Economics, 28(11): 1485–93.
Kerkvliet, Joe. 1991, “Efficiency and Vertical Integration: The Case of Mine-mouth Electric
Generating Plants,” Journal of Industrial Economics 39: 467-482.
Klein, Benjamin. 1988. "Vertical Integration as Organized Ownership: The Fisher Body-General
Motors Relationship Revisited," Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 4: 199-213.
Klein, Benjamin. 1996. “Why Hold-Ups Occur: The Self-Enforcing Range of Contractual
Relationships,” Economic Inquiry, 34(3): 444-463.
Klein, Benjamin. 2000. “Fisher-General Motors and the Nature of the Firm,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 43:105-141.
Klein, Benjamin, 2007. “The Economics Lessons of Fisher Body-General Motors”International
Journal of the Economics of Business, 14(1): 1-36.
Klein, Benjamin, Robert Crawford and Armen Alchian, 1978. "Vertical Integration,
Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process," Journal of Law and Economics,
21:297-326.
Klein, Peter G. 2005. “The Make-or-Buy Decision: Lessons from Empirical Studies.” In
Handbook of New Institutional Economics, ed. C. Menard and M. Shirley. Dordrecht and New
York: Springer, 435–64.
Klepper, Steven. 1996. “Entry, Exit, Growth, and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle,”
American Economic Review, 86(3): 562-583.



                                                  47
Lafontaine, Francine. 1992. “Agency Theory and Franchising: Some Empirical Results.” RAND
Journal of Economics, 23(2): 263–83.
Lafontaine, Francine, and Kathryn L. Shaw. 2005. “Targeting Managerial Control: Evidence
from Franchising.” RAND Journal of Economics, 36(1): 131–50.
Lafontaine, Francine, and Margaret E. Slade. 2007. “Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries:
The Evidence,’’ Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3): 629-685.
Lafontaine, Francine and Scott Masten. 2002. “Contracting in the Absence of Specific
Investments of Moral Hazard: Understanding Carrier-Driver Relations in the US,” NBER
Working Paper, 8859.
Langlois, Richard and Paul L. Robertson, 1989. “Explaining Vertical Integration: Lessons from
the American Automobile Industry,” The Journal of Economic History, 69: 361-375.
Langlois, Richard and Paul L. Robertson, 1992 “Networks and Innovation in a Modular System:
Lessons from the Microcomputer and Stereo Component Industries” Research Policy 21(4): 297-
313.
Levin, Jonathan and Steven Tadelis. 2010. “Contracting for Government Services: Theory and
Evidence from U.S. Cities,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 58(5): 507-541.
Levy, D.T. 1984, “Testing Stigler’s Interpretation of ‘Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent
of the Market’,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 32: 377-389.
Lieberman, Marvin B. 1991. “Determinants of Vertical Integration: An Empirical Test.” Journal
of Industrial Economics, 39(5): 451–66.
Lucas, Robert. 1978. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” The Bell Journal of
Economics, 9(2): 508-523.
Malmgren, Harald B. 1961. “Information, Expectations and the Theory of the Firm,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 75: 399-421.
Masten, Scott E. 1984. “The Organization of Production: Evidence from the Aerospace
Industry.” Journal of Law and Economics, 27(2): 403–17.
Masten, Scott E., James W. Meehan Jr., and Edward A. Snyder. 1989. “Vertical Integration in
the U.S. Auto Industry: A Note on the Influence of Transaction Specific Assets.” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 12(2): 265–73.
Masten, Scott E., James W. Meehan Jr., and Edward A. Snyder. 1991. “The Costs of
Organization.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7(1): 1–25.
McAfee, Preston and John McMillan. 1995. “Organizational Diseconomies of Scale,” Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, 4, 399-426.
Metcalfe, John Stanley and M. Gibbons, 1986. “Technological Variety and the Process of
Competition,” Economie Appliquee, 39(3), 493.
Minkler, Alanson P. 1990. “An Empirical Analysis of a Firm’s Decision to Franchise.”
Economics Letters, 34(1): 77–82.



                                                   48
Monteverde, Kirk, and David J. Teece. 1982. “Supplier Switching Costs and Vertical Integration
in the Automobile Industry.” Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1): 206–13.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and David Scharfstein. 2001. “Do Firm Boundaries Matter?” American
Economic Review, 91(2): 195–99.
Murray, Fiona and Scott Stern. 2007. “When Ideas Are Not Free: The Impact of Patenting on
Academic Science” in A. Jaffe, J. Lerner, and S. Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy.
Nelson, Richard R. 1961. “Uncertainty, Learning and the Economics of Parallel Research and
Development Efforts,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 43(4): 351-364.
Nickerson, Jack A., and Brian S. Silverman. 2003. “Why Aren’t All Truck Drivers Owner-
Operators? Asset Ownership and the Employment Relation in Interstate For-Hire Trucking.”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 12(1): 91–118.
Norton, Seth W. 1988. “An Empirical Look at Franchising as an Organizational Form.” Journal
of Business, 61(2): 197–218.
Novak, Sharon, and Scott Stern. 2008. “Complementarity among Vertical Integration Decisions:
Evidence from Automobile Product Development.” Management Science, 54(12): 1963-1979.
Ohanian, Nancy. 19994. “Vertical Integration in the US Pulp and Paper Industry, 1900-1940,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(1): 202-207.
Penrose, Edith. 1959. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Perry, Martin K. 1989. “Vertical Integration,” in Handbook of Industrial Organization. Ed.
Richard Schmalensee and Robert Willig, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Pirrong, Stephen Craig. 1993. “Contracting Practices in Bulk Shipping Markets: A Transactions
Cost Explanation.” Journal of Law and Economics, 36(2): 937–76.
Radner, Roy. 1992. “Hierarchy: The Economics of Managing” Journal of Economic Literature,
30(3): 1382-1415.
Ravenscraft, David and Frederic Scherer. 1987. Mergers, Sell-Offs and Economic Efficiency,
Brookings Institution.
Regan, Laureen. 1999. “Vertical Integration in the Property-Liability Insurance Industry: A
Transaction Cost Approach,” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 64: 41-62.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1994. Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics and History,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1998. “Chemical Engineering as a General Purpose Technology,” in
General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, ed. Elhanan Helpman, MIT Press.
Schoar, Antoinette. 2002. “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity,” Journal of
Finance, 57(7): 2379-2403.
Shelanski, Howard A., and Peter G. Klein. 1995. “Empirical Research in Transaction Cost
Economics: A Review and Assessment.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 11(2):
335–61.


                                                   49
Shepard, Andrea. 1993. “Contractual Form, Retail Price, and Asset Characteristics in Gasoline
Retailing.” RAND Journal of Economics, 24(1): 58–77.
Simon, Herbert A. 1947. Administrative Behavior. New York: Macmillan.
Simon, Herbert. 1951. “A Formal Theory of the Employment Relationship,” Econometrica,
19(3): 293-305.
Slade, Margaret E. 1996. “Multitask Agency and Contract Choice: An Empirical Exploration.”
International Economic Review, 37(2): 465–86.
Spengler, Joseph J. 1950. “Vertical Integration and Antitrust Policy.” Journal of Political
Economy, 58(4): 347–52.
Stein, Jeremy. 1997. “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources,”
Journal of Finance, 52(1): 111-133.
Stern, Scott 2004. “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?” Management Science, 50(6): 835-853.
Stigler, George. 1951. “The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the Market,” Journal
of Political Economy, 59: 185-193.
Stuckey, John. 1983. Vertical Integration and Joint Ventures in the Aluminum Industry.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sutton, John. “Market Structure: Theory and Evidence,” Handbook of Industrial Organization,
Volume 3, ed. Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Teece, David. 1986. “Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration,
Collaboration, Licensing and Public Policy,” Research Policy, 15(6): 285-305.
Tirole, Jean. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Van Biesenbroeck, Johannes. 2007. “Complementarities in Automobile Production,” Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 22(7): 1315:1345.
Walker, Gordon, and David Weber. 1984. “A Transaction Cost Approach to Make-or-Buy
Decisions.” Administrative Science Quarterly, 29(3): 373–91.
Wernerfelt, Berger. 1984. “A Resource-Based View of the Firm,” Strategic Management
Journal, 5(2): 171-180.
Whinston, Michael. 2003. “On the Transaction Cost Determinants of Vertical Integration.”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 19(1): 1–23.
Whinston, Michael. 2007. Lectures on Antitrust Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1971. “The Vertical Integration of Production: Market Failure
Considerations.” American Economic Review, 61(2): 112–23.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New
York: Free Press.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1979. “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
Relations.” Journal of Law and Economics, 22(2): 233–61.


                                                    50
Williamson, Oliver E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.
Williamson, Oliver E. 2005. “The Economics of Governance,” American Economic Review,
95(2): 1-18.
Williamson, Oliver E. 2010. “Transaction Cost Economics: The Natural Progression.” American
Economic Review, 100(3): 673-690.
Yeap, Clarissa A. 2006. “Residual Claims and Incentives in Restaurant Chains.” U.S. Census
Bureau, Center for Economic Studies Working Paper, no. CES 06-18.
Young, Allyn. 1928. “Increasing Returns and Economic Progress,” Economic Journal, 38(152):
527-542.




                                                 51
