                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   REFERRALS: PEER SCREENING AND ENFORCEMENT IN A CONSUMER CREDIT
                           FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                         Gharad T. Bryan
                                           Dean Karlan
                                         Jonathan Zinman

                                       Working Paper 17883
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17883


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012




Previously circulated as "You Can Pick Your Friends, But You Need to Watch Them: Loan Screening
and Enforcement in a Referrals Field Experiment." The authors would like to thank Manfred Kuhn
and the employees of Opportunity Finance, Luke Crowley, Jon de Quidt and seminar participants at
Yale, NEUDC,Warwick, Hebrew University, Stanford GSB, Wharton, The NBER summer institute
and The Cambridge conference on consumer credit and bankruptcy. We would also like to thank The
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for funding. This paper formed the third chapter of Gharad Bryan’s
dissertation – he would like to thank The Kauffman Foundation for financial support. All errors are,
of course, our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gharad T. Bryan, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Referrals: Peer Screening and Enforcement in a Consumer Credit Field Experiment
Gharad T. Bryan, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 17883
March 2012, Revised May 2012
JEL No. C93,D12,D14,D82,O12,O16

                                             ABSTRACT

Empirical evidence on peer intermediation lags behind many years of lending practice and a large
body of theory in which lenders use peers to mitigate adverse selection and moral hazard. Using a
simple referral incentive mechanism under individual liability, we develop and implement a two-stage
field experiment that permits separate identification of peer screening and enforcement effects. We
allow for borrower heterogeneity in both ex-ante repayment type and ex-post susceptibility to social
pressure. Our key contribution is how we deal with the interaction between these two sources of asymmetric
information. Our method allows us to cleanly identify selection on the likelihood of repayment, selection
on the susceptibility to social pressure, and loan enforcement. We estimate peer effects on loan repayment
in our setting, and find no evidence of screening (albeit with an imprecisely estimated zero) and large
effects on enforcement. We then discuss the potential utility and portability of the methodological
innovation, for both science and for practice.


Gharad T. Bryan                                     Jonathan Zinman
London School of Economics                          Department of Economics
Houghton Street                                     Dartmouth College
London WC2A 2AE                                     314 Rockefeller Hall
United Kingdom                                      Hanover, NH 03755
g.t.bryan@lse.ac.uk                                 and NBER
                                                    jzinman@dartmouth.edu
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
         Referrals: Peer Screening and Enforcement in a
                      Consumer Credit Field Experiment
                      Gharad Bryan, Dean Karlan and Jonathan Zinman∗

                                                 April 29, 2013



                                                       Abstract

          Empirical evidence on peer intermediation lags behind many years of lending practice and
       a large body of theory in which lenders use peers to mitigate adverse selection and moral haz-
       ard. Using a simple referral incentive mechanism under individual liability, we develop and
       implement a two-stage field experiment that permits separate identification of peer screening
       and enforcement effects. We allow for borrower heterogeneity in both ex-ante repayment type
       and ex-post susceptibility to social pressure. Our key contribution is how we deal with the
       interaction between these two sources of asymmetric information. Our method allows us to
       cleanly identify selection on the likelihood of repayment, selection on the susceptibility to so-
       cial pressure, and loan enforcement. We estimate peer effects on loan repayment in our setting,
       and find no evidence of screening (albeit with an imprecisely estimated zero) and large effects
       on enforcement. We then discuss the potential utility and portability of the methodological in-
       novation, for both science and for practice.


       JEL Codes: C93 D12 D14 D82 O12 O16



1     Introduction
Economic theory assigns credit market failure a central role in explaining poverty and underde-
velopment. Borrowing constraints reduce efficiency, increase inequality and can lead to poverty
traps (Banerjee and Newman, 1993; Galor and Zeira, 1993). Credit rationing also appears to be
empirically important. Making use of experimental or quasi-experimental supply shocks, several
   ∗ Bryan: London School of Economics and Innovations for Poverty Action, g.t.bryan@lse.ac.uk. Karlan: Yale University,
M.I.T. Jameel Poverty Action Lab, Innovations for Poverty Action and NBER, dean.karlan@yale.edu. Zinman: Dartmouth
College, M.I.T. Jameel Poverty Action Lab, Innovations for Poverty Action and NBER, jzinman@dartmouth.edu. The
authors would like to thank Manfred Kuhn and the employees of Opportunity Finance, Luke Crowley, Jon de Quidt and
seminar participants at Yale, NEUDC, Warwick, Hebrew University, Stanford GSB, Wharton, The NBER summer institute
and The Cambridge conference on consumer credit and bankruptcy. We would also like to thank The Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation for funding. This paper formed the third chapter of Gharad Bryan’s dissertation – he would like to
thank The Kauffman Foundation for financial support. All errors are, of course, our own.



                                                           1
recent papers estimate a large unmet demand for additional credit from consumers, microenter-
prises and small and medium enterprises.1 These studies, coupled with a literature that often
finds high returns to capital (e.g., De Mel et al. 2008), lend credence to policy and programmatic
efforts to relax borrowing constraints.
    But how should one go about relaxing borrowing constraints? Information asymmetries, in-
cluding ex-ante selection and ex-post incentive and enforcement problems, are often invoked as
the root causes of borrowing constraints in theory (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981) and practice (Ar-
mendáriz et al. 2010). If this is indeed the case, contracts that alleviate asymmetric information
problems provide a route to greater credit market efficiency.
    One popular approach to tackling asymmetric information is based on the presumption that
a borrower’s peers can be harnessed to provide information/screening or enforcement that is
unavailable to (or more costly for) the lender.2 Peer-intermediation has been fleshed out over
several hundred years of lending practice and can be seen in a range of guises including credit
cooperatives, credit unions, rotating savings and credit associations, and microlenders such as
the Grameen Bank. Peer intermediation has also been analyzed in a large theoretical literature on
optimal mechanism design in the face of different asymmetric information problems (e.g., Varian
1990, Stiglitz 1990, Banerjee et al. 1994, Besley and Coate 1995, Ghatak 1999, Ghatak and Guinnane
1999, Rai and Sjöström 2004, and Bond and Rai 2008).
    Empirical work on peer contracting has, however, lagged behind both theory and practice.
Yet we need empirical tests of theories not just to inform and build on our theoretical models
of credit markets, but for practical concerns to inform policy. Specifically, with more precise
information on the absolute and relative importance and leverage of screening and enforcement,
one can design better contracts that improve credit market efficiency. For example, if peers are
able to provide high quality screening but weak enforcement, a mechanism that uses joint liability
to select clients for a first loan but then moves to individual liability would harness much of the
screening incentive – á la Ghatak (1999) – but minimise the possible negatives of joint liability
lending such as tipping into strategic default (Besley and Coate 1995) and sub-optimal risk-taking
(Fischer 2010 and Giné et al. 2011). But if enforcement is largely responsible for the success of
peer schemes, then the appropriateness of peer mechanisms will decrease as ex-post enforcement
is strengthened through debt collection, court action or better identification.
    We formalize and implement a field experiment design that separately identifies peer screen-
ing and peer enforcement effects under weaker assumptions than previous work on asymmetric
information. Our key innovations concern the interaction between hidden information and hid-
den action. Our framework allows borrowers to differ both with respect to their ability to repay
(their repayment type) and their susceptibility to social pressure (their malleability type). Hetero-
geneity with respect to malleability raises the possibility of selection on malleability – that peers
   1 For consumers see e.g., Karlan and Zinman (2010) for microenterpretise see e.g., Banerjee et al. (2009); Karlan and

Zinman (2011) and for SMEs see e.g., Banerjee and Duflo (2004).
   2 Throughout the paper we use the term enforcement to refer to a set of actions that might include monitoring, peer

pressure, mutual insurance or direct peer assistance.



                                                           2
select based on their ability to enforce repayment – as well as the possibility that repayment type
is correlated with malleability type. We show that these issues complicate the identification of
selection on repayment type – the type of selection usually associated with peer mechanisms fol-
lowing Ghatak (1999) – but that our experimental design overcomes these difficulties. The possi-
bility that estimates of the extent of hidden information (that can be remedied by peer screening)
depend on the extent of hidden action effects (that can be remedied by enforcement) occurs in
many contract design settings. Relative to other papers that have attempted to separate selection
and enforcement in a variety of settings (e.g. Karlan and Zinman 2009 and Einav et al. 2013)
our experimental design allows us to identify selection without having to assume a zero corre-
lation between ex-ante type and ex-post responsiveness to incentives. Estimates of the extent of
selection on malleability are also important for contract design. Positive selection on malleability
implies that the success of peer enforcement will depend on the amount of selection induced by
the contract. Further, under some reasonable assumptions, selection on repayment type and se-
lection on malleability will be substitutes, opening up the possibility that the extent of selection
on repayment type will be determined by the lenders choice of enforcement technology.
    Since theory, practice, and empirical work all suggest that information environments and the
effectiveness of different remedies will vary across settings,3 our experiment is designed to be
portable: simple, and low-cost, to implement in different settings. The hope is that that this will
allow the experiment to be used to tailor contract design to the specifics of particular markets. We
demonstrate the experiment in one setting in conjunction with Opportunity Finance South Africa
(“Opportunity”), a consumer lender located in Kwazulu Natal and a member of the Opportunity
International microfinance network.
    Opportunity offered existing clients a 100 Rand ($12) bonus for referring a new borrower who
met particular criteria for Opportunity’s individual liability loan. Opportunity first randomly di-
vided referrers into one of two ex-ante incentives: referrers in the ex-ante approval group were
told that they would receive the bonus if the person they referred was approved for a loan. Re-
ferrers in the ex-ante repayment group were told that they would receive the bonus if the person
they referred repaid a loan on time. Referrers in the ex-ante repayment treatment had both an
ex-ante incentive to refer applicants of good credit quality (both observable and unobservable to
Opportunity), and an ex-post incentive to encourage repayment. Referrers in the ex-ante approval
group only had an incentive to refer someone they thought would be approved for a loan.
    Subsequently, Opportunity randomly surprised some referrers whose referred applications
had been approved with an improvement to their bonus contract.4 Half of the referrers with
the ex-ante repayment incentive were given their bonuses as soon as the loan was approved,
thus removing the enforcement incentive. Half of referrers given the ex-ante approval incentive
were offered an additional bonus if the referred loan was repaid, thus creating an enforcement
incentive. Thus, within each of the ex-ante groups, half the referrers have an ex-post repayment
    3 E.g., Besley and Coate (1995) predicts that the success of peer lending will depend on the strength of “social collateral”

in the community. For empirical evidence compare Giné and Karlan (2010) with Carpena et al. (2010).
    4 Lenders frequently contact borrowers with promotions in this market.




                                                               3
                      Figure 1: 2 × 2 Experimental Design – Repayment Incentives6

                                                             Ex-Ante Incentive
                                                        Approval         Repayment

                                                                                       Screening
                              Approval               No Incentive
                                                                                       Incentive
              Ex-Post
             Incentive                                                              Screening and
                                                     Enforcement
                             Repayment                                               Enforcement
                                                      Incentive
                                                                                      Incentives


incentive and half have an ex-post approval incentive.5
    The design produces four groups of referrers, each with a different combination of ex-ante and
ex-post incentives, as illustrated in Figure 1. In Section 4 we provide a formal model of the refer-
ral decision and use it to show how the design can separate peer enforcement from selection on
repayment type and selection on malleability. Intuitively, enforcement is measured by comparing
repayment rates in different rows and selection by comparing repayment rates across columns.
But selection on what? Two additional comparisons permit separate identification of selection
on repayment type and selection on enforcement malleability. First, comparing repayment rates
across columns only in the top row measures selection in the absence of an enforcement incentive.
This comparison reveals the extent of selection on repayment type even if repayment type and
malleability are correlated. Second, the design produces two estimates of the size of the enforce-
ment effect, one with a selection incentive (comparing rows conditional on being in the right
column) and one without (comparing rows conditional on being in the left column). Comparing
these two estimates gives us a measure of selection on malleability.
    Section 4 also uses a simple model to show when our experiment can determine whether or
not referrers have information about repayment type. This is a slightly more general question
– rather than asking whether the experiment induced selection, we ask whether the group of
referrers has information. (Referrers might have information but not reveal it if our mechanism
was ineffective.) Guided by our model, we show in the empirical section that our repayment
incentive induced referrers to substitute away from referring family toward referring friends. If
this substitution increases the cost of making the referral, and selection on malleability is not too
strong, then we can infer that referrers at least attempted to refer high repayment types. If this
attempt was unsuccessful– if we find no evidence of selection on repayment type– we infer that
referrers have a (noisy) belief that they have information about repayment type, but that in practice
    5 The lender also contacted those referrers for whom the contract was not changed and reminded them of the existence

of the contract. This was to rule out attention or signalling channels.
    6 Incentives refer to repayment incentives. All referrers have an incentive to refer a friend that will be approved for

a loan. So, for example, No Incentive implies the there is no incentive to refer a friend that will repay, but there is an
incentive to refer a friend that will be approved for a loan. We allow for a correlation between the probability of approval
and the probability of repayment in interpreting the results.



                                                             4
this information was already captured by the lender.
    Results from our demonstration show strong enforcement effects. By comparing repayment
rates across ex-post incentives holding the ex-ante incentive constant, we find that the small bonus
(100 Rand is equal to about 2% of the average referrer’s gross monthly income and 3% of the aver-
age loan size) decreased default from around 20% to 10% in most specifications.7 The magnitude
of improvement in repayment performance is far above and beyond what referrers and borrow-
ers could accomplish with side-contracting, and the improvement (and savings in collection costs)
far exceeded the lender’s outlays for bonuses. Indeed, the lender continues to use the repayment
incentive referral post-experiment.8
    We do not find strong evidence of selection effects. Comparing repayment rates across ex-
ante incentives, holding the ex-post incentive fixed, we find no evidence that peer selection on
repayment type improved repayment, although this is an imprecise zero. Finally, we are unable to
reject that there is no selection on malleability in our setting, although this is again an imprecisely
estimated zero with confidence intervals that contain economically meaningful selection effects.
    We make five main contributions relative to the existing literature. First, our experiment in-
troduces peer influence in a simple individual liability setting where there is limited potential for
complicating strategic interactions.9 This makes identification possible under weaker assump-
tions than required in joint liability settings.10 Second, we use a two-stage experiment to identify
selection and enforcement separately, in a peer referral environment.11 Third, as discussed above,
we advance the study of selection on moral hazard by developing a treatment in which there is
no enforcement incentive.12 Fourth, we provide evidence on the extent of selection and enforce-
ment effects in a particular setting, and highlight the potential for peer referral contracts to work
in practice. Fifth, the portability of the experimental design can help build evidence across set-
tings and contexts, thus leading to a more robust and thus more externally valid set of empirical
results. More specifically, theories predict that peer intermediation will have effects that vary
with, e.g., the lenders’ ability to screen, the social environment and the heterogeneity of returns,
and thus tests using this experimental design across such settings will help build a robust and
empirically-validated theoretical framework.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces Opportunity and the
South African microloan market. Section 3 provides details of the experiment. Section 4 outlines
    7 The emphasis of this paper is on designing contracts that encourage repayment so that the lender can relax borrowing

constraints. From this perspective the lower default rate is positive. However, it is plausible that overall welfare is
decreased if the social pressure is excessive. So we do not attach a welfare interpretation to any of our results.
    8 Besides the enforcement effect, another benefit for the lender is that referrers select on observables: referred borrowers

are much more likely to be approved for a loan (55%) than non-referred borrowers (23%).
    9 See also Klonner and Rai (2010), which finds in a non-experimental setting that co-signers improve repayment per-

formance in “organized” (intermediated) rotating savings and credit associations.
  10 For example, Ahlin and Townsend (2007) identifies selection effects only under the assumption that their model

correctly captures the strategic situation.
  11 Beaman and Magruder (2012) conduct a peer referral experiment in the labor market and use it to show the presence

of selection effects. They do not consider enforcement, nor the equivalent of selection on malleability.
  12 Recent work by Gunnsteinsson (2012) on crop insurance provides an example of how non-enforcement incentives can

be applied in other product markets.




                                                               5
a simple model of the referrer’s decision process, highlighting the conditions under which our
experiment separately identifies enforcement and selection. Section 5 provides some summary
statistics and discusses the integrity of the randomization. Section 6 provides our main results.
Section 7 discusses a few alternative explanations of the data and Section 8 concludes.


2     Market and Lender Overview
Our cooperating lender is a new entrant to the South African consumer microloan market. Oppor-
tunity Finance South Africa (Opportunity) is a for-profit, wholly-owned subsidiary of Opportu-
nity International, which has 1.26 million micro-loan customers across 24 different countries. Op-
portunity operates in the state of Kwazulu Natal, South Africa, and expanded from one branch in
Pietermaritzburg to 5 branches across the state during our study period (February 2008 through
July 2009). Opportunity offers small, high-interest, uncollateralised debt with a fixed monthly
repayment amount. Loans made during our study period averaged around 3500R ($US400), with
a modal (mean) duration of 9 (10) months, and a modal (mean) monthly percentage rate of 5%
(4.1%). There is a competitive market for these loans in Kwazulu Natal (see Karlan and Zinman
2010 for a description of a different lender in this market).
    Opportunity underwrites applications using a combination of internal and external credit
scores (South Africa has well-functioning credit bureaus). A necessary condition for getting a
loan is a documented, steady, salaried job. The loans are not tied to a specific purpose, but bor-
rowers are asked the purpose of the loan and most report needing the money for paying school
fees for their children, attending/organizing a funeral, or purchasing a durable.


3     The Experiment
From February 2008 through July 2009, Opportunity offered each individual approved for a loan
the opportunity to participate in its new “Refer-A-Friend”program. Individuals could participate
in the program only once. Referrers received a referral card, which they could give to a friend (the
referred). The referred earned R40 ($US5) if she brought in the card and was approved for a loan.
The referrer could earn R100 ($US12)13 for referring someone who was subsequently approved
for and/or repaid a loan, depending on the referrer’s incentive contract.
    Opportunity first randomly assigned referrers to one of two ex-ante incentive contracts, corre-
sponding to two different referral cards. Referrers given an ex-ante approval incentive would be
paid only if the referred was approved for a loan. Referrers given the ex-ante repayment incentive
would be paid only if the referred successfully repaid a loan.14 Figure ?? shows examples of the
  13 The bonus for the referrer was initially R60 but was changed to R100 in July 2008 at the request of the lender. The

inclusion of this as a control makes no difference in any of our results.
  14 Successful repayment was defined as having no money owing on the date of maturity of the loan.




                                                           6
referral cards, the top card was given to referrers in the ex-ante approval group and the bottom
card to those in the ex-ante repayment group.

                                           Figure 2: Referral Cards




                     If the friend is approved for a loan




                   If the friend successfully repays a loan




    Among the set of referrers whose referred friends were approved for a loan, Opportunity
randomly selected half to be surprised with an ex-post incentive change.
    Among referrers who had been given the ex-ante approval incentive, half were assigned to re-
ceive an additional ex-post repayment incentive. Opportunity phoned referrers in the additional-
incentive arm and told them that, in addition to the R100 approval bonus, they would receive an
additional R100 if the referred repaid the loan. Opportunity also phoned the other half of referrers
in the ex-ante approval incentive group– those who did not get the additional ex-post repayment
incentive– with a remninder to pick up their R100 bonus. The phone call did not provide any new
information on the incentive contract to this second arm, but we wanted every referrer to get a
call from Opportunity in case the personalized contact from the lender had some effect.
    Among referrers who had been given the ex-ante repayment incentive, half of the referrers

                                                              7
were assigned to have the ex-post repayment incentive removed. Opportunity phoned referrers
in this arm, told them that they would be paid R100 now instead of conditional on loan repay-
ment, and explained that this was the extent of the referrer’s bonus eligibility (e.g., that the refer-
rer would not receive an additional R100 if the loan was repaid). The other half of referrers who
had been given the ex-ante repayment incentive were assigned to continue with an ex-post re-
payment incentive. Opportunity phoned these referrers with a reminder that they would receive
a bonus if the loan was repaid.
    Figure 1 summarizes the randomization and the incentives that the referrers face. Intuitively,
any effect of peer screening can be identified by comparing the arms with and without an ex-ante
repayment incentive, holding constant the ex-post incentive. Similarly, any effect of peer enforce-
ment can be identified by comparing the arms with and without an ex-post repayment incentive,
holding constant the ex-ante incentive.Two additional comparisons permit separate identifica-
tion of selection on repayment type and selection on enforcement malleability. First, comparing
repayment rates across columns only in the top row measures selection in the absence of an en-
forcement incentive. This comparison reveals the extent of selection on repayment type even if
repayment type and malleability are correlated. Second, the design produces two estimates of
the size of the enforcement effect, one with a selection incentive (comparing rows conditional
on being in the right column) and one without (comparing rows conditional on being in the left
column). Comparing these two estimates gives us a measure of selection on malleability.


4     Identification
In this section we provide a stylised model of the referral decision to help clarify the interpretation
of our experiment. We provide the simplest model possible to discuss the interaction between
selection on repayment type, selection on malleability, and enforcement. We outline the basic
model in Section 4.1. Section 4.2 then relates the model to the data collected in the experiment.
Section 4.3 interprets the different repayment rates induced by the experiment, giving formal
definitions of selection on repayment type and selection on malleability and then discussing how
these are identified by the experiment. Section 4.4 analyses the extent to which the experiment
allows us to determine whether referrers have information about their peers’ repayment types.


4.1    The Referral Decision
A market consists of N potential borrowers (referreds), each of whom is characterised by four
parameters:

    1. θ ∈ {θ L , θ H }: a repayment type;

    2. σ ∈ {σ L , σ H }: a malleability type;

    3. γ ∈ {γ L , γ H }: the probability that the individual is approved for a loan; and


                                                   8
   4. λ ∈ (0, λ̄]: the net cost of recruiting the individual to the referral scheme, including all social
      and search costs and/or benefits, but excluding the referral bonus.

We assume that these characteristics are drawn from a population distribution F, and allow for
characteristics to be correlated. In particular, it may be that repayment type is correlated with
malleability; we discuss below how this would affect identification. We concentrate on the case
with binary types for ease of exposition.15
    We assume that referrer j knows the cost of referral λij 16 and holds beliefs (θ̂ij , σ̂ij , γ̂ij ) about
each potential referred i. We further assume that each of these beliefs is binary. So, for example,
θ̂ ∈ {θ̂ L , θ̂ H } with the interpretation that θ̂ij = θ̂ H implies that referrer j believes potential referred
i to be a high repayment type.
    The timing of the referral decision is as follows:

   1. Referrer j chooses a referred i and pays a cost λij (she may also choose not to make a referral);

   2. The referred is approved for a loan with probability γi ;

   3. The referrer applies social pressure e to encourage repayment and incurs cost c(e), where c
      is a strictly convex cost function;

   4. The loan is repaid with probability θi + σij e.17

We assume that {θ H , θ L } and {σ H , σ L } are such that the probability of repayment always lies
between zero and one given an optimal effort choice. We could allow for a more complicated
repayment function without altering our discussion. An advantage of the linear form is that σ
encodes all the information needed to determine the impact of enforcement effort.
   In making the referral decision, a referrer takes into account the possibility that she will exert
pressure on the referred to repay the loan. We therefore consider the decision backward, first
analysing the effort decision and then returning to the referral decision.
   Consider first the effort decision. If the referrer is in the ex-ante approval treatment she knows
she will exert no effort. If the referrer is in the ex-ante repayment treatment she foresees choosing
her level of effort to solve
                                              
                                        max BR (θ̂ + σ̂e) − c(e)
                                               e

where BR is the bonus payment in the repayment treatment. We denote the unique maximiser
e∗ (σ̂) which depends on θ̂ only through a correlation between σ̂ and θ̂. For a borrower of type
(θ, σ) perceived to be of type (θ̂, σ̂) the repayment probability is θ + σe∗ (σ̂).
  15 Allowing for more types does not alter the thrust of the arguments. However, we comment in the text where allowing

for a richer type space would lead to a slightly different interpretation.
  16 This last assumption seems reasonable given that we assume the cost is paid prior to the referral. Beliefs could be

derived from a more primitive model in which the referrer has a prior belief about types, receives a signal and uses Bayes’
rule to form the beliefs (θ̂ij , σ̂ij , γ̂ij ).
  17 σ is potentially specific to the referrer-referred match, and we allow for that in our notation.




                                                            9
   Now consider the referral decision. Given the effort decision discussed above, referrer j in the
ex-ante approval group chooses who to refer by solving
                                                       n              o
                                          Uj ( A) ≡ max γ̂i B A − λij                           (1)
                                                    i ∈ Nj


where B A is the bonus paid in approval treatment. Because the bonus in the ex-ante approval
treatment is expected to arrive earlier in time (immediately after approval) B A ≥ BR . In the
ex-ante repayment group referrer j solves
                                    n                                        o
                       Uj ( R) ≡ max γ̂i BR (θ̂ + σ̂e∗ (σ̂)) − c(e∗ (σ̂)) − λij .               (2)
                                 i ∈ Nj


Equation (2) makes clear that the selection decision depends on both the belief about repayment
type and the belief about malleability. Finally, the model is completed by noting that referrer j
makes a referral in the ex-ante repayment treatment if Uj ( R) > 0 and in the approval treatment
if Uj ( A) > 0.


4.2     Map from Model to Data
Our analysis focuses on the repayment behaviour of individuals referred in the different treat-
ments. We denote the ex-ante treatment assignment with a lower case letter and the ex-post
assignment with an upper case letter. So, for example, E(λ| aR) is the expectation of λ conditional
on the referrer being in the ex-ante approval group and ex-post repayment group, while E(λ| a) is
the expectation of λ conditional on being in the ex-ante approval group, unconditional on ex-post
treatment assignment.
    We have two potential measures of selection. Define S( A) as the difference in repayment
probabilities across ex-ante treatments conditional on being in the ex-post approval treatment
(where there is no enforcement incentive). S( A) is given by the expression

                              S( A) = E(θ |rA & app) − E(θ | aA & app),

where app implies that the observation is conditional on the referred individual being approved
for a loan, and expectations are taken over the population of referrers. We can also define define
S( R) as the same comparison conditional on being in the ex-post repayment treatment:

                    S( R) = E(θ + σe∗ (σ̂)|rR & app) − E(θ + σe∗ (σ̂)| aR & app).

      We also have two potential measures of enforcement. We define

                         N (r ) = E(θ + σe∗ (σ̂)|rR & app) − E(θ |rA & app),

as the different in repayment rates across enforcement treatments conditional on the ex-ante re-


                                                         10
payment incentive. We can also define the equivalent measure conditional on being in the ex-ante
approval treatment

                             N ( a) = E(θ + σe∗ (σ̂)| aR & app) − E(θ | aA & app).


4.3    Identifying Selection and Enforcement
The identification of enforcement effects is straightforward if the ex-post treatment does not af-
fect the referral or approval decision. This is a reasonable assumption, and a testable one (Sec-
tion 5.2), given that the referral and approval decisions occur without the referrer or lender
staff knowing the ex-post treatment assignment. Under this assumption, repayment type can-
cels out of the expressions for both N ( a) and N (r ) so that N ( a) = E(σe∗ (σ̂)| aR & app) and
N (r ) = E(σe∗ (σ̂)|rR & app). Therefore each of the expressions provides an estimate of the extent
to which social pressure can encourage loan repayment: our experiment generates two estimates
of the peer enforcement effect. These estimates may differ if perceived and actual malleability
differ across the ex-ante treatments.
    We now turn to identification of selection, focusing first on repayment type and then on mal-
leability.

Definition 1. [Selection on Repayment Type] We say that our repayment incentive induced selection on
repayment type if
                                  E(θ |r & app) > E(θ | a & app).

That is, on average, the set of clients referred under the ex-ante repayment incentive, and subsequently
approved for a loan, are more likely to repay than those referred under the ex-ante approval incentive.

    We use average repayment rates because they are relevant to the firm’s profitability and, there-
fore, its contract design choice. We condition on approval because the approval decision is neces-
sary in credit (and insurance, and labor) markets. A definition of selection on repayment type that
was not conditional on approval may seem more general, but would not be useful if the lender
can’t design an approval process that allows higher referred types to be approved.18 Given our
definition, the comparison S( A) defined above provides clean identification of the extent of se-
lection on repayment type.
    It is important to note that S( R) does not cleanly identify selection on repayment type because
it includes the effect of social pressure. If the effectiveness or extent of social pressure depends
on the repayment type (in our model this would occur through a correlation between repayment
type and malleability type) then S( R) could over- or under-estimate the extent of selection on
repayment type. Moreover, theory does not pin down the sign of the correlation between repay-
ment type and malleability. One intuition suggests that there is less scope for social pressure on
   18 The extent of selection on repayment type under our definition will be proportional to the extent of selection on

repayment type under the unconditional definition so long as we are willing to assume that the probability of approval is
strictly increasing in repayment type. This seems like a reasonable assumption in most settings.



                                                           11
those who are predisposed to repay: corr (σ̂, θ̂ ) < 0 and corr (σ, θ̂ ) < 0 . So in this case high
types would be less malleable. Social pressure might even be counterproductive if high repay-
ment types are intrinsically motivated and external pressure crowds out intrinsic motivation (e.g.
Gneezy and Rustichini 2000, Benabou and Tirole 2003 & Besley and Ghatak 2005). A second intu-
ition, however, suggests that high types will be more malleable; e.g., they already care the most
about repaying and hence will also care most about how they are viewed by their peers. If this is
the case we would expect that corr (σ̂, θ̂ ) > 0 and corr (σ, θ̂ ) > 0.19
    We refer to this issue as the comparability problem because S( R) does not provide an apples-
to-apples comparison: the two groups potentially differ in the extent of social pressure and mal-
leability. The comparability problem occurs in settings where there is both hidden information,
and hidden action that could depend on the extent of hidden information.
    We now consider selection on malleability.

Definition 2. [Selection on Malleability] We say that our incentive induced positive (negative) selection
on malleability if
                          E(σe∗ (σ̂)|rR & app) > (<) E(σe∗ (σ̂)| aR & app).

That is, on average the set of clients referred under the ex-ante repayment incentive, and subsequently
approved for a loan, are more (less) susceptible to the chosen social pressure of their referrer than those
referred under the ex-ante approval incentive.

    As above, we condition on approval and look at average repayment rates as we believe that
this is the most appropriate measure when considering how to design contracts. We further con-
dition on the optimal choice of social pressure in the ex-post repayment treatment. An alternative
would be to define positive (negative) selection on malleability to be

                                          E(σ|r & app) > (<) E(σ| a & app).

Again, this may seem a more natural definition, but a more malleable set of referrers is not helpful
to the lender if the referrers do not in fact put the appropriate pressure on these referrers.
    Again assuming that the ex-post treatment does not affect the referral or approval decision we
have
                     S( R) − S( A) = E(σe∗ (σ̂)|rR & app) − E(σe∗ (σ̂)| aR & app).

Therefore, S( R) − S( A) > (<)0 implies positive (negative) selection on malleability.20
   19 In the more familiar setting of moral hazard and adverse selection in the credit market, Karlan and Zinman (2009)

provide a simple model that implies high types put more effort into ensuring project success. If that model is true,
correlation between hidden information and the extent of hidden action would tend to lead to an underestimate of the
extent of selection on risk type. Even in that case, however, it is possible to tweak the simple model and reverse the
comparative static. The extent and direction of these interaction effects is, therefore, an empirical matter.
   20 There is a meaningful distinction between intentional and incidental selection on malleability if referrers are not

forward-looking or do not actually have a good signal on malleability type. Although these contingencies seems unlikely
to arise,we note two points. First, it is the possiblity of incidental selection on malleability– in particular of high repayment
types being less malleable– that leads to the possibility of negative selection on malleability. Second, observing S( A) < 0
and S( R) > 0 is only possible if there is positive intentional selection on malleability, and if selection on repayment type


                                                              12
4.4    Do Referrers Have Information?
The above discussion shows what is identified by the the experiment. In this section we argue that
we can use the experiment to understand whether referrers have information regarding repay-
ment types. This is a more general question than asking whether there is selection on repayment
type. For example, if we see no selection on repayment type it may be that referrers have infor-
mation, but the experiment did not lead them to reveal that information. We will argue in this
section and the empirical work that follows that the experiment did lead referrers to attempt to
select high repayment types, but that this selection was (subject to power considerations) unsuc-
cessful. We interpret this as evidence that referrers in fact have no useful information – at least
that can be extracted with incentives of the size we use. From a contract design perspective, this
means that our experiment can be useful in ruling out a whole class of mechanisms, rather than
just implying that our particular example is not effective in inducing selection.

Definition 3. [Referrer Knowledge] We say that referrers have information about repayment type if

                                    E(θ |θ̂ = θ̂ H & app) > E(θ |θ̂ = θ̂ L & app).                         (3)

    As with the definitions of selection above, this statement is conditional on loan approval: we
are interested in whether referrers have information that predicts repayment above and beyond
the information that the lender observes.
    Inferring whether referrers have information can, but need not, be straightforward. If S( A) >
0 it must be that the referrers have information about repayment type. But if S( A) ≤ 0 it is not
immediately clear whether referrers have information. It may be that referrers have information,
but that they have not been induced to reveal it. For example, our model allows for the possibility
that referrers believe approval types γ̂ and repayment types θ̂ to be highly correlated. In this case
there may be no differential incentive to refer high types in the ex-ante repayment treatment.
Alternatively, because B A ≥ BR referrers in the ex-ante approval treatment may be willing to
pay a higher cost λ to make a referral. If λ is correlated with repayment type we may even see
S( A) < 0, but this would not necessarily show a lack of information. Finally, it could just be that
referrers tend to only have one potential referred.
    We argue that if E(λ|r ) > E(λ| a), S( A) = 0, S( R) = S( A) and σ̂ is positively correlated with
σ, then we can infer that referrers do not have information. To see this note that we can write

                S( A) ≡ Pr (θ̂ = θ̂ H |r ) E(θ |θ̂ H & app) + (1 − Pr (θ̂ = θ̂ H |r )) E(θ |θ̂ L & app)
                                                                                                
              − Pr (θ̂ = θ̂ H | a) E(θ |θ̂ H & app) + (1 − Pr (θ̂ = θ̂ H | a)) E(θ |θ̂ L & app) .

Consequently, if the experiment induces selection in the sense that

                                           Pr (θ̂ = θ̂ H |r ) > Pr (θ̂ = θ̂ H | a),                (SELECTION)
and selection on malleability are substitutes.



                                                             13
then S( A) = 0 implies that referrers have no information. To complete the argument we need to
show that E(λ|r ) > E(λ| a) and S( R) − S( A) = 0 imply SELECTION.
   The condition E(λ|r ) > E(λ| a), combined with (1) and (2), implies that
                                                                                        
             E γ̂ BR (θ̂ + σe∗ (σ̂)) − c(e∗ (σ̂)) |r > E γ̂ BR (θ̂ + σe∗ (σ̂)) − c(e∗ (σ̂)) | a .                       (4)

This follows because there must be some expected return to making a high cost referral. Condition
(4), combined with the assumption that c is strictly convex, then implies that E(θ̂ + σe∗ (σ)|r ) >
E(θ̂ + σe∗ (σ)| a): that the ex-ante incentive induced selection on the probability of repayment
conditional on anticipated effort. To complete the argument, observe that if S( R) = S( A) then
E(θ̂ + σe∗ (σ)|r ) > E(θ̂ + σe∗ (σ)| a) implies E(θ̂ |r ) > E(θ̂ | a) so long as we are willing to make the
weak assumption that σ̂ is positively correlated with σ: that those perceived to be more malleable
are, in reality, more malleable.
    Finally, it is worth noting that our restriction to two repayment types may be restrictive in the
case where S( A) = 0. Our experiment provides a limited incentive (BR ) to refer a good repayment
type. It may be that this incentive induces SELECTION within a set of low-cost referreds, and
that a larger incentive would induce selection across a larger group of potential referreds. For
example, it may be that the referrers know people who are high repayment types, but that it is
very costly to contact them and make the referral.


5     Data
5.1    Summary Statistics
Table 1 provides a summary of the characteristics of potential referrers over the period in which
the experiment was run.


5.2    Integrity of the Randomization
Opportunity handed out 4408 referral cards to potential referrers– borrowers approved for new
loans– during the study period.21 Table 2 presents regressions of treatment assignment on referrer
characteristics at baseline. If the randomization is valid, we would expect these characteristics to
be uncorrelated with treatment. In all cases an F-test of the restriction that the coefficients are
jointly zero fails to reject at the usual significance levels. Further, most individual coefficients are
not statistically different from zero and the total number of significant coefficients is in line with
what we would expect to see by chance. Below we also show that our treatment effect estimates
are robust to including controls for referrer baseline characteristics.
  21 Referred clients were not eligible for a card. This restriction was aimed to reduce learning about the treatments among

potential referreds.




                                                            14
                 Table 1: Demographic Variables of all Borrowers During Experiment

                                                             Mean          Median         Std Dev

                  Female                                     0.418              -           0.493

                  Age                                        37.789         36.000         10.785

                  High School Education                      0.637              -           0.481

                  Disposable Income                           1753           1265            1703

                  Requested Amount                            5049           3000            6615

                  Requested Term                             10.743             9           6.265
                  (Months)
                  N                                                          4408

Disposable income is income remaining after rent, debt repayments and recurring obligations. An individual has a high
school education if they have matriculated or gone on to tertiary education.



     Of the 4408 cards that were handed out, 430 were returned and 245 of these referred clients
were approved for a loan. The surprise nature of the second randomization (i.e. the change
in ex-post incentives) provides another opportunity to check the integrity of the experimental
implementation. Because the second-stage assignments were not known to potential referrers ex-
ante (nor to Opportunity staff members delivering referral cards), baseline characteristics of those
referred and approved for a loan22 should not differ within the ex-ante treatment groups.23 Table
3 presents tests this hypothesis from regressions where the outcome variable is being assigned to
the ex-post repayment incentive.
     Within the group given the ex-ante approval incentive (Table 3 Column 1), the F-test shows
that the baseline coefficients do not significantly predict assignment to treatment in the joint test.
Among the individual tests, only one of the sixteen variables is significant, which is about what
one would expect to happen by chance.
     Within the group given the ex-ante repayment incentive (Column 2), a higher application
score (i.e., internal credit score) significantly predicts assignment to the ex-post approval group.
Given that application score is a key measure of the observed credit quality of the applicant, this
is troubling. It turns out that Opportunity changed its application score in May 2009 (before this
time, scores are out of 200, while after they are out of 800). Only 12 referred clients from the ex-
ante repayment group were approved for loans after the change, with 9 coming from the ex-post
  22 Results are similar if we do not condition on approval, and instead consider the full sample of 430 referreds.
  23 Comparison across the ex-ante incentive groups are, however, endogenous.   That is, we cannot compare characteristics
of those in the ex-ante approval groups to those in the ex-ante repayment groups because the experiment aims to generate
difference in these characteristics.




                                                           15
              Table 2: Testing The Balance of Referrer Characteristics Across Treatments: OLS
                      Ex-Ante Incentive                           Approval                      Repayment
                      Ex-Post Incentive                  Approval         Repayment      Approval       Repayment
                      Female                                -0.006          0.008           0.005          -0.008
                                                            (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.014)
                      Age                                    0.000          -0.001          0.000           0.000
                                                            (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)
                      High School Education                 -0.027          0.027           -0.007          0.008
                                                            (0.023)        (0.023)         (0.023)         (0.023)
                      Salary Earner                         -0.004          0.022           -0.016         -0.003
                                                            (0.016)        (0.016)         (0.016)         (0.016)
                      Disposable Income                     -0.003          -0.006          0.010*         -0.001
                      (Thousands of Rand)                   (0.004)        (0.004)       * (0.004)         (0.004)
                      Application Score                      0.000          0.000           0.000           0.000
                                                            (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
                      ITC Score                              0.000          0.000           0.000           0.000
                                                            (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
                      ITC Score Missing                      0.072          0.039           -0.058         -0.053
                                                            (0.109)        (0.109)         (0.109)         (0.110)
                      Requested Amount                      -0.001          0.004*         -0.004*          0.000
                      (Thousands of Rand)                   (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                                               *           (0.002)
                                                                                               *           (0.002)
                      Requested Term                         0.002         -0.004*          0.002           0.000
                      (Months)                              (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                                               *           (0.002)         (0.002)
                      Government Worker                      0.005          -0.002          0.022          -0.025
                                                            (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.032)         (0.032)
                      Cleaner/Builder/Miner                  0.010          -0.006          0.007          -0.011
                                                            (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.031)         (0.031)
                      Security/Mining/Transport              0.021          -0.004          0.020          -0.037
                                                            (0.033)        (0.033)         (0.033)         (0.033)
                      Retail Worker                         -0.002          0.008           0.003          -0.009
                                                            (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.032)         (0.032)
                      IT/Financial Woker                     0.010          -0.025          0.014           0.001
                                                            (0.035)        (0.035)         (0.035)         (0.035)
                      Agriculture/Manufacturing              0.008          -0.005          0.027          -0.030
                                                            -0.029          -0.029          -0.029         -0.029
                      Constant                               0.189          0.224          0.273**         0.315*
                                                            (0.118)        (0.118)         (0.119)         (0.120)
                      F-test of joint significance           0.560          0.930            0.810          0.440
                      p-value of F-test                      0.916          0.533            0.679          0.971
                      N                                      4408           4408             4408           4408
∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Each column represents a separate OLS regression where the LHS variable is assignment to
the particular treatment. Education is a dummy variable taking on value 1 if the referrer has matriculated. Application score is an internal
credit score. ITC score is external credit score. Salary monthly is a dummy variable taking value 1 if the client receives his or her salary
monthly.




                                                                     16
approval group. This is not out of line with what we would expect from random arrival times, but
it does create a problem in testing orthogonality. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 take two approaches.
Column 3 omits the application score, and the p-value for the F-test of joint significance rises to
0.326 (from 0.077 in Column 2). Column 4 drops the 12 post-change observations (so the sample
size falls from 120 to 108), and the p-value is 0.478. We also note that the ITC (external) credit
score– which is provided by a credit bureau and is another key predictor of credit worthiness– is
never predictive of treatment status.
    Overall it seems that the randomization was succesful. We also show below that our results
are not sensitive to including these baseline characteristics as controls.24


6     Results
6.1    Who Refers and Who Gets Referred?
430 of 4408, or 10%, of eligible clients made a referral. Making a referral is not correlated with
the ex-ante incentive: a regression of the referral rate on a dummy for ex-ante treatment gives
a coefficient of −0.002 with a standard error of 0.040. This suggests that the higher net present
value of the bonus in the ex-ante approval group did not loom large in the referrers’ calculations
and induce greater search. And it bodes well for using the assumption that E(λ| a) < E(λ|r ) to
help identify whether referrers have information.
    We also collected data on the relationship between referrers and referreds. Specifically, the
lender asked the referred “How do you know the person that gave you the voucher?” Most
people answered that the referrer was a relative or work colleague. A small number answered
church. Table 4 shows the impact of the ex-ante repayment incentive (being in the ex-ante repay-
ment group) on the probability of referring a relative or a work colleague. The table shows that
the selection incentive leads referrers to substitute away from relatives toward those they know
through church and their work colleagues – those with the ex-ante repayment incentive are 10%
less likely to refer a relative .
    We argue that this finding implies that E(λ|r ) > E(λ| a). First, we believe that it is intuitive
that colleagues are more costly to refer than family members. This is both because colleagues may
be harder to approach and because there may be a positive obligation to refer family members
given the R40 bonus given to the referred. Second, Beaman and Magruder (2012) find similar sub-
stitution toward referring colleagues in a labor market experiment in India. Their experiment also
documents that referred colleagues are more productive workers than referred family members,
which would only occur if colleagues are indeed more costly to refer. Consequently, following
our analysis in Section 4.4, if we can now show that S( R) = S( A) and S( A) = 0 we will infer that
referrers have no information.
  24 We can only control for these differences when studying the enforcement question; when we consider selection,

referred characteristics are endogenous.




                                                       17
Table 3: Testing The Balance of Referred Characteristics Across Ex-Post Treatments. Dependent
Variables is Assignment to Ex-Post Repayment Incentive: OLS
                                                                                         App. Score Before
                                                               Whole Sample
                                                                                         Exlcuded May 2009
                      Ex-Ante Incentive                  Approval         Repayment      Repayment Repayment
                      Female                                 0.041           0.098           0.088          0.147
                                                            (0.113)         (0.104)         (0.107)        (0.113)
                      Age                                    0.001           0.003           0.004          0.002
                                                            (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.006)
                      High School Education                  0.131           0.022          -0.005         -0.008
                                                            (0.148)         (0.164)         (0.169)        (0.173)
                      Salary Earner                          0.029          -0.117          -0.086         -0.106
                                                            (0.110)         (0.113)         (0.116)        (0.133)
                      Disposable Income                      0.034           0.028           0.037          0.023
                      (Thousands of Rand)                   (0.057)         (0.059)         (0.061)        (0.069)
                      Application Score                      0.000         -0.001***            -           0.002
                                                            (0.000)         (0.000)
                                                                               **               -          (0.004)
                      ITC Score                              0.002           0.000           0.000          0.000
                                                            (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)
                      ITC Score Missing                      1.197          -0.116          -0.276         -0.077
                                                            (0.893)         (0.895)         (0.922)        (0.935)
                      Requested Amount                       0.010         -0.027*          -0.026         -0.020
                      (Thousands of Rand)                   (0.011)        (0.016)          (0.016)        (0.021)
                      Requested Term                        -0.013           0.014           0.010          0.012
                      (Months)                              (0.015)         (0.017)         (0.018)        (0.019)
                      Government Worker                     -0.389           0.103           0.023          0.115
                                                            (0.266)         (0.257)         (0.264)        (0.273)
                      Cleaner/Builder/Miner                 -0.094           0.098           0.028          0.027
                                                            (0.207)         (0.211)         (0.217)        (0.225)
                      Security/Mining/Transport             -0.330          -0.321          -0.450*        -0.355
                                                            (0.226)         (0.251)         (0.255)        (0.275)
                      Retail Worker                         -0.212          -0.105           -0.166        -0.129
                                                            (0.203)         (0.220)         (0.226)        (0.231)
                      IT/Financial Woker                   -0.570**          0.495           0.445          0.427
                                                            (0.279)
                                                               *            (0.533)         (0.550)        (0.562)
                      Agriculture/Manufacturing             -0.222          -0.168           -0.214        -0.199
                                                            -0.187          -0.222           -0.229        -0.234
                      Constant                              -0.547           0.642           0.692          0.348
                                                            (0.923)         (0.932)         (0.962)        (1.059)
                      F-test of joint significance           0.810          1.640            1.150          0.990
                      p-value of F-test                      0.669          0.077*
                                                                              12             0.326          0.478
                      N                                       123            120              120            108
∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Each column represents a separate OLS regression where the LHS variable is assignment to
the particular treatment. Education is a dummy variable taking on value 1 if the referrer has matriculated. Application score is an internal
credit score. ITC score is external credit score. Salary monthly is a dummy variable taking value 1 if the client receives his or her salary
monthly.




                                                                     18
    We also find evidence that referred clients are more likely to be approved for a loan. Approval
rate for clients off-the-street is around 23%, but for clients referred through the Refer-A-Friend
program the approval rate is around 55%. We will argue below that referrers were not success-
ful in selecting on repayment type. The observation that referred clients are more likely to be
approved is, therefore, consistent with two interpretations: i) peers know which of their friends
are creditworthy, but this information duplicates information already held by the lender; and ii)
peers have correlated credit scores and, because the referrers were all approved borrowers, their
peers are more likely to be approved than an average client.25 These two possibilities make it
hard to give a causal interpretation to the correlation.

            Table 4: The Impact of Ex-Ante Treatment Group on Referred Characteristics


                                                                     No Controls
                        Dep Var                           Relative                     Work

                        Ex-ante
                        Repayment Incentive                -0.095*                     0.051
                                                           (0.043)                    (0.046)

                        Mean                                0.271                      0.656

                        N                                    428                        428


                       Each column represents a separate OLS regression. Standard errors in parentheses.




6.2    Measuring Repayment Performance
We identify screening and enforcement effects by comparing the repayment performance of loans
referred by referrers facing different incentives. We have four different and complementary mea-
sures of repayment performance. Each proxies for the costs a lender bears when borrowers don’t
repay (on time), without needing to impose additional assumptions on what the lender’s cost
structure actually is (since in our experience many lenders lack precise data on marginal costs of
collections). First, we have an indicator variable, for all 245 referred clients, of whether or not
the borrower was charged penalty interest for paying late at any time during the course of the
loan. Second, we measure whether the loan was fully repaid on the date of maturity for the 240
loans that have reached maturity. Third, for those 240 loans we also calculate the proportion of
principal still owed at maturity date (this value is zero for loans repaid on time, and positive for
loans in arrears). Fourth, Opportunity charges off loans deemed unrecoverable and has made a
   25 It is also possible that the lender took into account whether the borrower was referred in making its approval de-

cision. We find this unlikely for two reasons. First, the approval process is quite mechanical. Second, the lender was
genuinely agnostic as to whether the referral system would work. This was one of the main reasons for implementing the
experiment.


                                                              19
                 Table 5: Key Outcome Variables: Mean Differences Across Treatment Groups


          (a) Penalty Interest Charged by Lender (N=245)                           (b) Positive Balance Owing at Maturity (N=240)
                               Ex-Ante Incentive                                                      Ex-Ante Incentive
                            Approval Repayment                Diff                                  Approval Repayment                 Diff

                               0.389         0.518           0.129                                    0.206           0.226          0.019
             Approval                                                                  Approval
 Incentive




                                                                           Incentive
  Ex-Post




                                                                            Ex-Post
                              (0.064)       (0.069)         (0.093)                                  (0.054)         (0.058)        (0.079)
                                0.258        0.272   0.015                                            0.095            0.152         0.056
             Repayment                                                                 Repayment
                              (0.054)       (0.055) (0.077)                                          (0.037)         (0.044)        (0.058)
             Difference
                               -0.132      -0.246*** 0.114                             Difference
                                                                                                     -0.111*          -0.075         0.036
                              (0.083)       (0.087) (0.122)                                          (0.064)         (0.072)        (0.098)
       (c) Portion of Loan Value Owing at Maturity (N=240)                              (d) Loan Charged off By Lender (N=239)
                               Ex-Ante Incentive                                                      Ex-Ante Incentive
                            Approval Repayment                Diff                                  Approval Repayment                 Diff

                               0.187         0.257           0.070                                    0.155           0.188          0.034
             Approval                                                                  Approval
 Incentive




                                                                           Incentive
  Ex-Post




                                                                            Ex-Post
                              (0.054)       (0.076)         (0.091)                                  (0.048)         (0.054)        (0.072)
                               0.076         0.109           0.033                                  0.047              0.092         0.045
             Repayment                                                                 Repayment
                              (0.039)       (0.039)         (0.055)                                (0.027)           (0.036)        (0.045)
             Difference
                              -0.110*       -0.147*          0.037                     Difference
                                                                                                  -0.108**            -0.096         0.011
                              (0.066)       (0.081)         (0.108)                                (0.054)           (0.063)        (0.085)

∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Penalty interest is charged by the lender if a borrower is late in making an expected payment.
A loan is charged off if the lender deems that there is no probability that it will be repaid. Standard errors in parentheses and p-values
in square brackets. p-values are for a χ2 -test of the hypothesis that the difference in differences is equal to zero. Ex-Ante incentive is the
incentive that the referrer faced when choosing a friend to refer. Ex-Post incentive is the incentive that the referrer faced after the loan had
been approved. Approval implies the loan had to be approved in order to earn the bonus and repayment implies the loan had to be repaid
in order to earn the bonus.



chargeoff decision (yes or no) on all but one of the 240 loans that have reached maturity as of this
writing.26
   Each panel in Table 5 shows the mean of these four loan performance measures, organized
by treatment groups. It also shows the difference in means holding either the ex-ante or ex-post
incentive fixed. These differences are our key results. Relating these back to Section 4.2 the right
most cell in the top row of each table gives S( A), the right most cell in the second row gives S( R)
the bottom cell in the first column gives N ( a) and the second column gives N (r ). Finally, the
bottom right cell in each table gives |S( R) − S( A)|.
  26 The     results do not change qualitatively if we arbitrarily assign this loan as being charged off or not.




                                                                      20
6.3   Enforcement Effects
Table 5 provides eight estimates of the peer enforcement effect, two for each measure of default.
The bottom cell in the first column of each sub-table shows an estimate of N ( a) and the bottom
cell in the second column shows an estimate of N (r ). The point estimate for each of the eight
differences is negative, suggesting that adding the ex-post repayment incentive decreases the
incidence of default. Five of the eight estimates are statistically significant from zero, despite our
small sample.
    In each case the implied magnitude of the enforcement effect is large; e.g., an 11 percentage
point reduction in chargeoff likelihood, on a base of 16%. The size of the impacts is also large
given the size of the bonus (R100) and the average loan size. It seems unlikely that these results
could be driven by referrers transferring R100 to the referred to encourage repayment. In all, the
results suggest that small referral incentive create social pressure that lead to large reductions in
default.
    It is interesting to ask how the size of the effect compares to the impact of an incentive given
directly to the borrower – rather than to a peer. We have one bit of evidence from a similar
context. Karlan and Zinman (2009) conducted a dynamic incentive experiment with a similar,
although much larger, South African lender in 2004. That intervention is somewhat different in
that the dynamic incentive did not come in the form of a cash bonus, but rather in the form of a
reduced rate on a future loan. On average, the dynamic incentive reduced the interest rate on a
future loan by 3.85% and led to a roughly 2.5% point increase in likelihood that the current loan
was paid on time. This result suggests that to have a similar impact as our study, a direct incentive
would need to be very large - in the order of a 12 percentage point reduction in the interest rate
(effectively making the interest rate on the next loan zero). This again suggests that at least part of
the enforcement effect in our experiment reflects social pressure, rather than simply the transfer
of cash from the referrer to the borrower.


6.4   Selection Effects
Table 5 also provides eight estimates of the [reduced-form] peer selection effect, two for each
measure of default. Relating these back to Section 4.2, the rightmost cell in the top row of each
table gives S( A), and the rightmost cell in the second row gives S( R). Each of the eight point
estimates is statistically insignificant and positive, so there is no evidence that a small referral
incentive induces screening on repayment type that reduces default. In fact, if we take the point
estimates seriously they imply negative selection on repayment type. This outcome is consistent
with our model if there is strong intentional positive selection on malleability. As discussed in
Section 4.3, this could lead to the crowding out of the incentive to select on repayment type.
    The bottom-right cell in each panel of Table 5 estimates the difference-in-differences (DD)
across the two different estimates of the referral incentive effects on default rates. Recall from
Section 4 that if S( A) = S( R) we can rule out selection on malleability. A zero estimate of the DD



                                                  21
indicates that malleability is uncorrelated with ex-ante repayment type. And indeed none of the
four estimates is significantly different than zero. This suggests that, in our setting, selection on
malleability and the comparability problem do not loom large. It bears emphasizing, however,
that these are very imprecisely estimated zeros: each of the four confidence intervals includes
economically large selection on malleability.


6.5   Estimates of Whether Referrers Have Information
The DD estimate and the estimates of the selection effect are also relevant to determining whether
referrers have information. In Section (6.1) we argued that E(λ|r ) > E(λ| a). This assumption,
following the analysis of Section 4.4, in combination with the findings above that S( A) = 0 and
S( R) − S( A) = 0, suggest that referrers have no useful information for the lender (again subject
to the above mentioned caveats on the distribution of repayment types and our wide confidence
intervals).


6.6   Improving Precision and Checking Robustness
Under the assumption that malleability is uncorrelated with repayment type, which is born out
by the above DD estimates, our model implies that we can estimate the extent of peer enforcement
and selection with greater precision, using regressions that pool across all four treatment arms:

                                 yi = α + β1 en f orcei + β2 selecti + ei

where yi is one of the four measures of default, en f orcei is an indicator with value 1 if client i was
referred by someone with the ex-post repayment incentive, and selecti is an indicator with value
1 if the client was referred by someone with the ex-ante repayment incentive. Results from this
regression (without controls) are presented in Table 6. For each of the four outcome measures we
see a large and statistically significant reduction in default associated with the enforcement in-
centive, and a smaller and statistically insignificant increase in default coming from the selection
incentive. These results sharpen the key inferences from the means comparisons in Table 5: there
is a large enforcement effect, and no (or a perverse) selection effect.
    Appendix A shows that these results are robust to various specifications that control for the
baseline characteristics of borrowers or referrers.


7     Alternative Explanations
In this section we discuss alternative interpretations of the results.




                                                   22
Table 6: Pooled Impact of Selection and Enforcement Treatments on Key Outcome Variables: OLS
Without Controls

                                                                                                      Loan
                                 Outcome             Penalty Not Paid Portion
                                                                                                     Charged
                                 Measure             Interest on Time Owing
                                                                                                       Off

                              Enforcement -0.188***                   -0.094*        -0.129**         -0.100**
                                           (0.061)                    (0.049)         (0.054)          (0.042)

                                 Selection             0.067           0.039           0.050            0.040
                                                      (0.060)         (0.047)         (0.052)          (0.041)

                                 Constant            0.419***        0.197***        0.196***         0.149***
                                                     (0.054)         (0.045)         (0.046)          (0.039)

                                      N                  245             240             240              239

∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Penalty interest is charged by the lender if a borrower is late in making an expected payment.
A loan is charged off if the lender deems that there is no probability that it will be repaid. Standard errors in parentheses. Ex-Ante incentive
is the incentive that the referrer faced when choosing a friend to refer. Ex-Post incentive is the incentive that the referrer faced after the loan
had been approved. Approval implies the loan had to be approved in order to earn the bonus and repayment implies the loan had to be
repaid in order to earn the bonus.



7.1        Income Effects
In theory, the enforcement effect could be driven by side-payments from the referrer to referred
that produce an income effect on loan repayment. In practice this channel seems implausible, for
several reasons. First, the bonus was not paid out until after the loan was repaid, and the borrow-
ers in our sample are liquidity constrained (as evidenced by the fact that they are borrowing at
high rates). Second, even our smaller point estimates imply default reductions that seem too large
(about R500 on the average loan) to be explained by a small increase in income (maximum R100).
Third, as discussed above (Section 6.3), the enforcement effects here are large in comparison to
effects from bonuses paid directly to the borrower.


7.2        Signaling
The repayment rates in Table 5 consistently show that the highest default rates occur for those
clients who were in the ex-ante repayment group and moved to the ex-post approval group. In
this treatment group, Opportunity phoned the referrer and told her that the bonus would no
longer be paid upon repayment. It is possible that this signaled that the lender was not really
interested in repayment. If this explanation is correct, then our estimate of selection conditional
on being in the ex-post approval group would be biased in favor of showing no screening, while
our estimate of enforcement conditional on the ex-ante repayment incentive would be biased in



                                                                       23
favor of finding an enforcement effect.
    There are three reasons why this should not be a concern. First, recall that we can estimate
the enforcement effect and selection effect without relying on the ex-ante repayment/ex-post ap-
proval arm. Second, as discussed above, it is never the case that the difference-in-differences is
statistically different from zero, implying that these potentially biased estimates of selection and
enforcement are not statistically different from the unbiased ones. Third, if the signaling story
were correct we would anticipate that repayment rates for the referrer would also be affected.
But the difference between the default rates of the “signaled” and the “un-signaled” is not sig-
nificantly different from zero for any of the four default measures ( −0.060 (p = 0.414), −0.030
(p = 0.473), −0.019 ( p = 0.664) and −0.006 (p = 0.895)): the data does not support the signaling
story. If anything the point estimates suggest that the “signaled” were better repayers.


7.3   Impatience
Referrers who were assigned to the ex-ante repayment incentive were promised a bonus that
would not be paid until the referrer repaid their loans. One might therefore expect fewer referrers
to make a referral in this treatment group, and/or that those making referrals would be more
patient (and hence be more willing to and effective at enforcing loans). Either difference could,
in principle, create issues for the identification of screening effects. In practice, such issues do
not loom large. First, the number of referred clients does not differ across the ex-ante treatment
groups (99 in the ex-ante approval group v. 94 in the ex-ante repayment group, p = 0.516).
Second, if referrers in the ex-ante repayment group were more patient and this impacted on how
much social pressure they placed on their referreds, then we would expect to see evidence for
this in the size of the enforcement effect; i.e., estimates using the ex-ante repayment group should
show larger effects As discussed above, there is no evidence for this, albeit with large confidence
intervals.


8     Conclusions
We formalize and implement a field experiment design and show it is possible to identify peer
selection and peer enforcement effects separately, even when peers select on malleablity to en-
forcement pressure. Novel features of the design include experimental arms without enforcement
incentives (see also Gunnsteinsson (2012)), combinations of experimental arms that produce dif-
ferent estimates of selection and enforcement effects, and a combination that estimates the extent
of selection on hidden action (malleability). We hope that our analysis of identification will pave
the way for further progress in identifying interactions between hidden information and hidden
action, using multi-stage experiments as well as other methods.
    Our empirical results imply large peer enforcement effects. They also imply peer selection that
is only partly effective: peers refer applicants who are likely to be approved, but do not end up



                                                24
producing any ex-ante information on repayment type that is useful to the lender on the margin
(despite evidence suggesting that they exert at least some effort to select better repayment types).
   Both theory and practice suggest that results may be different elsewhere – e.g., in settings
that lack a well-functioning credit bureau, or with contracts that use larger referral bonuses – and
hence our experiment is designed to be portable. Our experiment can be layered on top of any
individual liability lending operation, and could be modified to work with joint liability lending.
Given the implications for increased profits for the lender, the results from our demonstration
could help convince lenders (and firms in other product markets) that it is worth experimenting
with referral mechanisms.




                                                25
References
Ahlin, C. and R.M. Townsend, “Using repayment data to test across models of joint liability
 lending,” Economic Journal, 2007, 117 (517), 1253–67.

Armendáriz, B., J. Morduch, and Inc ebrary, The economics of microfinance, MIT press, 2010.

Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo, “Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Constraints Using a
  Directed Lending Program,” CEPR Discussion Papers, 2004.

  , , R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan, “The miracle of microfinance? Evidence from a random-
  ized evaluation,” Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Working
  Paper, May, 2009.

Banerjee, A.V. and A.F. Newman, “Occupational choice and the process of development,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (2), 274–298.

  , T. Besley, and T.W. Guinnane, “Thy neighbor’s keeper: The design of a credit cooperative
  with theory and a test,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (2), 491.

Beaman, Lori and Jeremy Magruder, “Who gets the job referral? Evidence from a social networks
  experiment,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3574–3593.

Benabou, R. and J. Tirole, “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003,
  70 (3), 489–520.

Besley, T. and M. Ghatak, “Competition and incentives with motivated agents,” The American
  economic review, 2005, 95 (3), 616–636.

  and S. Coate, “Group lending, repayment incentives and social collateral,” Journal of Develop-
  ment Economics, 1995, 46 (1), 1–18.

Bond, P. and A.S. Rai, “Cosigned vs. group loans,” Journal of Development Economics, 2008, 85
  (1-2), 58–80.

Carpena, F., S. Cole, J. Shapiro, and B. Zia, “Liability Structure in Small-Scale Finance: Evidence
  from a Natural Experiment,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series, Vol, 2010.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R Cullen, “Selection
  on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance,” The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 178–219.

Fischer, G., “Contract structure, risk sharing, and investment choice,” London School of Economics
  working paper, 2010.

Galor, O. and J. Zeira, “Income distribution and macroeconomics,” The Review of Economic Studies,
 1993, 60 (1), 35–52.


                                                26
Ghatak, M., “Group lending, local information and peer selection,” Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics, 1999, 60 (1), 27–50.

   and T.W. Guinnane, “The economics of lending with joint liability: theory and practice1,”
  Journal of development economics, 1999, 60 (1), 195–228.

Giné, X. and D.S. Karlan, “Group versus Individual Liability: A Field Experiment in the Philip-
  pines,” 2010. Working Paper.

Giné, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang, “Credit Market Consequences of Improved
  Personal Identification: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi,” Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2011.

Gneezy, U. and A. Rustichini, “A Fine is a Price,” The Journal of Legal Studies, 2000, 29 (1), 1–17.

Gunnsteinsson, Snaebjorn, “Information Assymmetries in Crop Insurance,” 2012. mimeo.

Karlan, D. and J. Zinman, “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries
 With a Consumer Credit Field Experiment,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (6), 1993–2008.

   and , “Expanding credit access: Using randomized supply decisions to estimate the im-
  pacts,” Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23 (1), 433.

   and , “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Randomized Credit Scoring for Impact
  Evaluation,” Science, 2011, 332 (6035), 1278.

Klonner, S. and A.S. Rai, “Cosigners as Collateral,” Journal of Development Economics, 2010.

Mel, S. De, D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff, “Returns to Capital in Microenterprises: Evidence
 from a Field Experiment*,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (4), 1329–1372.

Rai, A.S. and T. Sjöström, “Is Grameen lending efficient? Repayment incentives and insurance
  in village economies,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2004, 71 (1), 217.

Stiglitz, J.E., “Peer monitoring and credit markets,” The World Bank Economic Review, 1990, 4 (3),
  351.

   and A. Weiss, “Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information,” The American economic
  review, 1981, 71 (3), 393–410.

Varian, Hal, “Monitoring Agents With Other Agents,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Eco-
  nomics: JITE, 1990, 146, 153–174.




                                                 27
A     Robustness to Controls
We now check whether the results are robust to adding controls. We start by estimating the
enforcement or screening effect separately using equations of the form:

                                      yi = αi + βTi + γXi + ei ,                                   (5)

where yi is again a measure of default, Ti is a dummy variable which takes on value 1 if i is
“treated”, and Xi is a set of controls for either referrer or borrower baseline characteristics (these
sets of characteristics are highly collinear). When estimating the enforcement effect here, Ti = 1
if the referrer was given the ex-post repayment incentive. We condition on the ex-ante incentive
by running regressions separately for the samples that received the ex-ante approval incentive
(Tables A.1 and A.2, Panel (a)) or the ex-ante repayment incentive (Panel (b)). When controlling
for the referred’s application score we include a dummy variable for whether the client came in
after the change in application score procedure and also interact that term with the application
score. Tables A.1 and A.2 show that adding controls does not alter the coefficients appreciably.
    To test for selection effects we repeat the above exercise with Ti being an indicator for whether
the referrer was given an ex-ante repayment incentive. The results are reported in Table A.3.
In Panel (a) we restrict the sample to those given the ex-post approval incentive and in Panel
(b) we restrict the sample to those given the ex-post repayment incentive. For these regressions
we control for referrer characteristics as the referred characteristics are endogenous. Again, the
results are robust to including controls.
    Finally, we again pool the data and assume that the enforcement and selection effects are
independent of each other. That is we run the regression

                            yi = α + β1 en f orcei + β2 selecti + β3 Xi + ei

where Xi is a set of controls. In this case we can only control for referrer characteristics as once
again the referred characteristics are endogenous. Table A.4 contains the results, which do not
differ significantly from those reported in Table 6 without controls.




                                                  28
Table A.1: Enforcement Effects. The Impact of Ex-Post Repayment Incentive Within Ex-Ante
Treatment Group: OLS with Controls for Referrer Characteristics


                   (a) Ex-Ante Approval Incentive                                      (b) Ex-Ante Repayment Incentive

                      Penalty Not Paid Portion Charged                                      Penalty Not Paid Portion Charged
                      Interest on Time Owing     Off                                        Interest on Time Owing     Off

        Ex-Post                                                              Ex-Post
                Left Out Left Out Left Out Left Out                                  Left Out Left Out Left Out Left Out
       Approval                                                             Approval

       Ex-Post   -0.144           -0.188** -0.184** -0.166**                 Ex-Post  -0.208*             -0.115      -0.157*     -0.128*
      Repayment (0.097)            (0.084) (0.084) (0.068)                  Repayment (0.107)            (0.084)      (0.091)     (0.076)

        Mean in                                                              Mean in
                        0.389       0.206       0.186        0.155                            0.519       0.226        0.256       0.189
         Ex-post                                                              Ex-post
                       (0.064)     (0.054)     (0.054)      (0.047)                          (0.069)     (0.058)      (0.076)     (0.054)
        approval                                                             approval

        Controls         All         All          All         All            Controls          All         All          All         All

            N            125         121         121          121                N             120         117          117         117



∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Penalty interest is charged by the lender if a borrower is late in making an expected payment.
A loan is charged off if the lender deems that there is no probability that it will be repaid. Standard errors in parentheses. Ex-Ante incentive
is the incentive that the referrer faced when choosing a friend to refer. Ex-Post incentive is the incentive that the referrer faced after the
loan had been approved. Approval implies the loan had to be approved in order to earn the bonus and repayment implies the loan had
to be repaid in order to earn the bonus. Controls: Female, Age, Disposable Income, Salary Occurrence, Education, Application Score, ITC
Score, Job Type, Requested Loan Amount, Requested Term, Branch, Application Month, Application year. All controls are for referrer
characteristics. Categorical variables are entered as fixed effects.




                                                                       29
Table A.2: Enforcement Effects. The Impact of Ex-Post Repayment Incentive Within Ex-Ante
Treatment Group: OLS with Controls for Referred Characteristics


                   (a) Ex-Ante Approval Incentive                                         (b) Ex-Ante Repayment Incentive


                      Penalty Not Paid Portion Charged                                         Penalty Not Paid Portion Charged
                      Interest on Time Owing     Off                                           Interest on Time Owing     Off

        Ex-Post                                                                 Ex-Post
                Left Out Left Out Left Out Left Out                                     Left Out Left Out Left Out Left Out
       Approval                                                                Approval

       Ex-Post  -0.100** -0.127** -0.120** -0.115**                           Ex-Post  -0.312**            -0.072*     -0.066     -0.098*
      Repayment (0.034) (0.045) (0.039) (0.046)                              Repayment (0.095)             (0.033)    (0.040)     (0.046)

        Mean in                                                                Mean in
                        0.389       0.206        0.186       0.155                              0.519       0.226      0.256       0.189
         Ex-post                                                                Ex-post
                       (0.064)     (0.054)      (0.054)     (0.047)                            (0.069)     (0.058)    (0.076)     (0.054)
        approval                                                               approval

        Controls         All         All          All          All             Controls           All       All         All         All

            N            125         121          121          121                  N            120        119         119         118



∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Penalty interest is charged by the lender if a borrower is late in making an expected payment.
A loan is charged off if the lender deems that there is no probability that it will be repaid. Standard errors in parentheses. Ex-Ante incentive
is the incentive that the referrer faced when choosing a friend to refer. Ex-Post incentive is the incentive that the referrer faced after the
loan had been approved. Approval implies the loan had to be approved in order to earn the bonus and repayment implies the loan had
to be repaid in order to earn the bonus. Controls: Female, Age, Disposable Income, Salary Occurrence, Education, Application Score,
Application Score Post May 2009, ITC Score, Job Type, Requested Loan Amount, Requested Term, Branch, Application Month, Application
year. All controls are for referrer characteristics. Categorical variables are entered as fixed effects.




                                                                        30
Table A.3: Selection Effects. The Impact of Ex-Ante Repayment Incentive Within Ex-Post Treat-
ment Group: OLS with Controls


                   (a) Ex-Post Approval Incentive                                       (b) Ex-Post Repayment Incentive


                      Penalty Not Paid Portion Charged                                      Penalty Not Paid Portion Charged
                      Interest on Time Owing     Off                                        Interest on Time Owing     Off

       Ex-Ante                                                              Ex-Ante
                Left Out Left Out Left Out Left Out                                  Left Out Left Out Left Out Left Out
       Approval                                                             Approval

       Ex-Ante   0.046              0.046       0.035       0.027           Ex-Ante   0.007               0.009        0.018       0.028
      Repayment (0.041)            (0.035)     (0.041)     (0.031)         Repayment (0.100)             (0.080)      (0.075)     (0.063)

       Mean in                                                              Mean in
                        0.389       0.206       0.186       0.155                             0.258       0.095        0.076       0.047
       Ex-Ante                                                              Ex-Ante
                       (0.064)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.047)                           (0.054)     (0.037)      (0.039)     (0.027)
       Approval                                                             Approval

        Controls         All         All         All         All             Controls          All         All          All         All

            N            113         111         111         111                 N             132         129          129         128



∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Penalty interest is charged by the lender if a borrower is late in making an expected payment.
A loan is charged off if the lender deems that there is no probability that it will be repaid. Standard errors in parentheses. Ex-Ante incentive
is the incentive that the referrer faced when choosing a friend to refer. Ex-Post incentive is the incentive that the referrer faced after the
loan had been approved. Approval implies the loan had to be approved in order to earn the bonus and repayment implies the loan had
to be repaid in order to earn the bonus. Controls: Female, Age, Disposable Income, Salary Occurrence, Education, Application Score, Job
Type, Requested Loan Amount, Requested Term, Branch, Application Month, Application year. All controls are for referrer characteristics.
Categorical variables are entered as fixed effects.




                                                                      31
Table A.4: Pooled Impact of Selection and Enforcement Treatments on Key Outcome Variables:
OLS With Controls (same as Table 6 but with controls)


                                                                                                    Loan
                                 Outcome             Penalty Not Paid Portion
                                                                                                   Charged
                                 Measure             Interest on Time Owing
                                                                                                     Off

                              Enforcement -0.168*** -0.117**                        -0.130**        -0.109**
                                           (0.065)   (0.055)                         (0.054)         (0.047)

                                 Selection            -0.009            0.021        0.018            0.032
                                                     (0.074)           (0.061)      (0.062)          (0.053)

                                 Mean in              0.389             0.206        0.186            0.155
                                 Left Out            (0.064)           (0.054)      (0.054)          (0.047)

                                 Controls               All             All            All              All

                                      N                 245             240            240             239


∗∗∗   ⇒ p < 0.01, ∗∗ ⇒ p < 0.05, ∗ ⇒ p < 0.1. Penalty interest is charged by the lender if a borrower is late in making an expected payment.
A loan is charged off if the lender deems that there is no probability that it will be repaid. Standard errors in parentheses. Ex-Ante incentive
is the incentive that the referrer faced when choosing a friend to refer. Ex-Post incentive is the incentive that the referrer faced after the
loan had been approved. Approval implies the loan had to be approved in order to earn the bonus and repayment implies the loan had
to be repaid in order to earn the bonus. Controls: Female, Age, Disposable Income, Salary Occurrence, Education, Application Score, ITC
score, Job Type, Requested Loan Amount, Requested Term, Branch, Application Month, Application year. All controls are for referrer
characteristics. Categorical variables are entered as fixed effects.




                                                                       32
