NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF AGE IN JURY SELECTION AND TRIAL OUTCOMES
Shamena Anwar
Patrick Bayer
Randi Hjalmarsson
Working Paper 17887
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17887
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

Previously circulated as "A Fair and Impartial Jury? The Role of Age in Jury Selection and Trial Outcomes."
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Shamena Anwar, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Age in Jury Selection and Trial Outcomes
Shamena Anwar, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson
NBER Working Paper No. 17887
March 2012, Revised May 2013
JEL No. J16,K0,K14,K4,K41
ABSTRACT
This paper uses data from 700+ felony trials in Sarasota and Lake Counties in Florida from 2000-2010
to examine the role of age in jury selection and trial outcomes. The results imply that prosecutors are
more likely to use their peremptory challenges to exclude younger members of the jury pool, while
defense attorneys exclude older potential jurors. To examine the causal impact of age on trial outcomes,
the paper employs a research design that isolates the effect of the random variation in the age composition
of the pool of eligible jurors called for jury duty. Consistent with the jury selection patterns, the empirical
evidence implies that older jurors are significantly more likely to convict. Results are robust to the
inclusion of broad set of controls including county, time, and judge fixed effects. These findings imply
that many cases are decided differently for reasons that are completely independent of the true nature
of the evidence in the case – i.e., that there is substantial randomness in the application of criminal
justice.
Shamena Anwar
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave
Heinz College, Hamburg Hall Room 2116D
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
shamena@andrew.cmu.edu
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu

Randi Hjalmarsson
Queen Mary
University of London
School of Economics and Finance
Mile End Road
London E1 4NS, UK
r.hjalmarsson@qmul.ac.uk

I. Introduction
The Sixth Amendment right to a fair and impartial jury of one’s peers is the bedrock of the
American criminal justice system. Yet citizens are not randomly chosen to sit on juries. Instead,
attorneys have the power to shape the composition of the seated jury through the use of peremptory
challenges.1 Historically, such challenges could be used to exclude potential members of the jury
“without cause, without explanation and without judicial approval” and, not surprisingly, this has
raised concerns about the systematic exclusion of jurors on the basis of observable attributes (e.g.,
race, gender, age) and the ultimate impartiality of seated juries.
In recent years, in Batson v. Kentucky (1986) and J.E.B. v. Alabama (1994), the US Supreme
Court has ruled that challenges motivated solely by race or gender violate the equal protection clause
of the US Constitution. The Court has not extended this protection to any other category of juror
characteristics and thus, under current case law, it is perfectly legal for attorneys to exclude potential
jurors on the basis of any other juror attribute.2 A spirited debate continues in the courts and academy
about whether discrimination on these bases should be allowed and even whether peremptory
challenges should be abolished altogether.3
With this broad debate in mind, the goal of this paper is to examine the role of an important
unprotected category, age, in jury selection and trial outcomes. To date, very little is known about
whether attorneys systematically exclude potential jurors on the basis of age or whether juror age is
even a clear predictor of conviction rates.4 The lack of compelling evidence to date is likely due, in
large part, to the fact that few courts systematically collect age-specific data for summoned and/or
seated jurors (Entzel, Dunlop, and Rothman 2000). A sparse literature has examined the relationship
between juror age and trial outcomes using post-trial surveys of jurors; these studies have generally
found no evidence or inconsistent evidence of an effect of juror age on verdict, but potential biases due

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"!

See Beck (1998) or Page (2005) for more detailed discussion of the historical evolution of the use of
peremptory challenges in the United States.!
#!One exception is the Connecticut Supreme Court’s extension to outlaw peremptory challenges on the basis of
religion (State v. Hodge 1999).
$! Weber v. Strippit, Inc (1999) declined to extend Batson to peremptory challenges based on age. See also
Marder (1995), Reid (2004), Montz and Montz (2000), Fahey (1997), Chase and Graffy (1997), Montoya (1996),
Broderick (1992), Hoffman (1997), and Page (2005).
%! Age discrimination has been studied extensively in the labor market and other contexts - see, for example,
Johnson and Neumark (1997), Macinol (2005) and Neumark and Stock (1999).!

2
!

to the non-random selection of the jury have not been addressed in this literature.5,6 There is also
limited evidence, though much of it is anecdotal, that attorneys exercise their peremptory challenges to
exclude jurors on the basis of age.7,8
To examine the role of age in jury selection and decisions, we have assembled a data set for
over 700 felony trials in Lake and Sarasota Counties, Florida between 2000-2010. In both counties, we
observe the race, gender, and age not only of each member of the seated jury but also the jury pool.
This allows us to examine how juror attributes affect the propensity of members of the jury pool to be
seated.9 Moreover, for Lake County, we observe the reason that an excluded member of the jury pool
did not make it onto the seated jury - i.e., whether he/she was excluded for cause, or excluded by a
peremptory challenge by the prosecutor or defense attorney, respectively. Finally, for each trial we
observe detailed information about the defendant and criminal charges as well as the jury’s verdict on
each charge.
Our analysis proceeds in two main parts. We begin by examining the role of juror age in the
selection process. Using the Lake County data, we show that prosecutors are systematically more
likely to exclude younger members of the jury pool, while defense attorneys do the exact opposite –
they disproportionately exclude older members of the jury pool. As a result, both the youngest and
oldest members of the jury pool are less likely to be seated than those in the middle of the age
distribution. Interestingly, this pattern of selection contrasts with that for the protected categories of
race and gender. For these categories, we find that both sides (prosecutors and defense attorneys) are

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
&! There

is a much more extensive literature that looks at other demographic characteristics, such as race and
gender, using both post-trial surveys and mock juries; mock juries have not been extensively used to study age.
Reviews of this research indicate that there is little evidence of a consistent and significant relationship between
demographic characteristics and verdicts in criminal trials (Devine et al 2000, Bonazzoli 1998-1999, and
Overland 2008).!
'! See Garvey et al (2004), Mills and Bohannon (1980), Baldwin and McConville (1980), Moran and Comfort
(1982), and Eisenberg et al (2001) for examples of studies of the relationship between juror age and verdict that
rely on juror recall.!
(! Many attorneys openly acknowledge using age as one basis for peremptory challenges. It is also routine for
age-based explanations to be offered to the courts when peremptory strikes are alleged to be improperly based on
race and/or gender. See Entzel, Dunlop and Rothman (2000) for relevant cases.
)!Baldus et. al (2001) study the use of peremptory strikes in Philadelphia capital cases. With regards to age, they
found that prosecutors were more likely to strike younger jurors while the opposite was found for the defense.
*!In Anwar, Bayer, Hjalmarsson (2012), we use this data to study the impact of jury race on verdict. We find
evidence that: (i) juries formed from all-white jury pools convict black defendants significantly (16 percentage
points) more often than white defendants and (ii) this gap in conviction rates is entirely eliminated when the jury
pool includes at least one black member.!

3
!

about equally likely to exclude white versus black and male versus female members of the jury pool.
Having established the systematic use of age in jury selection, the second part of our analysis
considers the role of juror age on trial outcomes. Establishing the causal impact of any juror
characteristic on trial outcomes is generally not straightforward, precisely because of the peremptory
challenge process. In particular, the seated jury on any trial is made up of those members of the jury
pool that made it through the jury selection process and, as a result, the composition of the seated jury
is certainly not random. Given concerns about the non-random selection of the seated jury, our
research design instead exploits the variation in the composition of the jury pool across trials, which is
driven primarily by which eligible jurors in the county are randomly called for jury duty on a given
day.10 In essence, we examine how conviction rates vary with the age composition of the jury pool
rather than the seated jury. This day-to-day variation in the composition of the jury pool does in fact
appear to be random – the composition of the pool is uncorrelated with the characteristics of the
defendant and the criminal charge. Importantly, the age composition of the jury pool is also highly
correlated with the composition of the seated jury: a higher fraction of older (younger) jurors are
seated when there is a higher fraction of older (younger) jurors in the pool drawn for that trial.
The evidence regarding the impact of the jury pool on conviction rates is straightforward and
striking: when the average age of the jury pool is greater than 50 (which happens in about half of the
trials), defendants are convicted 79 percent of the time. In contrast, when the average age of the jury
pool is less than 50, conviction rates are only 68 percent. These differences are statistically significant.
More generally, we find that conviction rates increase by about 1 percentage point for each year
increase in the average age of the jury pool. A clear and robust relationship between the jury age and
conviction rates is also evident in instrumental variable (IV) regressions of conviction rates on the age
of the seated jury that use corresponding measures of the jury pool as instruments. Tracking the
reduced-form results very closely, our preferred IV estimates imply that conviction rates increase by 1
percentage point with each year increase in the average age of the seated jury and are 15 percentage

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"+!A

handful of studies utilize random variation in other aspects of the criminal justice system. Abrams, Bertrand,
and Mullainathan (forthcoming) use the random assignment of judges to study racial disparities in sentencing.
Kling (2006) uses random judge assignment as a source of exogenous variation in sentence length. Abrams and
Yoon (2007) use the random assignment of felony cases to public defenders to study the effect of attorney ability
on case outcomes.!

4
!

points higher when the average age of the seated jury is greater versus less than 50. Our findings are
robust to the inclusion of a broad set of controls for the racial and gender composition of the jury and a
series of county, time, and judge fixed effects. A qualitatively similar pattern of results is found in
both Lake and Sarasota Counties.
While the effects of jury age on conviction rates do not vary with the race of the defendants,
they do vary with the gender of the defendant. Because the majority of the defendants in the sample
are male, the results for male defendants mirror the overall results closely, revealing a strong positive
relationship between jury age and conviction rates. The results for female defendants, on the other
hand, reveal a strong negative relationship between jury age and conviction rates. This suggestive
finding raises the possibility that older jurors may be more sympathetic to female defendants or may
have lower initial priors about their criminality.
A limitation of the analysis that we conduct in our paper, and essentially any analysis like it, is
that ultimately we cannot say for certain whether it is age itself, rather than unobserved factors
correlated with age, that drive our results related to jury selection and decision-making. We close the
paper, therefore, with a more general examination of the relationship between age and conservatism,
especially as it relates to issues of criminal justice. Since the existing academic literature reports
mixed results, we conduct our own analysis of the age-conservatism link using the 1972 to 2010
rounds of the General Social Surveys. We consider three survey questions that assess whether
individuals: (i) are in favor of the death penalty for persons convicted of murder, (ii) believe their local
courts are too harsh, too lenient, or about right towards criminals and, (iii) consider their own political
views to be liberal or conservative. In each case, the results reveal that conservatism increases
significantly with age, especially between the ages of 20 and 40. Interestingly, non-parametric plots of
conviction rates by the average age of the jury pool also reveal a much steeper relationship at lower
ages, suggesting that our main results are driven primarily by shifting from especially young pools to
those closer to the median.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides background information
on jury selection in Sarasota and Lake County while Section III describes the data. Section IV presents
our analysis of the jury selection process and Section V presents our findings on the impact of jury age
5
!

composition on conviction rates, including a number of alternative specifications that establish the
robustness of our main findings. Section VI discusses the relationship between age and conservatism.
Finally, Section VII concludes by discussing the implications of our findings for the equal application
of the law.

II. The Jury Selection Process
Our analysis is based on a sample of non-capital felony jury trials in Sarasota County and
Lake County, Florida. Each county has a master jury list, which is a list of potential jurors that is
compiled from driver’s license records. Both counties use a jury management software program to
randomly choose individuals from this master list to receive a summons requesting that they appear at
the courthouse on a particular date. Potential jurors are only eligible to serve if they are a U.S. citizen,
are a legal resident of either Sarasota or Lake County, able to speak/understand English, and not under
a legal disability (felony conviction or incompetence). In addition, some individuals who receive a
summons are eligible for an automatic exemption and need not appear in court.11
Individuals who are not exempt and who are eligible to serve check-in on the date summoned;
upon check-in, they are entered into the jury management software program, which randomly chooses
individuals to participate in a particular panel. It is important to note that the jury management
software program only utilizes data about jurors and does not have information about the defendants
or case characteristics. Individuals whose names are called out enter the courtroom to participate in
voir dire.
During the voir dire process, both the attorneys (defense and prosecution) and the judge ask
the potential jurors a series of questions, which are designed to determine whether the individual is fit
to serve as an impartial member of the jury. Some individuals are simply excused from service,
perhaps because of a medical condition. Other individuals are removed for cause by the judge because
they cannot be impartial or follow the law. Both prosecutor and defense attorneys can request a

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
11

Individuals can be automatically excused if: (i) they are an expectant mother, (ii) they are a parent who is not
employed full time and has custody of a child under 6, (iii) they are a full time law enforcement officer, (iv) they
served as a juror in Sarasota county in the last 365 days, (v) they are responsible for the care of another who is
incapable of caring for himself, or (vi) they are 70 or older and wish not to report (at this time or permanently).

6
!

removal for cause, and there is generally no limit to the number of such requests. Finally, both the
prosecutor and defense attorneys have the option to use peremptory challenges to strike potential
jurors from the jury. Such challenges are differentiated from removals for cause in that attorneys do
not have to state the reason for the strike and there are a limited number of peremptory challenges
available to both the prosecution and defense. Though the attorneys do not have to provide a reason
for dismissing a juror, a peremptory challenge cannot be used to strike a juror solely on the basis of
race or gender, although striking based on age is permitted.

If the offense is punishable by

imprisonment of more than 12 months, then attorneys for both the defense and prosecution have six
challenges; for all other offenses, there are three challenges. The first six jurors to survive the voir
dire make up the seated jury. In addition, 0-2 alternate jurors are also chosen at this time through the
same process.12
After hearing the evidence, the six seated jurors need to come to a unanimous decision of
guilty or not guilty for each of the defendant’s charges. If jurors cannot come to a unanimous decision
for a particular charge, there will be a hung jury for that charge. This typically results in the defendant
being retried on that particular charge.13

III. Data
III.A. Description of Jury Data from Sarasota and Lake Counties
Our analysis is conducted using felony jury trial data for Lake County and Sarasota County,
Florida. As each county circuit court maintains their own records of jury trials, these data were
obtained through separate requests to each county.14 Since a standardized record system is not used

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12

The jury selection process described above pertains only to non-capital cases in Lake and Sarasota County.
While many of the core details remain the same, the process can vary slightly when considering different
jurisdictions or capital cases. The main differences are where the master jury list is composed from, the number
of peremptory challenges the prosecution and defense have, and the size of the seated jury.
13
Since a hung jury is an interim disposition from the court’s perspective, most courts do not systematically
collect and publish statistics regarding hung jury rates (Hannaford-Agor et. al 2002). Hannaford-Agor et. al
(2002) began to address this issue in a study of hung jury rates for 30 state courts and federal courts between
1980 and 1997. They found that about five percent of state felony jury trials resulted in a hung jury, though there
was substantial variation across jurisdictions. Federal hung jury rates for criminal trials were even lower,
between two and three percent, and those for civil trials were lower still.
14
To obtain the data used in this paper, we sent data request letters to every felony court in fifteen states. Most
courts indicated that they were unable to provide data because either judicial records are excluded from public
records request or these data are not collected or maintained.

7
!

throughout Florida, the type of information and format of the data available vary somewhat across
counties. Thus, the majority of our analysis is conducted with a single, combined data set of Lake and
Sarasota County trials, using those variables that can be commonly identified in both counties. The
following is a brief description of the data obtained for each county as well as the combined data set.
The office of the Clerk of the Sarasota County Circuit Court provided us with information on
all felony trials for which jury selection began between January 1, 2004 and June 1, 2009.15 For each
trial, we have data for both the defendant and the jury. The defendant data includes the name, race, and
gender of the defendant as well as information about the charged offenses, including a detailed crime
code, the date that the offense was filed, the date that the judgment was handed down, and the verdict
for each offense. For our main analysis, we restrict our sample to trials in which at least one of the
charged offenses resulted in a verdict of guilty or not guilty by the jury.16 The jury data includes the
name, date of birth, gender, and race of each individual in the jury pool as well as whether or not they
were seated. However, we cannot distinguish between individuals who are seated and those who
became alternates; all of these individuals appear to be ‘seated’.
Data were also provided to us by the Lake County Clerk of Courts for all felony jury trials
from March 1, 2000 to April 2, 2010. As in Sarasota County, we know each potential juror’s name,
race, gender, date of birth, and whether they were seated or assigned as alternates. In addition to this,
we also know whether jurors were struck for cause or whether the prosecution or defense struck them
with their peremptory challenges. This information is not available in Sarasota County. In terms of
the defendant information, the Lake County Clerk of Courts only provided the case number and
defendant name. We used this information to manually collect the following information from the
Lake County Clerk of Courts Online Court Records website: city of residence, sex, race, attorney,
judge, the number of charges, the type of charge, and the verdict for each charge.17 As in Sarasota, we

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15

Note that because of the (oftentimes long) lag between the date at which an offense is filed with the courts and
the date at which a verdict is rendered, our data set contains trials for offenses dating as far back as 1999.
16
Charges for which the verdict was neither guilty nor not guilty had the following possible outcomes: dropped,
noelle prosequi, filed, dismissed due to speedy trial, dismissed with no reason given, consolidated, adjudication
withheld by judge and unable to stand trial. We test the sensitivity of our results to the exclusion of these cases in
Table 7.
17
The data were collected from the following website:
http://www.lakecountyclerk.org/record_searches/court_records_agreement.aspx?to=%2Frecord%5Fsearches%2
Fonline%5Fcourt%5Frecords%2Fonline%5Fcourt%5Frecords%2Easp?target%3D%5Fblank.

8
!

restrict our sample to trials in which at least one of the charged offenses resulted in a verdict of guilty
or not guilty by the jury.18
Since all felony trials in Florida other than capital trials have six-member juries, we exclude
capital trials from our analysis. Since each jury should have six members plus zero to two alternates,
we drop those cases with less than six jurors/alternates identified in the data and those with more than
8. We also drop those cases with multiple defendants and those in which the defendant names do not
match the online record (i.e. in Lake County). We are left with a dataset of 785 felony jury trials, 401
of which are from Sarasota County and 384 of which are from Lake County.

III.B. Summary Statistics
Table I presents descriptive statistics for both the defendant and jury variables for all 785
felony trials overall and separately for Lake and Sarasota counties. Overall, 44 percent of defendants
are black, and 92 percent are male. The average number of charges per defendant is 2.99. We identify
whether each defendant is charged with an offense in the following categories, regardless of the
verdict associated with the charge: murder (non-capital), robbery, other violent offenses, property
offenses, drug offenses, sex offenses, weapons offenses, and other offenses. Overall, the most
common crime categories are other offenses (33 percent), other violent offenses (31 percent), and drug
offenses (25 percent).
We consider two possible outcome measures or verdicts: whether the defendant was convicted
of at least one offense and the percent of the first five offenses for which the defendant was convicted.
72.8 percent of defendants were convicted of at least one offense. On average, seated juries have seven
members (including alternates) drawn from jury pools with 27 individuals. In Lake County, where we
have detailed strike information, we find that on average 2.2 jurors in the pool are struck for cause, 4.5
jurors are struck by a defense peremptory challenge, and 3.4 jurors are struck by a prosecution
peremptory challenge.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
18

Other possible verdicts include: pled, nolle prosequi, no information, dismissed by judge, and mistrial. We
will test the sensitivity of our results to redefining pleas as decisions of guilty by the jury.

9
!

The average age of jurors in the pool is 49.6 years, and 46 percent of jury pools have an
average age that is greater than or equal to 50 years. The age composition in Sarasota County is
slightly older (49.9) than in Lake County (49.4). The average age of the seated jury tends to be
slightly older than the average age of the pool, implying older jurors are more likely to be seated.
While this difference is observed in both counties, it is more pronounced in Sarasota County.19

IV. The Role of Juror Demographics in the Selection Process
As mentioned previously, it is perfectly legal for attorneys to use their peremptory challenges
to exclude potential jurors on the basis of age. If attorneys use these challenges as a strategic way to
eliminate jurors that are unfriendly to their case due to their age, we would expect the defense strike
pattern to be the opposite of the prosecution strike pattern. Column 1 of Table 2 examines whether
this is the case for Lake County, where we observe information about the use of peremptory
challenges by each side. The regression includes the entire pool of Lake County jurors. We regress
the juror’s age on indicator variables for whether she/he was struck for cause, struck by a defense
peremptory challenge, struck by a prosecution peremptory challenge, or remained in the jury pool after
the selection process was over.20 The excluded category is an indicator for whether the individual was
on the seated jury for the trial. The results show that the average seated juror is 49.4 years old, while
the average juror struck by the defense is 51.6 years old, and the average juror struck by the
prosecution is 47.1 years old. This implies that defense attorneys strike relatively older members of
the jury pool while prosecutors strike relatively younger ones. We find the same pattern of results in
Column 2 where our dependent variable is an indicator for whether a juror’s age is 50 or greater.
These results are consistent with the Baldus et. al (2001) findings that prosecutors of Philadelphia

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19

While not reported in Table I, the average composition of the jury pools is 4 percent black and 51 percent
female.
20
Some of these jurors remaining in the pool were suitable to be seated but were not needed. Others were so far
back in the pool they did not even go through the questioning process that could potentially have led to them
being struck.

10
!

capital cases were more likely to strike young jurors while the opposite was true for defense
attorneys.21
In Columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is defined as an indicator for whether the juror is
male, and an indicator for whether the juror is black, respectively, to examine the strike pattern for the
protected categories of gender and race.

The results in Column 3 imply that attorneys do not

systematically use gender as a factor when they use their peremptory challenges, because both the
prosecution and defense are just as likely to strike male jurors as they are female jurors. The results
for race in Column 4 show that both the defense and prosecution are less likely to strike black jurors
than white jurors.22 Technically, this means attorneys are taking race into account when they make
their strike decisions. However, they do not seem to be doing this in a strategic way (i.e. using race as
a factor to strike jurors unfriendly to their case), because otherwise we would expect one side to be
more likely to strike black jurors, and the other group to be less likely. The fact that both attorneys are
less likely to strike black jurors might instead indicate attorneys go overboard in not striking blacks so
they cannot be accused of violating the ruling in Batson v. Kentucky. This is especially likely to be a
concern in Lake County where only 5 percent of the jury pool is black, making it easy to notice the
systematic use of peremptory challenges to exclude black jurors.
Table 3 examines in more detail the strike patterns by age revealed in the first two columns of
Table 2. We regress an indicator variable for why the juror was struck on juror age group indicator
variables, where the omitted age category is whether a juror is age 30 or younger. The results in
Column 1 imply there is no relationship between juror age and being struck for cause. Column 2
shows that 13 percent of the jurors that are 30 or younger are struck by the defense. The likelihood of
being struck by the defense increases monotonically in juror age; jurors greater than 60 years old have
a 20 percent chance of being struck by the defense. In contrast, column 3 shows that the probability of

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
21

More specifically, Baldus et, al. (2001) find that the odds of a prosecutor striking a young venire member
relative to a middle aged venire member are 1.8 while those of striking an old member relative to a middle aged
are 0.81. For the defense, the odds of striking a young venire member relative to one who is middle aged are 0.72
while the odds of striking an old member relative to a middle aged member are 1.3. It should be kept in mind
that peremptory challenges may play a much larger role in death penalty cases, at least in Philadelphia where
each side has 20 peremptory strikes available in a single defendant case. In contrast, the felony cases studied in
the present paper have at most six strikes.
22
This same result occurs for the subsamples of cases involving only black defendants or only white defendants.

11
!

being struck by the prosecution is highest for younger jurors and continues to decrease as juror age
increases.
The limited existing literature on jury selection has been largely written by trial consultants
and is inconclusive about the role of age.23 Entzel, Dunlop, and Rothman (2000) cite a 1991 American
Bar Association report that indicates that older members of the venire may be struck because they are
“stubborn, indecisive, or cantankerous.” Other experts do not view age as an important factor for jury
selection. For example, Sean Overland, a trial consultant, writes in a 2009 article that he has not found
any evidence of an age—verdict relationship in his own analysis of thousands of mock jurors.24
Kressel and Kressel’s (2004) book on the jury consulting science notes that social psychologists have
searched for a formula based on individual characteristics and traits, including for instance whether
‘older people are more likely to vote guilty’, that will identify which jurors will vote for a conviction;
however, they conclude that there is no single profile of the ideal juror and that if individual
characteristics play any role in determining verdicts, it will vary on a case by case basis.

25

In the

context of this broader literature, our results contribute strong statistical evidence from real felony
trials that age plays a systematic role in jury selection.

V. The Effect of Juror Age on Conviction Rates
The difference in defense and prosecution strike patterns by juror age suggests that attorneys
believe age is correlated with the likelihood of voting to convict or acquit. We now take up this
question directly, examining the causal impact of juror age on trial outcomes. The dashed line in
Figure 1 shows that the probability a defendant is convicted of at least one crime increases
systematically with the average age of the seated jury. As shown in the previous section, however, the

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
#$

In high-profile cases, trial consultants often conduct phone surveys prior to jury selection to collect
demographic and attitude behavior for a relevant sub-sample of the population. Paul Lisnek (2003), one such
trial consultant, writes that these “demographic questions ultimately assist in creating the juror profile of both
desirable and undesirable jurors. Lawyers want to know, as a guideline, whether desired jurors tend to be of a
certain race, sex, age group, and such.”
24
Generational Differences in the Jury: Much Ado About Nothing?, Overland Consulting Blog, Dec 16, 2009.
25
Other trial consultants emphasize that these generational differences are important factors when helping an
attorney determine the best way to present their case to the jury; for instance, older individuals respond
differently to graphics, narratives, metaphors, or pretrial publicity. See for instance, “Intergenerational Law
Offices, Intergenerational Juries: Values, Priorities and Decision Making,” by Douglas Keene and Rita Handrich
from Keene Trial Consulting. , January 31, 2013. The Jury Expert. http://www.thejuryexpert.com/2013/01/

12
!

seated jury is determined in part by the selective use of peremptory challenges and this raises the
concern that the correlation between the composition of seated jury and trial outcomes may be driven
by selection bias.
We deal with this selection problem in two ways. In Section V.A. we use a reduced form
approach and examine how conviction rates respond to the age composition of the jury pool, as this
variation is driven by the automated random selection of the eligible jurors who are called for jury
duty on a given day. The solid line in Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of this reduced
form relationship. There is a clear positive relationship between the average age of the jury pool and
the conviction rate that appears to be stronger than the relationship observed when looking at the
average age of the empaneled jury.
In Section V.B. we directly examine the causal relationship between the age of the seated jury
and conviction rates by instrumenting for the age of the seated jury with the age of the jury pool. As
Figure 2 shows, the age of the jury pool is highly predictive of the age of the seated jury, and is thus a
strong instrument for the age of the seated jury; the first stage regression results and corresponding Fstatistics show this more formally. In addition, we show that our central result of a positive
relationship between juror age and conviction rates is robust to a variety of instrumental variable
specifications.

V.A. Reduced Form Results
Before presenting our main results, we first test that the foundation of our research design is
valid – i.e., that the composition of the jury pool is effectively random. To this end, Table 4 examines
the correlation of the composition of the jury pool with defendant and case characteristics.
Specifically, we regress the average age of the pool, an indicator for whether the average age of the
pool is greater than or equal to 50, the proportion of the pool that is female, and the proportion of the
pool that is black on observable defendant and case characteristics.26 If the jury pool were truly
randomly assigned to cases, the regression coefficients should be close to zero and statistically
insignificant in the vast majority of cases. This is exactly what we find, as just three of the 48

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
26

Note that 14 cases are dropped from these regressions due to incomplete charge information.

13
!

coefficients presented in this table are statistically significant at the 10 percent level and the
magnitudes of all coefficients are quite small. These results suggest that the jury management software
properly randomly selected both the potential jurors from the master list to receive summons for jury
duty and the pool of jurors from those summoned on a given day to participate in voir dire for a
particular trial.
Table 5 presents simple cross tabulations showing how conviction rates vary with the average
age of the jury pool. There is a general upward trend - defendants are more likely to be convicted as
the average age of the pool increases. In particular, the table indicates that there is a sharp difference
in conviction rates between jury pools that have an average age of 50 or older versus those with an
average age less than 50.
Table 6 examines the relationship between conviction rates and the age of the jury pool in
regression form. Column 1 regresses an indicator of whether a defendant is convicted of at least one
crime on the average age of the jury pool. The results indicate that increasing the average age of the
jury pool by one year increases conviction rates by one percentage point. The specification in Column
2 includes controls for the racial and gender composition of the jury pool, defendant and case
characteristics (race, gender, offense category and number of offenses), as well as county, year and
judge controls. Including controls for other characteristics of the jury pool accounts for potential
correlations between jury race, gender, and age. The coefficients on the age of the jury pool are
similar across both specifications.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 repeat the previous specifications using an indicator for whether
the average age of the pool is greater than or equal to 50. The use of this indicator, which effectively
splits the sample in half, is a more robust way to measure the relationship between jury age and
conviction rates if the effect of age is not strictly linear, which the previous specification requires.
Consistent with this notion, the statistical power of the impact of age on conviction rates is stronger in
this specification. In particular, Column 3 indicates that when the average age of the jury pool is
greater than or equal to 50, defendants are convicted 79 percent of the time. When the average age of
the jury pool is less than 50, conviction rates are only 68 percent. Columns 5-8 repeat the same
structure of the first four columns using the fraction of the first five offenses on which the defendant
14
!

was found guilty as the dependant variable. The results are quite similar in magnitude, although not
all of the age coefficients are statistically significant.
Table 7 examines whether the relationship between juror age and conviction rates varies by
defendant characteristics.

To determine whether this relationship depends on defendant gender,

Columns 1 and 2 regress whether a defendant is convicted of at least one crime on a measure of the
age of the jury pool, whether the defendant is female, and an interaction of the two variables. The
regressions also include controls for jury gender, race, and county, which are fully interacted with
defendant gender; we also include controls for defendant race, crime type and total charges which are
fully interacted with the age measure of the jury pool.27 The results in Column 2 indicate that for male
defendants, when the average age of the pool goes from below 50 to 50 or above, the conviction rates
increase from 66% to 79%. However, for female defendants the opposite pattern is observed as the
conviction rate declines from 95% to 71%. Because over 90 percent of the defendants are male, the
overall pattern between juror age and conviction rates found in Table 6 mirrors that of male
defendants.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 perform a similar analysis, but now allow the relationship
between juror age and conviction rates to depend on whether a defendant is black. These regressions
restrict the sample to cases involving black and white defendants only. Again, we include controls for
jury gender, race, and county which are fully interacted with defendant race; we also include controls
for defendant gender, crime type and total charges which are fully interacted with the age measure of
the jury pool.28 The results in Column 4 imply that the increase in conviction rates due to juror age is
similar for cases involving black versus white defendants. Thus, the effects of juror age on conviction
rates do not vary with the race of the defendant.
Table 8 considers some additional robustness checks on the main result found in Table 6. All
specifications include the full set of controls, and use an indicator for whether the average age of the
jury pool is greater than or equal to 50 as a measure of juror age (akin to Table 6, Column 4). The first

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
27

Each control variable not shown in Table 7 is demeaned (prior to being interacted), which ensures the main
coefficients in Table 7 are reported at the sample mean in each specification; thus there is no need to look at the
coefficients on the interaction variables included in the vector of controls to interpret the main coefficients
shown in the table.
28
As above, each control variable not shown is demeaned prior to being interacted.

15
!

two columns show that the positive relationship between juror age and conviction rates appears
separately in both Lake and Sarasota County. Columns (3)-(6) consider the robustness of the results to
alternative ways of categorizing trial outcomes that are not simple verdicts of “guilty” or “not guilty”
by the jury. For instance, Column 3 redefines as guilty 133 cases in Lake County that are pled by the
defendant at some point after a jury pool is chosen (but before the case actually goes to the jury). It is
theoretically ambiguous whether such cases should be included in the analysis (categorized as guilty
verdicts). On the one hand, it makes sense to include them if the willingness of the parties to enter into
a plea bargain is affected by the composition of the jury. On the other hand, if these plea bargains are
reached for reasons unrelated to the jury composition (as they would be if reached prior to jury
selection), including them biases the coefficients towards zero as the outcome is, by construction, the
same for all of these trials regardless of the jury composition. In about two-thirds of the pled Lake
County cases, we observe data characterizing the composition of both the jury pool and a seated jury,
suggesting that voir dire did actually occur in these cases, and that the plea occurred after the jury was
seated. We thus conduct an additional robustness check in Column 4, and include as guilty verdicts
just those Lake cases that are pled by the defendant after the jury is seated.29 Column 5 recodes those
25 Sarasota cases that did not have guilty or not guilty jury verdicts associated with them as not guilty
while Column 6 repeats the same exercise, coding these cases as guilty. In all cases, the pattern of
results related to juror age remains.

V.B. Instrumental Variables Results
The reduced form results presented in Tables 5-8 show the direct effect of the quasiexperimental variation in the data and are, therefore, our preferred way of examining the relationship
between juror age and trial outcome. We take the analysis a step further in this subsection by
presenting results from instrumental variables (IV) specifications that identify the impact of the age of
the seated jury using the age of the jury pool as instruments. This analysis requires the additional

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
29

All of the results presented in Columns 1-4 of Table 6 and all of Table 7 are robust to the inclusion of these
Lake County cases that were pled after the jury was seated. !

16
!

assumption that the age composition of the jury pool affects trial outcomes only through its impact on
the age composition of the seated jury.
We present results for a variety of IV specifications using as instruments the two measures of
the age composition of the jury pool (average age, average age greater than 50) that were used in the
reduced form analysis. !Table 9 presents first stage regressions of seated jury age on the measures of
the jury pool age, as well as the full set of controls described in Table 6. The results in Column 1
indicate that the average age of the seated jury increases by 0.94 years when the jury pool increases by
one year, while those presented in Column 2 imply that the average age of the seated jury is 4.6 years
higher when the jury pool is greater than 50 versus less than 50. Both of these results are highly
statistically significant. When both measures of the jury pool age are included in Column 3, predictive
power loads on the average age of the pool suggesting that this variable is a better predictor of the
average age of the seated jury. Columns 4-6 repeat analogous specifications using an indicator for
whether the average age of the seated jury is 50 or greater as the dependent variable. Regardless of the
specification used, all of the first stage results are strongly statistically significant. In particular, Fstatistics on the excluded instruments from these first stage regressions (which are shown in Table 10)
are between 88 and 276.
Table 10 presents both OLS and IV results of the impact of the seated jury on trial outcomes.
Columns 1-4 use average age of the seated jury as the dependent variable. Column 1 presents the OLS
results, Column 2 uses average age of the jury pool as an instrument, Column 3 uses an indicator for
whether the average age of the pool is 50 or greater as an instrument, and Column 4 uses both pool age
measures as instruments. While the OLS results show only a weak and statistically insignificant
relationship, the IV specifications consistently pick up a significant positive relationship that is 4-10
times greater in magnitude than that implied by OLS.
The size of the estimated effect in the IV regressions depends on which instrument(s) is
used—the results from Columns 2 and 4 imply that increasing the average age of the seated jury by
one increases the probability of conviction by 0.9-1.0 percentage points, while those presented in
Column 3 imply an increase of 2.5 percentage points. The various IV specifications produce different
results because they implicitly use different variation in the data to identify the effect – i.e., each
17
!

specification captures a different Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE). The results presented in
Column 2, for example, pick up the effect of increasing the average age of the pool across the full age
range of all seated juries, as increasing the average age of the jury pool by a year raises the average
age of the seated jury by about a year at all points in the age distribution.30 Not surprisingly, this
specification corresponds quite closely to the reduced form results presented in Column 2 of Table 6.
Our preferred specification is that presented in Column 4, which uses both measures of the pool age
composition as instruments, thereby generating as much variation in the seated jury age distribution as
possible. That these results mirror those reported in Column 2 is not surprising given that predictive
power in the first stage regression loads on the average age of the pool when both instruments are
included.
Columns 5-8 repeat the specifications in Columns 1-4, respectively, with a new dependent
variable: whether the average age of the seated jury is 50 or greater. The results are similar to those
reported in Columns 1-4; the OLS results are insignificant, while all IV results show positive and
significant age effects. Again we find that the age results are stronger when the indicator age variable
is used as an instrument, and the results using both instruments mirror those of only using the average
age of the pool as an instrument.

31

Our preferred specification is that reported in Column 8, which

implies that seated juries with an average age above 50 are 15 percentage points more likely to convict
than those with an average age less than 50.
Overall, the reduced form and IV results reveal a strong positive relationship between jury age
and trial outcomes regardless of the particular specification that is chosen. The OLS estimates of the
effect of the seated jury on trial outcomes, in contrast, are much smaller in magnitude and statistically
insignificant, suggesting that the jury selection process indeed confounds the underlying relationship
between juror age and trial outcomes.

This is potentially one of the reasons that the previous

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
$+!This

can be seen in Figure 2, which shows that the relationship between jury pool age and seated jury age is
roughly linear throughout the age distribution.
$"!We do not report the IV results where both endogenous age measures of the seated jury are used
simultaneously. The first stage results shown in Column 3 and 6 of Table 9 imply that all the identification
would likely be coming off only one of the instruments (the average age of the pool) and thus we would have an
under-identified model.

18
!

literature, which has typically relied on examining simple correlations between seated juror age and
conviction decisions, has found no relationship between age and trial outcomes.

VI. Why Does Age Play a Role?
The previous sections document the role juror age plays in both jury selection and trial
outcomes. Unfortunately, we cannot conclude for certain whether it is age itself, or unobserved
factors correlated with age, that drive these relationships. One of the key unobservable variables that
age might pick up is conservatism and thus in this section we examine the relationship between these
two variables in the context of the criminal justice system.
Popular stereotypes suggest that older individuals are more conservative than younger
individuals, either because these older cohorts were born into a generation that is generally more
conservative or because individuals become more conservative as they age. Academics have studied
the relationship between aging and conservatism for many years. Much of this literature is focused on
how an individual’s beliefs change as they age: do they, in fact, become more conservative? Are older
individuals so set in their ways that they are not willing to change their beliefs? A review of a number
of early studies (Glenn, 1974) suggests people actually become less conservative as they have grown
older, in conformity with general trends in society. However, he also notes that older cohorts are more
conservative relative to the general population; while they became less conservative as they aged, their
changing beliefs did not keep pace with younger generations. Danigelis, Cutler and Hardy (2007) use
the U.S. General Social Survey data from 1972 to 2004 to study the magnitude and direction of
changes in attitudes towards historically subordinate groups, civil liberties, and privacy within cohorts
as they age. They find that attitudes can change at both earlier and later stages of the life cycle (i.e. that
older individuals’ attitudes are not completely fixed) and that the direction of change is often towards
being more tolerant. In contrast, when studying law and order issues, Danigelis and Cutler (1991) have
found that all generations have become more conservative. In addition, studies that consider whether

19
!

older individuals have more conservative beliefs towards law and order issues than younger
individuals have yielded mixed findings.32
Given that the relationship between age and conservatism appears to vary across studies, and in
particular with respect to the topic being studied, we conduct our own analysis of the age—
conservatism link using the 1972 to 2010 rounds of the General Social Surveys. We consider three
survey questions that assess whether individuals: (i) are in favor of the death penalty for persons
convicted of murder, (ii) believe their local courts are too harsh, too lenient, or about right towards
criminals and, (iii) consider their own political views to be liberal or conservative on a scale of one to
seven, where an answer of five or above indicates some degree of conservativeness.
Figure 3 presents the raw relationship between age and the answers to these questions. As
individuals get older, they are more likely than younger individuals to favor capital punishment,
believe that the courts are too lenient towards criminals and consider themselves politically
conservative while they are less likely to believe that the courts are too harsh. While an upwards trend
is observed in each of these graphs across most of the age spectrum, the gradient appears to be steepest
for individuals younger than 40.
Table 11 presents regression results that look more formally at the relationship between age and
conservatism. We characterize individuals’ ages as 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, 70-79 and 80
plus; age 18-29 is the omitted category in each regression. Column (1) of each panel presents the raw
relationship for all survey rounds, with no controls. Relative to 18-29 year olds, individuals in each of
the other age groups are significantly more likely to be ‘conservative’. In addition, this difference is
often significantly larger for the age groups over 60 than the younger age groups. For instance,
respondents aged 30-39 are 4.7 percentage points more likely than 18-29 year olds to think that the
courts are too lenient while those 60-69 are 7.5 percentage points more likely to think so. The
regressions presented in column (1) and the graphs discussed above, however, pool all individuals
from all survey rounds; thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that the observed relationships are

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
32

Alston (1976), Sengstock and Liang (1979), Vidmar and Ellsworth (1976), and Williams, Thomas and Singh
(1983) find older individuals support harsher sanctions for criminals while Thomas and Hoard (1978) finds little
difference across ages and Rugiero and Weston (1977) finds that older people are less punitive towards the death
penalty.

20
!

driven by changes in beliefs over time. The robustness of these results to the inclusion of survey year
dummies in column (2) suggests that this is not what is underlying the age-conservatism relationship.
Column (3) begins to address the question of whether it is an individual’s age that drives the
relationship, or something else that is correlated with age, such as gender, race, years of schooling,
number of children and marital status. These variables are significant predictors of conservatism
themselves and do appear to explain some of the age-conservatism relationship; however, much of the
age-conservatism relationship remains over and above these controls. Finally, column (4) of each
panel demonstrates the robustness of the results to restricting the sample to the 2000-2010 survey
rounds, which corresponds with the years of our jury data. The same pattern of results is generally
seen, though there is some loss of precision due to the reduced sample size. 33

VII. Implications and Conclusion
The main empirical findings presented in this paper provide clear statistical evidence that jury
age has a causal effect on trial outcomes and that prosecution and defense attorneys take age into
account when using their peremptory challenges to shape the seated jury. We conclude the paper by
considering the implications of these findings for the equal application of criminal justice.
At the most foundational level, our reduced form results show that random variation in the
pool of jurors called for jury duty on a given day has a substantial effect on conviction rates. In
particular, if a male defendant, completely by chance, faces a jury pool that has an average age above
50, he is about 13 percentage points more likely to be convicted than if he faces a jury pool with an
average age less than 50. Put slightly differently, for reasons that are completely independent of the
nature of the evidence in the case, a large fraction of cases are decided differently based simply on
random variation in this single dimension of the jury pool composition.

When combined with

variation in other aspects of jury pool such as the racial composition (which we document has a
substantial impact on conviction rates in Anwar et al. (2012)), our findings imply that there is a
substantial random component in the application of criminal justice due to the jury variation.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
33

A similar pattern of results is also seen when using actual age as the variable of interest rather than age
categories and when considering support of the death penalty as the dependent variable.

21
!

Whether such randomness in the criminal justice system constitutes unfair or unequal
treatment under the law depends on whether these measures are considered from an ex ante or ex post
perspective. Because juries for all defendants are drawn from the same master list of eligible jurors,
the system provides equal treatment from this vantage point. Yet, the fact that cases for defendants
facing statistically identical evidence are decided differently in so many instances due to randomness
in the jury pool suggests a fundamental lack of equity with respect to the quality of true nature of the
evidence in a case.
Of course, some degree of randomness is to be expected in any jury trial setting, as juries are
made up of a small subset of the full eligible population by necessity. How much randomness in trial
outcomes is acceptable, however, is at the heart of the design of the jury trial system. While smaller
juries, such as the 6-person juries in Florida, might save court costs, they substantially increase the
variation in trial outcomes. A move to one-person juries could cut court costs even further, yet
presumably such a system has been deemed socially unacceptable because it would seem capricious,
even if the single juror were randomly selected. From this perspective, our paper provides the first
direct evidence in the literature on the magnitude of the randomness embedded in the jury system used
in these Florida counties. By examining the impact of the random variation in jury composition along
the dimensions that we can observe, we provide a lower bound on how much of the variation in trial
outcomes is independent of the true nature of the evidence in the case.

22
!

References
Abrams, David, Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan (forthcoming) “Do Judges Vary in
Their Treatment of Race?” Journal of Legal Studies.
Abrams, David and Albert Yoon (2009),"The Luck of the Draw: Using Random Case Assignment to
Investigate Attorney Ability," The University of Chicago Law Review, 74:4, 1145-1177.
Alston, Jon. (1976) “Japanese and American Attitudes toward the Abolition of Capital Punishment.”
Criminology 14: 271-76.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson (2012) “The Impact of Jury Race in Criminal
Trials”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (2), 1017-1055.
Baldwin, J. and Mike McConville (1980), "Understanding Jury Trial: A review of the Literature on the
role of the Jury in Criminal trials in the United States and England", in (ed. N. Morris and M. Tonry),
Crime and Justice 1979: A review of Criminal Justice Research, University of Chicago Press.
Baldus, D. C., Woodworth, G. G., Zuckerman, D., Weiner, N. A., & Broffitt, B. (2001). “The use of
peremptory challenges in capital murder trials: A legal and empirical analysis”. University of
Pennsylvania Journal of Constitutional Law, 3, 3-169.
Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79
Beck, Coburn (1998), “The Current State of the Peremptory Challenge,” William and Mary Law
Review, 39.
Bonazzoli, M. Juliet (1998-1999). “Jury Selection and Bias: Debunking Invidious Stereotypes through
Science”. Quinnipiac Law Review, 18: 247.
Broderick, Raymond, (1992) “Why the Peremptory Challenge Should Be Abolished,” 65 Temple Law
Review 369
Chase, Carol and Colleen P. Graffy (1997) “A Challenge for Cause to Peremptory Challenges in
Criminal Proceedings,” 19 Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review 507.
Danigelis, Nicholas and Stephen Cutler (1991) “Cohort Trends in Attitudes About Law and Order:
Who’s Leading the Conservative Wave?” Public Opinion Quarterly 55:24-49.
Danigelis, Nicholas, Melissa Hardy, and Stephen Cutler (2007) “Population Aging, Introcohort Aging,
and Sociopolitical Attitudes” American Sociological Review, 72: 812-830.

Devine, Dennis, Laura Clayton, Benjamin Dunford, Rasmy Seying, and Jennifer Pryce (2000). “Jury
Decision Making: 45 Years of Empirical Research on Deliberating Groups”. Psychology, Public
Policy, and Law, 7:3, 622-727.
Eisenberg, Theodore, Stephen Garvey, and Martin Wells (2001). “Forecasting Life and Death: Juror
Race, Religion, and Attitude Toward the Death Penalty”. Journal of Legal Studies, 30, 277-311.
Entzel, Pamela, Burton Dunlop and Max Rothman (2000) “Elders and Jury Service: A Case of Age
Discrimination” In Rothman, Max, Burton Dunlop and Pamela Entzel (Eds), Elders, Crime, and the
Criminal Justice System: Myth, Perceptions, and Reality in the 21st Century, New York, Springer.
Fahey, William (1997) “Peremptory Challenges: A Crucial Tool for Trial Lawyers,” 12
23
!

Criminal Justice 24
Glenn, Norval (1974) “Aging and Conservatism” Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science Vol 415: 176-186.
Hannaford-Agor, Paula, Valerie Hans, Nicole Mott, G. Thomas Munsterman (2002) “Are Hung Juries
a Problem”, National Institute of Justice, The National Center for State Courts.
Hoffman, Morris (1997) “Peremptory Challenges Should Be Abolished: A Trial Judge’s Perspective,”
64 University of Chicago Law Review 809.
Garvey, Stephen, Paula Hannaford-Agor, Valerie Hans, Nicole Mott, G. Thomas Munsterman, and
Martin Wells (2004). “Juror First Votes in Criminal Trials”. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 1:2,
371-398.
J.E.B. v Alabama (1994), ex rel. T.B., 511 U.S. 127
Johnson, Richard and David Neumark (1997) Age Discrimination, Job Separation, and the
Employment Status of Older Workers: Evidence from Self-Reports,” Journal of Human Resources,
32(4).
Kling, Jeffrey, "Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings," American Economic Review, 96
(2006), 863-876.
Kressel, Neil and Dorit Kressel (2004) “Stack and Sway: The New Science of Jury Consulting”
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, pages 302.
Lisneck, Paul (2003) “the Hidden Jury”Sourcebooks, Inc. Naperville, Illinois. 313.
Macinol, John, (2005) Age Discrimination: An Historical and Contemporary Analysis, Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, UK
Marder, Nancy (1995) “Beyond Gender: Peremptory Challenges and the Roles of the Jury” Texas Law
Review, 73, 1041-1138.
Mills, Carol and Wayne Bohannon (1980). “Jury Characteristics: To What Extent Are They Related to
Jury Verdicts?” Judicature, 64, 22.
Montz, Vivien and Craig Lee Montz (2000), “The Peremptory Challenge: Should It Still Exist? An
Examination of Federal and Florida Law,” 54 University of Miami Law Review 451 (2000).
Montoya, Jean (1996) “The Future of Post-Batson Peremptory Challenges: Voir Dire By
Questionnaire and the 'Blind Peremptory'”, 29 University of Michigan Journal of Legal Reform 981
(1996).
Moran, Gary and John Craig Comfort (1982). “Scientific Jury Selection: Sex as a Moderator of
Demographic and Personality Predictors of Impaneled Felony Juror Behavior”. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 1052-1054.
Neumark, David and Wendy Stock, (1999), “Age Discrimination Laws and Labor Market Efficiency,”
The Journal of Political Economy, 107(5).
Overland, Sean G. (2009). The Juror Factor: Race and Gender in America’s Civil Courts, LFB
Scholarly Publishing

24
!

Page, Anthony (2005), “Batson’s Blind-Spot: Unconscious Stereotyping and the Peremptory
Challenges,” 85 Boston University Law Review 155.
Reid, Glen (2004), “Limitations on Peremptory Challenges: How Far Will They Extend?” 51 Fed.
Law 18.
Ruggiero, Josephine and Louise Weston (1977) “Comparative Analysis of Male and Female Attitudes
toward Tolerance of Nonconformists.” International Journal of Sociology of the Family 7:77-85.
Sengstock, Mary and Jersey Liang (1979) “Attitudes of the Elderly toward the American Legal
System.” Paper presented at the 1979 Gerontological Society of America, Philadelphia.
State v. Hodge (1999), 248 Conn. 207, 726 A. 2d 531
Thomas, Charles and Robert Howard (1978) “Public Attitudes toward Capital Punishment” In Justice
and Corrections, ed. Norman Johnston and Leonard Savitz, 407-17. New York: Wiley.
Vidmar, Neil and Åhoebe Ellsworth (1976) “Public Opinion on the Death Penalty.” In Capital
Punishment in the United States, ed. Hugo Adam Bedau and Chester Pierce, 125-51. New York: AMS
Press.
Weber v. Strippit, Inc. (1999), 186 F.3d 907, 911 (8th Cir.)
Williams, Sherwood, Charles Thomas and B.K. Singh (1983) “Situational Use of Police Force: Public
Reactions.” American Journal of Police 3:37-50.
!
!
!

25
!

Figure 1:
Rates

The Relationship Between Average Pool Age (Empaneled Jury Age) and Conviction

Note: The above graph presents a kernel based smoothed local average estimate of at least one conviction versus the average
age of the jury pool and the average age of the empaneled jury. It is estimated using a Rule of Thumb Bandwidth, which is
.835 for average pool age and 1.455 for average empaneled jury age.

26
!

Figure 2:

The Relationship Between the Average Age of the Jury Pool and Empaneled Jury

Note: The above graph presents a scatterplot of the average jury age versus the average pool age as well as a kernel based
smoothed local average estimate of the average jury age – pool age relationship. The latter is estimated using a Rule of
Thumb Bandwidth, which is .835 for average pool age.

27
!

Figure 3: Evidence of the Age-Conservatism Relationship From the 1972-2010 General
Social Surveys

28
!

Table 1: Summary Statistics
All Lake and
Sarasota Cases

All Lake Cases

Mean

Sd

Mean

Sd

Mean

Sd

Black Defendant

0.439

0.497

0.501

0.501

0.382

0.486

Hispanic Defendant

0.043

0.202

0.024

0.154

0.06

0.238

White Defendant

0.513

0.500

0.472

0.500

0.551

0.498

Male Defendant

0.919

0.273

0.931

0.254

0.908

0.29

Total Charges

2.994

3.567

3.465

4.565

2.551

2.18

Any Drug Charge

0.253

0.435

0.219

0.414

0.284

0.452

Any Murder Charge

0.053

0.224

0.080

0.272

0.027

0.164

Any Robbery Charge

0.090

0.287

0.099

0.299

0.082

0.275

Any Other Violent Charge

0.307

0.461

0.349

0.477

0.267

0.443

Any Property Charge

0.233

0.423

0.259

0.438

0.209

0.407

Any Sex Charge

0.131

0.338

0.128

0.335

0.135

0.342

Any Weapons Charge

0.120

0.325

0.160

0.367

0.082

0.275

Any Other Charge

0.327

0.470

All Sarasota Cases

Defendant Characteristics

Case Characteristics

0.320

!

Dependant Variables

0.467

!

0.334

!

!

0.472

!

Proportion Guilty Convictions

0.670

0.439

0.584

0.458

0.756

0.401

Any Guilty Convictions

0.728

0.445

0.653

0.477

0.803

0.399

Number in Jury Pool

27.292

7.294

26.956

7.410

27.613

7.175

Number of Seated Jurors

7.113

0.483

6.928

0.384

Pool and Seated Jury Characteristics
7.307

0.500

Number of Jurors Struck for Cause

2.229

2.357

Number of Jurors Struck by Defense
Number of Jurors Struck by
Prosecution

4.469

2.177

3.383

1.874

average age of seated jury

50.102

5.468

49.380

5.280

50.794

5.561

average age of pool

49.623

3.137

49.361

3.164

49.873

3.094

average age of seated jury>=50

0.526
0.461

0.500
0.499

0.477

0.500

0.574

0.495

0.424

0.495

0.496

0.501

average age of pool>=50

Observations
785
384
401
Note: The columns report summary statistics for the sample of cases for which a jury was selected and the variable under
consideration is defined. In the first column, defendant race is defined for 774 cases, defendant gender for 776 cases, specific
crime categories for 776 cases, total charges for 773 cases, the dependant variables for 750 cases, and the pool and seated jury
variables for the full sample of 785 cases. Summary statistics for the proportion and average variables (i.e., proportion guilty
convictions, average age of seated jury, and average age of pool) were formed by measuring the relevant proportion or average
for each jury/jury pool and then averaging across cases.

!
!

Table 2: Juror Selection in Lake County

juror age

"%$!
indicator for
whether juror
is >= 50

"&$!
indicator for
whether juror is
male

"'$!
indicator for
whether juror is
black

0.683
(0.534)

0.0245
(0.0195)

-0.0394**
(0.0195)

0.0119
(0.0103)

struck by defense

2.186***
(0.417)

0.0622***
(0.0152)

-0.0160
(0.0153)

-0.0362***
(0.00614)

struck by prosecution

-2.321***
(0.488)

-0.0465***
(0.0168)

-0.00513
(0.0168)

-0.0160**
(0.00762)

-0.340
(0.350)

-0.0189
(0.0127)

-0.0163
(0.0127)

-0.00757
(0.00612)

49.38***
(0.259)

0.5246***
(0.0094)

0.503***
(0.00944)

0.0630***
(0.00468)

10185
0.008

10185
0.004

10185
0.000

9753
0.004

!!

struck for cause

remained in pool

constant

Observations
R-squared

"#$!

Note: The omitted category is an indicator for whether the juror was seated. All regressions use OLS and report
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5
percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. Columns 1-3 include all jurors in the pool for the 384 Lake County trials. Column 4
restricts this to white and black jurors only.

!
!

Table 3: The Relationship Between Juror Age Group and Reason for Dismissal in Lake County

(1)
indicator for
whether juror is
struck for cause

(2)
indicator for
whether juror is
struck by defense

(3)
indicator for whether
juror is struck by
prosecution

Age Between 30-40

-0.0101
(0.0103)

0.0247*
(0.0131)

-0.0561***
(0.0141)

Age Between 40-50

0.00509
(0.00995)

0.0332***
(0.0123)

-0.0587***
(0.0133)

Age Between 50-60

0.00174
(0.00980)

0.0530***
(0.0124)

-0.0622***
(0.0132)

Age > 60

0.0108
(0.00978)

0.0699***
(0.0124)

-0.0790***
(0.0129)

Constant

0.0976***
(0.0162)

0.133***
(0.0198)

0.195***
(0.0197)

10185
0.002

10185
0.006

10185
0.005

Observations
R-squared

Note: The omitted category is an indicator for whether the juror is age 30 or younger. All regressions use OLS and report
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5
percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. All specifications include all jurors in the pool for the 384 Lake County Trials and
include controls for juror gender and race.

!
!

Table 4: The Relationship between the Demographic Composition of the Jury Pool and
Defendant/Case Characteristics

Defendant Characteristics
Black Defendant
Hispanic Defendant
Male Defendant
Case Characteristics
Any Drug Charge
Any Murder Charge
Any Other Charge
Any Other Violent
Charge
Any Property Charge
Any Robbery Charge
Any Sex Charge
Any Weapons Charge
Total Charges
Constant
Observations
F-Statistic
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Average Age
of Pool

Indicator for
whether Average
Age of Pool>=50

Proportion of the
Pool that is
Female

Proportion of the
Pool that is
Black

-0.295
(0.260)
0.227
(0.679)
-0.796*
(0.450)

-0.0320
(0.0405)
-0.0474
(0.0910)
-0.122*
(0.0676)

0.00110
(0.00787)
0.0254
(0.0157)
-0.00199
(0.0119)

0.00309
(0.00344)
0.00401
(0.00821)
0.00579
(0.00481)

0.222
(0.328)
0.159
(0.414)
0.0812
(0.261)

0.0198
(0.0534)
-0.0333
(0.0834)
-0.0179
(0.0425)

0.0139
(0.00995)
0.0134
(0.0137)
0.00151
(0.00811)

-0.000316
(0.00414)
-0.00224
(0.00591)
0.00229
(0.00354)

0.216

0.00881

0.0121

0.00364

(0.267)
0.0827
(0.301)
0.343
(0.411)
0.572
(0.402)
0.157
(0.332)
-0.0422
(0.0388)
50.30***
(0.473)
771
0.67
0.01

(0.0440)
-0.00943
(0.0500)
0.0874
(0.0662)
0.0751
(0.0639)
-0.0470
(0.0572)
-0.00464
(0.00622)
0.593***
(0.0744)
771
0.84
0.01

(0.00867)
0.00693
(0.00958)
-0.00171
(0.0136)
0.0200
(0.0122)
0.00499
(0.0112)
-0.000299
(0.00128)
0.496***
(0.0132)
771
0.78
0.009

(0.00368)
0.0133***
(0.00455)
-0.00495
(0.00503)
0.00189
(0.00465)
-0.00139
(0.00397)
0.0000555
(0.000253)
0.0276***
(0.00566)
771
1.13
0.023

Note: All regressions use OLS and report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. The crime categories are not mutually
exclusive, so there is no omitted crime category. F-statistics jointly testing whether all coefficients equal zero are reported in the
second to last row of the table. Fourteen observations from the full sample shown in Table 1 were dropped due to one or more
missing values for the various defendant and case characteristics.

!
!

Average Age of
Jury Pool

Table 5: Cross Tabulations of Conviction Rates and Age Composition of Jury Pool

No Guilty
Verdicts

At Least One
Guilty Verdict

Conviction
Rate

< 45

19

31

62%

45-50

112

243

68%

50-55

64

252

80%

55-60

9

20

69%

Note: 35 observations from the full sample used in Table 1 were dropped because none of the charged offenses for those trials
resulted in a verdict of guilty or not guilty by the jury. All but two observations in the less than 45 age group have an average age
between 40-45.

!
!

Table 6: Reduced Form Regressions of Relationship Between Conviction Rates and Age of Jury Pool

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Any Guilty Conviction
Average Age
of Pool

0.0104*

0.00761

(0.00534) (0.00538)

0.210
(0.267)

1.231**
(0.602)

Controls
Observations
R-Squared

none
750
0.005

full
743
0.119

(8)

0.00525

(0.00527) (0.00537)

0.112*** 0.116***
(0.0320) (0.0333)

Constant

(7)

Proportion Guilty Convictions

0.00891*

Average Age
of Pool >=50

(6)

0.0914*** 0.0899***
(0.0318)
(0.0331)

0.677*** 1.673***
(0.0233) (0.540)
none
750
0.016

full
743
0.131

0.292
(0.263)

1.301**
(0.596)

0.628***
(0.0227)

1.577***
(0.536)

none
750
0.003

full
743
0.117

none
750
0.011

full
743
0.125

Note: The dependant variable for each regression is shown in the row heading. All regressions are estimated on the main analysis sample using OLS and heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors are reported in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. The full set of controls (used
in the even-numbered columns) include controls for the racial and gender composition of the jury pool, defendant and case characteristics (race, gender, offense category and
number of offenses), as well as county, year and judge controls.

!
!

Table 7: Robustness of Main Result to Defendant Gender and Race

Dependent Variable = Any Guilty Conviction
(1)
Average Age of Pool
Female Defendant
Average Age of Pool* Female Defendant

(2)

0.0109*
(0.00583)
2.529***
(0.928)
-0.0488***
(0.0185)

Average Age of Pool >=50

(3)
0.0109
(0.00819)

0.282***
(0.0755)

0.131***
(0.0343)
-0.365***
(0.126)

Average Age of Pool >=50 * Female Defendant
Black Defendant

0.145***
(0.0481)

0.0530
(0.624)
0.000303
(0.0126)

Average Age of Pool * Black Defendant
Average Age of Pool >=50 * Black Defendant
Constant
Observations
R-squared

0.187
(0.290)
746
0.135

(4)

0.664***
(0.0240)
746
0.154

0.156
(0.406)
710
0.130

0.0825
(0.0504)

-0.0287
(0.0741)
0.626***
(0.0336)
710
0.152

Note: All regressions use OLS and report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1
percent levels, respectively. Columns 1 and 2 include demeaned controls for jury gender, race, and county, which are fully interacted with defendant gender, as well as demeaned
controls for defendant race, crime type and total charges which are fully interacted with the age measure of the jury pool. Columns 3 and 4 include demeaned controls for jury
gender, race and county which are fully interacted with defendant race, as well as demeaned controls for defendant gender, crime type, and total charges which are fully interacted
with the age measure of the jury pool. Columns 3 and 4 restrict the sample to cases with black and white defendants only.

!
!

Table 8: Robustness/Sensitivity Checks

Dependent Variable = Any Guilty Conviction
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Average Age of Pool >=50

0.0858*
(0.0519)

0.123***
(0.0449)

0.084***
(0.0289)

0.092***
(0.0301)

0.116***
(0.0339)

0.112***
(0.0323)

Constant

1.135*
(0.656)

1.703**
(0.753)

1.697***
(0.4386)

1.413***
(0.4767)

1.920***
(0.5440)

1.590***
(0.530)

Lake
County

Sarasota County

Includes all
Lake cases
that are pled
as guilty jury
verdict

Includes
Sarasota
non-verdict
cases as not
guilty jury
verdict

Includes
Sarasota
non-verdict
cases as
guilty jury
verdict

372
0.101

371
0.158

883
0.0932

768
0.1147

768
0.1313

Sample Notes
Observations
R-squared

Includes
only Lake
cases that are
pled after the
jury is seated
as guilty jury
verdict
838
0.1008

Note: All regressions use OLS and report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent; and 1 percent levels, respectively. All regressions include the full set of controls described in Table 6.

!
!

Table 9: The First Stage Relationship Between Age of the Seated Jury and Age of the Jury Pool

Average Age of Seated Jury
(1)
Average Age of Pool

0.943***
(0.0568)

Average Age of
Pool >=50

Constant

Observations
R-squared

(2)

Average Age of Seated Jury>=50
(3)

(4)

0.906***
(0.0873)

0.0677***
(0.00491)

4.605***
(0.372)

0.291
(0.535)

-2.911
(6.128)

38.39***
(5.777)

-1.219
(7.061)

743
0.367

743
0.275

743
0.368

(5)

(6)
0.0613***
(0.00793)

0.343***
(0.0366)

0.0514
(0.0575)

-3.116***
(0.569)

-0.140
(0.568)

-2.817***
(0.643)

743
0.227

743
0.177

743
0.228

Note: All regressions use OLS and report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent; and 1 percent levels, respectively. All regressions include the full set of controls described in Table 6.

!
!

Table 10: OLS and IV Regressions of the Relationship Between Conviction Rates and Age of Seated Jury

Dependent Variable = Any Guilty Conviction

Avg. Age of Seated Jury

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.00258
(0.00305)

0.00945*
(0.00553)

0.0252***
(0.00730)

0.0101*
(0.00553)

Avg. Age of Seated Jury
>=50

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0378
(0.0329)

0.132*
(0.0778)

0.338***
(0.100)

0.152*
(0.0778)

Constant

1.499***
(0.568)

1.258**
(0.581)

0.707
(0.636)

1.236**
(0.582)

1.604***
(0.559)

1.640***
(0.543)

1.721***
(0.566)

1.649***
(0.544)

Method

OLS

IV
avg age
of pool
275.51

IV
avg age of
pool >=50
153.58

IV

OLS

IV
avg age of
pool >=50
87.79

IV

138.07

IV
avg age
of pool
190.49

98.03

743

743

743

743

743

743

Instrument
First Stage F-statistic
Observations
R-squared

743
0.116

both

743
0.117

Note: All regressions report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent; and 1 percent levels, respectively. All regressions include the full set of controls described in Table 6.

!
!
!
!
!

!
!

both

Table 11: General Social Survey Regression Results
(1)

(2)
(3)
Courts are Too Lenient

0.047**

-0.034**

(2)
(3)
Courts are Too Harsh

-0.034**

0.050**

[0.005]

[0.005]

[0.006]

[0.014]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.009]

[0.007]

age40_49

0.041**

0.054**

0.046**

0.037**

-0.044**

-0.049**

-0.042**

-0.053**

0.084**

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.014]

[0.003]

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.009]

[0.007]

0.042**

0.057**

0.044**

0.030*

-0.038**

-0.045**

-0.037**

-0.034**

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.015]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.010]

0.075**

0.082**

0.063**

0.057**

-0.060**

-0.063**

-0.056**

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.007]

[0.017]

[0.004]

[0.004]

[0.004]

0.067**

0.071**

0.051**

0.029

-0.068**

-0.070**

[0.007]

[0.007]

[0.008]

[0.019]

[0.004]

[0.004]

0.036**

0.053**

0.033**

0.014

-0.063**

[0.010]

[0.010]

[0.011]

[0.023]

[0.006]

-0.041**
[0.004]

(2)
(3)
Politically Conservative
[0.007]

[0.007]

[0.014]

0.081**

0.042**

0.02

[0.007]

[0.007]

[0.014]

0.098**

0.098**

0.058**

0.026

[0.007]

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.014]

-0.065**

0.102**

0.102**

0.067**

0.045**

[0.011]

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.008]

[0.016]

-0.066**

-0.080**

0.115**

0.113**

0.091**

0.053**

[0.005]

[0.013]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.010]

[0.019]

-0.071**

-0.069**

-0.093**

0.109**

0.107**

0.102**

0.055*

[0.006]

[0.006]

[0.015]

[0.013]

[0.013]

[0.013]

[0.022]

-0.063**

0.020**

0.032**

0.050**

0.049**

[0.009]

[0.002]

[0.006]

[0.004]

[0.008]

0.075**

0.102**

-0.073**

-0.097**

0.072**

0.084**

[0.005]

[0.010]

[0.003]

[0.007]

[0.006]

[0.010]

-0.007**

-0.014**

-0.001

0

0.006**

0.003*

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.000]

[0.001]

[0.001]

[0.001]

number of children

-0.005**

-0.001

0.004**

0.005*

0.010**

0.017**

[0.001]

[0.003]

[0.001]

[0.002]

[0.001]

[0.003]

Married

0.052**

0.055**

-0.034**

-0.054**

0.066**

0.078**

Male
White
years of schooling

Constant

0.775**

0.697**

[0.004]

[0.009]

0.721**

0.773**

0.094**

0.110**

[0.002]

[0.006]

0.180**

0.227**

0.275**

0.047**

(4)
-0.001

age80plus

-0.027**

(1)

0.017*

age70_79

-0.034**

(4)

0.047**

age60_69

0.042**

(1)

age30_39

age50_59

0.049**

(4)

0.310**

[0.005]

[0.009]

0.117**

0.125**

[0.004]
[0.011]
[0.013]
[0.023]
[0.002]
[0.006]
[0.008]
[0.015]
[0.005]
[0.014]
[0.018]
[0.022]
Observations
47018
47018
46788
11568
47018
47018
46788
11568
45860
45860
45667
13431
R-squared
0
0.04
0.06
0.03
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
Survey Year Dummies
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
2000-2010 survey rounds only
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Note: Standard errors in brackets.* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns 1 uses the full sample that has responded and has no controls. Column 2 adds controls for
year of survey -- 1972 to 2010. Column 3 controls for individual characteristics. Column 4 uses just the 2000 to 2010 survey rounds. Omitted age category in columns 2-5 is 18 to
29.!

!
!

