                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EQUITY PREMIUM AND THE
                CONCENTRATION OF AGGREGATE SHOCKS




                        N. Gregory Mankiw




                      Working Paper No. 1788




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




I am grateful to Fischer Black, Olivier Blanchard, Stanley Fischer,
John Long, and David Romer for helpful comments. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    ER Working Paper #1788
                                                    January 1986




                         The   Equity Premium and
                 the Concentration of Aggregate Shocks



                                 ABSTPACT




     This  paper examines an economy in which aggregate shocks are not
dispersed equally throughout the population. Instead, while these shocks
affect all individuals ex ante, they are concentrated among a few ex post.
The equity premium in general depends on the concentration of these
aggregate shocks; it follows that one cannot estimate the degree of risk
aversion from aggregate data alone. These findings suggest that the
empirical usefulness of aggregation theorems for capital asset pricing
models is limited.




                                                    Professor Gregory Ivlankiw
                                                    Harvard University
                                                    123 Littauer Center
                                                    Canbridge, NA 02138
1. Introduction

        Several recent and important studies have attempted to exp)ain the

joint behavior of asset returns and aggregate consumption using

representative consumer models.1 This empirical work raises the obvious

question of whether it is valid to aggregate across consumers. In this

paper I present a simple model economy in which aggregation is not valid

and, in particular, obscures the economic forces underlying relative asset

returns. I assume that aggregate shocks to consumption are not dispersed

equally across all consumers. Instead, while all consumers are subject to

adverse aggregate shocks ex ante, these shocks affect only some consumers ex

post.     I show that the concentration of aggregate shocks is a potentially

important determinant of relative asset returns.

        The model illustrates how the absence of certain contingent claims

markets can render representative consumer models largely ineffective as

approximations to a complex economy with ex post heterogeneous consumers.

Rubinstein (1974) and Grossman and Shiller (1982) prove aggregation

theorems that do not require complete markets. The results I present here

suggest that these theorems cannot be greatly extended. More important,

they suggest that these theorems do not fully justify the use of

representative consumer models in empirical studies of asset pricing.

     The general principle is that the absence of complete markets implies

that individual consumption is more variable than per capita consumption,

even if individuals are identical ex ante. Unless individuals have

quadratic utility, so that the marginal utility schedule -is linear, this
                                      -2—

extra variability generally affects both the mean of marginal utility and

its covariance with asset returns. It is generally not possible to

aggregate individuals' first-order conditions relating consumption and asset

returns to a relation holding with per capita consumption data.

     The model also suggests a possible solution to the equity premium

"puzzle" discussed by Mehra and Prescott (1985) among others. The nature of

this puzzle can be seen using the consumption-beta relation Grossman and

Shiller (1982) derive. They show that


         E Rt =   A   Cov(Rt, 1nCt),                                    (1)



where Rt is the difference in return between any two assets, A is the

harmonic mean of individuals' Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk

aversion, and C is aggregate consumption. This relation implies that


         A     E Rt /   a(Rt)   a(AlnCt).                               (2)



In United States data, the equity premium is about six percent, the standard

deviation of the realized equity premium is about twenty percent, and the

standard deviation of the growth in consumption of non-durables and

services is about three precent. The inequality in (2) therefore implies

that the coefficient of relative risk aversion exceeds ten. Using (1) and

noting that the correlation of the market return and consumption growth is

about one-third, we find that the implied coefficient of relative risk

aversion is about thirty, which is generally considered implausible.

     The model presented here suggests that the level of the equity

premium is -in part attributable to the role of incomplete markets in
                                            —3—

determining the equilibrium return on marketable assets. In particular,

for any set of aggregate variables, the equity premium may be made

arbitrarily large or small by changing the concentration of the

aggregate shock among the population. This finding implies that one cannot

judge the appropriateness of the equity premium from aggregate data alone.


2. A Simple Illustrative Model

          I illustrate the importance of the concentration of aggregate shocks

using the simplest possible model. I first describe the aggregate economy

and how an observer might attempt to infer the degree of risk aversion from

aggregate data. I then consider the disaggregate distribution of the

aggregate shocks and the implications for relative asset returns.


2.1 The Aggregate Economy

          There are two points of time in the model. At time zero, while the

endowment of the consumption good is uncertain, portfolio choices are made.

At time one, the endowment is realized and consumption takes place.

          Per capita consumption in the economy takes on two values: a good value

of j.z,    and a bad value of (1 -   q)p,   where 0 < q < 1.   Each state occurs

with probability 3.

          I examine a portfolio that pays —1 in the bad state and pays 1 +     it in
the good state, where it     is   the "premium." One can think of this portfolio

as consisting of two assets: a short position in an asset that pays off in

both states (Treasury bills) together with a long position in an asset that

pays off only in the good state (equity).

          Consider a representative consumer with utility function U(•) deciding

how much of the security to purchase. His goal is to maximize
                                                   —4—

         E U(C)                                                        (3)



where C is consumption. If R is the payoff of the portfolio, then the

standard first—order condition is


         E [R U'(C)] =            0.                                   (4)


The marginal utility weighted mean return is zero.

     Given the distribution of per capita consumption, this first-order

condition can be written as


         (1 + it) U'(jt)
                              —
                                       u'((l   —         =0            (5)


If it is valid to describe the economy as generated by this representative

consumer, equation (5) must hold at the equilibrium level of it.   Equation

therefore (5) produces the following value of the premium:


         it =     — [U'(ji)   —                — q)t)] / u'(4.         (6)


For small values of 4, the premium is approximately


         11 =   — [i   U''(&)/U'(.z)] 4.                               (7)


            =


where A is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.

     An economist observing the size of the aggregate shock (4) and the

premium on the portfolio (it) might wish to estimate the degree of risk

aversion. Using the approximation in (7) he would obtain
                                             —5-

            A = 7t/4.                                                                    (8)

Alternatively, he might explicitly parameterize the utility function as


            U(C) =   C1/1—A.                                                              (9)


In this case, equation (6) implies


            A =   - log(].   +   ir)/log(1   -   q),                                     (10)


which is    approximately    the same as (8) for small it and          .

2.2.    Individuals and Equilibrium

        Suppose there are an infinite number of individuals that are identical

ex ante. That is, as of time zero, the distribution of consumption is the

same for all individuals.          I assume, however, that their consumption is not

the same ex post. In particular, I assume that in the bad state, the fall

in aggregate consumption of qji         is   concentrated among a fraction A of the

population.

       The stochastic environment facing any given individual is therefore as

follows. With probability 3, a good state occurs: his consumption is .t and

the portfolio pays 1 +       it. With   probability 3, a bad state occurs. In the

bad state, the portfolio pays -1; his consumption is ji               with   probability 1. - A

and is (1 -   4/A)gi with    probability A.            I assume there do not exist

contingent claims markets through which individuals can diversify away this

latter risk.2

       The parameter A measures the concentration of the aggregate shock. If

A =    1, then all individuals have the same consumption ex post.                 As A
                                                 -6—

approaches q, the aggregate shock becomes more highly concentrated. At

A =   , the      aggregate shock is fully concentrated on a few individuals whose

consumption falls to zero.

      The first-order condition (4) holds for each individual, which implies


         (1 +     ii) U'(ji)   —
                                   (1   —
                                            A) U'(ji) — A u'((i —       q/X)p)   =   o.      (11)


The premium is therefore


            it   =x                -
                                        4/X)i)   -
                                                     W[gi])/U'[j.t]}.                        (12)



The premium (it)      in   general depends not only on the size of the aggregate

shock (4) but also on its distribution within the population (A).


2.3. The Implications of Concentration

      I now consider how the concentration of the aggregate shock affects

the size of the equity premium and the apparent degree of risk aversion

that an observer might infer from aggregate data.                        I assume that the

observer knows the size of the aggregate shock 4 and the size of the

premium it and uses the results from the representative consumer model--that

is, equations (9) and (1O)—-to estimate the coefficient of relative risk

aversion.

      The first result Is:


Proposition 1: If the utility function U(S) is quadratic, then the

                     premium is independent of the concentration of the

                     aggregate shock. That is, it does not depend on A.
                                          —7—

 This result follows directly from equation (12). It implies that if

 utility is quadratic, then the concentration of the aggregate shock does

 not affect the apparent degree of risk aversion. Hence, our observer is not

 led astray by his representative consumer model.

      This result does not generalize, however, as the next proposition

makes clear:


Proposition 2:   If the third derivative of the utility function is

                 positive, then an increase in the concentration of the

                 aggregate shock increases the premium. That is,

                 if U''' > 0, then

                                                 an




Proof:   By differentiating equation (12), we obtain


                    ax ——     U'[(l   -               - U'[ji)       + (qi/x) U''[(l -
                                                            u'J

         This can be rewritten as

                               J.1



                    air
                                                {U''[(l —    q/A)i]    —
                                                                           U''[Z]}   dZ
                          =    (1-q/x).
                                                            U' Eu]



         If U''' > 0, then the expresssion in the integral is negative over

         the range of integration. This completes the proof.



The condition of a positive third derivative is very plausible; indeed, it

is even weaker than the condition of non-increasing absolute risk
                                     -8-

aversion.3 The implication of Proposition 2 is that one cannot determine

the size of the equity premium from aggregate data alone. It further

suggests that our observer could be badly mistaken using a representative

consumer model, that is, equation (10). In particular, since our observer

estimates the degree of risk aversion correctly if A = 1, Proposition 2

implies that if A < 1, our observer overestimates the degree of risk

aversion.

     The assumption that the concentrated shock is an adverse one is

crucial to the direction of this bias. If, instead, we considered a model

with a concentrated windfall, greater concentration would imply a smaller

premium. The general case is discussed in Section 3.

     The next proposition shows that the error from using the representative

consumer model in fact can be great.


Proposition 3: Suppose the utility function satisfies the Inada

                  condition: urn U'(C) =
                              c—,0


                  Then lim   ir =




Proposition   3 follows directly from equation (12). It shows that

regardless of the size of the aggregate shock, the equity premium can be

made arbitrarily large by making the shock more and more concentrated.

Thus, if the Inada condition is satisfied, one cannot place an upper bound

on the equity premium from only the degree of risk aversion and the

aggregate shock. Conversely, one cannot place a lower bound on the degree

of risk aversion from the aggregate shock and the equity premium alone.
                                          -9-

           It may be instructive to apply some numbers to the model. Suppose
      =   0.05, so that the aggregate endowment falls by five percent in the bad
state. Table 1 presents the ratio of the true premium (equation (12)) to

the premium one would expect from the representative consumer model

(equation 7). Suppose A =        0.2,   so that twenty percent of the population

experiences a fall in endowment of twenty-five percent in the bad state.           If

utility is logarithmic, then the true equity premium is 1.3 times what one

would expect from a representative consumer model. If the constant relative

risk aversion is six, then the equity premium is 2.6 times what one would

expect. While the model is clearly too stylized to draw firm empirical

conclusions, the numbers in Table 1 do suggest that the concentration of

aggregate shocks is a potentially important determinant of the equity

premium.


3. Discussion

          This section provides a less formal and perhaps more intuitive

discussion of the effects highlighted in the model of Section 2. As above,

consider an economy in which all individuals are honiogenous ex ante but

heterogeneous ex post. Let R be the difference in return between two tra-

dable assets and C. be the consumption of individual i. The first-order

condition each individual satisfies is


              E [R tJ'(C1)] =   0.                                          (13)


Let        be the expectation of consumption. Since individuals are identical ex

ante, this mean is the same for all individuals, and therefore does not
                                               -10-

require a subscript i. The second-order Taylor approximation of marginal

utility around w is


  U'(C) = U'(w)            +   U''()   (C — w)            +    i   U'''(w) (Ci —   w)2.     (14)



Substituting (14) into (13) yields




            E(R)   =
                       - ---- E[R(C      -            -       1''' E[R(C      -
                                                                                  w)2],     (15)




where the derivatives are evaluated at w. Now sum (15) over the

individuals in the economy. Letting C denote per capita consumption and N

the number of individuals in the population, we obtain the following

expression for the expected excess return:


                       —           ,,,          —                     I,,
E(R) = - jj--— E[R(C-w)] -                   E{R(C-w)2] —
                                   t                                        E[R{E(C.- )2/N}]. (16)


The three terms in equation (16) provide some insight into the determinants

of relative asset yields.

      If utility is quadratic, the second and third terms in equation (16)

disappear. Expected return then depends only on the covariance of per

capita consumption with return. If the third derivative is positive,

then expected return depends on the third cross-moment of per capita

consumption with return, as represented in the second term of equation (16).

     The third term shows how the deviations of individual consumption

from per capita consumption affect expected return. In particular, if

U' '' >   0, then expected return depends on the cross-moment of return with
                                   —11—

ex post heterogeneity. In the model of Section 2, heterogeneity is great

when return is low; this cross-moment is therefore negative, which exerts a

positive influence on expected return. In general, however,

non-diversifiable individual risk can exert either a positive or negative

influence on the equity premium.


4. Conclusion

     The simple model presented here illustrates how one might be misled

using a representative consumer model to estimate the degree of risk

aversion from the size of the equity premium. Unless aggregate shocks to

income affect all investors equally ex post, relative asset returns in

general depend on the distribution of aggregate shocks among the population.

It is therefore not possible to infer investors' risk aversion from aggregate

data alone.

     It seems plausible that the concentration of aggregate shocks is an

important determinant of the equity premium. It is well-known that

recessions do not affect all individuals equally; rather, they fall on a

small fraction of the population that experiences very large losses in

income. From 1929 to 1933, consumption of nondurables and services

per capita fell only 20 percent. One suspects that certain investors

experienced much larger drops in their standard of living.

     The results obtained here require the absence of contingent claims

markets through which individuals can agree ex ante to spread this aggregate

risk among themselves ex post. This assumption appears a reasonable

approximation to observed behavior. Undoubtedly, the reason such markets
                                  —12—

do not exist is a combination of moral hazard and adverse selection

considerations.

     In light of these results, one might wonder whether representative

consumer models remain a useful paradigm in empirical work. It is probably

impossible to justify rigorously these models once we admit that many

contingent claims markets do not exist. Vet representative consumer models

may nonetheless remain a useful approximation for applications in which the

failure of Arrow-Debreu assumptions is not critical. Moreover, models using

a "surrogate" consumer with a hypothetical utility function may be useful for

some purposes even if this surrogate cannot be interpreted as representative

of actual individuals in the economy. Delineating the boundary between the

(approximately) valid and invalid uses of representative consumer models is

an important topic for future research.
                                     —13—




                                     Table 1


  Ratio of the True Premium to the Premium Inferred from Aggregate Model


                                      =   0.05


                             A=1             4=3           A=6


        X =   0.1             1.9                4.2       17.5


        A =   0.2             1.3                1.6        2.6



Note: A =   Coefficient   of relative risk aversion,

        =   Size of adverse aggregate shock,
      A =   Fraction   of population affected by aggregate shock.
                                  —14—



Notes


1.

     See, for example, Sh-iller (1982), Hansen and Singleton (1983),

Mehra and Prescott (1985), and Dunn and Singleton (1984).


2.


     It is this assumption that makes Rubinstein's (1974) aggregation

theorem inapplicable. Rubinste-in assumes that all risky assets are traded,

so that the portfolio of risky assets is the same for all individuals.


3.


     This condition is related to the precautionary demand for saving; see

Leland (1968) and Sandmo (1970). It is also related to skewness preference

in asset demand; see Kraus and Litzenberger (1976) for some empirical

support for the assumption of a positive third derivative.
                                  —15—


References

Dunn, Kenneth B., and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1984, Modeling the term structure
     of interest rates under nonseparable utility and durability of goods,
     NBER Working Paper No. 1415.

Grossman, Sanford 3., and Robert Shiller, 1982, Consumption correlatedness
     and risk measurement in economies with non-traded assets and
     heterogeneous information, Journal of Financial Economics 10, 195—210.

Hansen, Lars P., and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consumption,
     risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of asset returns,
     Journal of Political Economy 91, 249—265.

Kraus, Alan, and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1976, Skewness preference and the
     valuation of risk assets, Journal of FInance 31, 1085-1100.

Leland, Hayne E., 1968, Saving and uncertainty: the precautionary demand
     for saving, Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, 465—473.

Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: a
     puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 145-162.

Rubinstein, Mark, 1974, An aggregation theorem for securities markets,
     Journal of Financial Economics 1, 225-244.

Sandmo, Agnar, 1970, The effect of uncertainty on saving decisions,
     Review of Economic Studies 37, 353-360.

Shiller, Robert, 1982, Consumption, asset markets, and macroeconomic
     fluctuations, Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy 17.
