                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     GASOLINE TAXES AND CONSUMER BEHAVIOR

                                             Shanjun Li
                                            Joshua Linn
                                         Erich Muehlegger

                                       Working Paper 17891
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17891


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2012




ˆWe thank Antonio Bento, Larry Goulder, Ken Small, Chad Syverson, Le Wang and participants at
the Chicago-RFF energy conference, the Cornell environmental and energy economics workshop,
the UC Berkeley Energy Camp, the AERE Summer Conference, and the Northwestern, Stanford, UC-Davis,
and Maryland seminars for excellent comments and suggestions. Ken Small also shared with us the
state-level data, on which part of our analysis is based. Adam Stern and Pei Zhu provided excellent
research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Shanjun Li, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Gasoline Taxes and Consumer Behavior
Shanjun Li, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger
NBER Working Paper No. 17891
March 2012, Revised February 2014
JEL No. H3,Q4,Q5

                                            ABSTRACT

Gasoline taxes can be employed to correct externalities from automobile use and to raise government
revenue. Our understanding of the optimal gasoline tax and the efficacy of existing taxes is largely
based on empirical analysis of consumer responses to gasoline price changes. In this paper, we directly
examine how gasoline taxes affect gasoline consumption as distinct from tax-inclusive retail gasoline
prices. We find robust evidence that consumers respond more strongly to gasoline tax changes under
a variety of model specifications. We discuss two potential reasons for our main findings as well as
their implications.


Shanjun Li                                         Erich Muehlegger
Cornell University                                 Harvard Kennedy School
405 Warren Hall                                    79 JFK Street
Ithaca, NY 14853                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
sl2448@cornell.edu                                 and NBER
                                                   erich_muehlegger@hks.harvard.edu
Joshua Linn
Resources for the Future
1616 P St NW
Washington, DC 20036
linn@rff.org
    The gasoline tax is an important policy tool to control externalities as-
sociated with automobile use, to reduce dependency on oil imports, and to
raise government revenue. Automobile use imposes externalities including
local air pollution, carbon dioxide emissions, traffic accidents, and traffic
congestion (Parry, Walls, and Harrington (2007)). Although the gasoline
tax is not the theoretically optimal tax for all of these externalities, a sin-
gle tax avoids the need for multiple instruments (e.g., distance-based taxes
and real-time congestion pricing) and offers an administratively simple way
to control these externalities at the same time. Besides correcting environ-
mental externalities, the gasoline tax can reduce gasoline consumption and
may mitigate concerns about the sensitivity of the U.S. economy to oil price
volatility, constraints on foreign policy, and other military and geopolitical
costs. Moreover, gasoline taxes at the federal and state levels are major
funding sources for building and maintaining transportation infrastructure.
Federal fuel taxes provide the majority of revenue for the Highway Trust
Fund, which is used to finance highway and transit programs. Past increases
in federal gasoline taxes have generated revenue for such programs, but the
federal gasoline tax has stayed constant since 1993. Greater infrastructure
investment needs and declining fuel tax revenues due to the recent economic
downtown have led the Highway Trust Fund to be insolvent since 2008 and
required Congress to provide funding from the General Fund.1
    Growing concerns about climate change, air pollution, energy security,
the national budget deficit, and insolvency of the Highway Trust Fund have
brought renewed interests in increasing state and federal gasoline taxes. Un-
derstanding how gasoline tax changes affect automobile use and gasoline con-
sumption is crucial in effectively leveraging this instrument to achieve these
policy goals. An underlying assumption used in previous policy analysis on
the effectiveness of higher gasoline taxes and the optimal gasoline tax is that
   1
    In federal fiscal year 2010, $51 billion of spending was committed from the Highway
Trust Fund while the total revenue into the fund was just $35 billion.



                                          2
consumers react to gasoline tax changes similarly to gasoline price changes.
Consequently, the consumer response to oil-price induced changes in gasoline
prices is often used as a proxy for the response to a commensurate change
in the gasoline tax. The recent economics literature finds that consumers re-
spond little to rising gasoline prices at least in the short run.2 Together with
the maintained assumption, these estimates suggest that a large increase in
the gasoline tax would be required to significantly reduce fuel consumption.
Not only may this exacerbate the perceived political cost of increasing gaso-
line taxes, but it may partially explain why U.S. policy makers have tended
to favor less-salient fuel economy standards over gasoline taxes, despite the
broad conclusion of a long literature examining the Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards that gasoline taxes are more cost-effective at
reducing gasoline consumption.3
    The purpose of our paper is to directly quantify the consumer response
to gasoline taxes. In contrast to the literature, our analysis explicitly esti-
mates consumer responses to gasoline taxes by decomposing retail gasoline
prices into tax and tax-exclusive components. Consumers may respond more
to taxes than equal-sized changes in tax-inclusive gasoline prices because
of perceived persistence and salience. Fixed costs of adjusting driving be-
havior and purchasing a car cause consumers to respond more to persistent
than transitory gasoline tax or price changes. Furthermore, salience may be
greater for a tax change than for an equal-sized price change, particularly
given the much larger media coverage from tax changes that we document.
Most tax changes are fairly small, typically less than 10 cents per gallon.
Consumers may be less aware of equal-sized gasoline price movements driven
   2
     A partial list includes Small and Van Dender (2007), Hughes, Knittel, and Sperling
(2008), Bento et al. (2009), Li, Timmins, and von Haefen (2009), Klier and Linn (2010).
These studies often use variations in gasoline prices driven primarily by supply and demand
shocks.
   3
     See, for example, Goldberg (1998), Congressional Budget Office (2003), Austin and
Dinan (2005), Fischer, Harrington, and Parry (2007), Jacobsen (2013), and Anderson and
Sallee (2011).



                                            3
by oil price changes.
    We use three outcomes to examine consumer behavior over short time
horizons: gasoline consumption, vehicle miles traveled (VMT), and vehicle
fuel economy (miles per gallon, MPG). VMT represents the intensive mar-
gin, MPG represents the extensive margin, and total gasoline consumption
is the combination of the two. Our analysis employs two separate data sets:
aggregate state-level data that allow us to examine responses in gasoline
consumption, and household-level data that allow us to examine responses
in VMT and MPG. We find that rising gasoline taxes are associated with
much larger reductions in gasoline consumption than comparable increases
in gasoline prices; this result is robust across a variety of specifications and
estimation methods. The results from our main specification suggest that a
5-cent increase in the gasoline tax would reduce gasoline consumption by 0.86
percent, three times as large as the effect one would find from an empirical
framework that does not separate gasoline prices into tax and tax-exclusive
components. Dissecting the intensive and extensive margins, we find a signif-
icant differential effect in household MPG, especially among newer vehicles.
Although we focus on short-term responses, the large effect of taxes on MPG
suggests that the long-run response to taxes may also be greater than the
long-run response to gasoline prices. Our analysis does not show a statis-
tically significant differential effect on VMT from gasoline taxes and prices.
This finding could be in part due to imprecise estimates and in part a reflec-
tion of the short-run focus of our analysis.
    While adding to the extensive literature on automobile purchase and uti-
lization cited above, our study also fits into the growing literature on how per-
sistence, salience, and other factors may cause consumers to respond to one
component of retail prices, such as a tax or rebate, differently from other com-
ponents.4 In the context of gasoline consumption, recent studies including
  4
    For example, Busse, Silva-Risso, and Zettelmeyer (2006), Chetty, Looney, and Kroft
(2009), and Finkelstein (2009), Zheng, McLaughlin and Kaiser (2012).



                                          4
Davis and Kilian (2011), Barandini and Weber (2012), Rivers and Schaufele
(2012), and Scott (2012) all provide evidence that consumer respond to gaso-
line taxes differently from other components. Barandini and Weber (2012)
examine gasoline demand in Switzerland using time-series data. Rivers and
Schaufele (2012) use province-level panel data to investigate the consumer
response to a carbon tax on fossil fuels in British Columbia, Canada. Finally,
Davis and Kilian (2011) and Scott (2012) both employ U.S. state-level panel
data on gasoline consumption from 1989 to 2009.
    Among the existing studies, our research is perhaps most closely related to
Davis and Kilian (2011). Compared to estimates obtained via least squares,
they report much larger effects (in magnitude) of gasoline prices when instru-
menting with the state-level gasoline tax. They argue that the IV estimate
should be interpreted as capturing the consumer response to the gasoline tax.
Our research differs from their study in four important dimensions. First,
our main goal is to directly estimate consumer responses to gasoline taxes.
Our empirical analysis includes two price components, the gasoline tax and
tax-exclusive price, which permits estimates of consumer responses to the two
components; Rivers and Schaufele (2012) and Scott (2012) adopt a similar
approach. In contrast, Davis and Kilian (2011) use the tax-inclusive gasoline
price as the key regressor in the gasoline demand equation and use gasoline
taxes as the instrument for the price variable. Nevertheless, their analysis
does not directly produce an estimate of the elasticity of gasoline demand
to gasoline taxes. Second, they use monthly state-panel data from January
1989 to March 2008 while our data are annual from 1966 to 2008. Therefore,
their estimates may capture very short-term responses while ours represent
effects over a longer term. Third, in addition to the gasoline consumption
analysis using state-level data, we use household-level data to investigate the
differential effect separately for the extensive and intensive margins. This
analysis yields additional support for the finding of a differential response
and sheds lights on the channels through which the differential effect arises.


                                      5
Lastly, we present a more detailed analysis on two potential reasons for larger
responses to the gasoline tax: persistence and salience. The salience analysis
is based on extensive data on media coverage of changes in gasoline prices
and taxes.
     Our main findings have several implications. First, they suggest that the
gasoline tax would be more effective than the previous empirical literature
has suggested at addressing climate change, air pollution, and energy secu-
rity. Several recent proposals have called for higher gasoline taxes for either
fiscal motives (see, e.g., the proposal of the Deficit Reduction Committee) to
maintain the solvency of the Highway Trust Fund, or to internalize the exter-
nal cost of greenhouse gas emissions. By focusing on the effects of gasoline
taxes, our paper speaks directly to the effectiveness of these proposals.
     Second, separating gasoline taxes from tax-exclusive prices may offer a
strategy to address a challenging identification problem in environmental and
energy economics. Energy efficiency-related policies such as CAFE are often
advocated on the widespread belief that consumers use a high implicit dis-
count rate to value future energy savings. Beginning with Hausman (1979)
and Dubin and McFadden (1984), a long literature estimates the implicit
discount rates consumers use to evaluate durable goods purchases. The iden-
tification problem arises because the econometrician does not observe a con-
sumer’s expectation of future energy prices. Consequently, it is impossible to
estimate implicit discount rates without making assumptions on consumers’
expectations of future energy prices. In some cases, assumptions of future
expectations are innocuous (e.g., for regulated retail electricity markets) but
in others, such as gasoline prices, which are subject to influences from nu-
merous domestic and international factors, modeling consumer expectations
is not straightforward.5 Nevertheless, our analysis suggests that one could
use state or federal taxes to estimate implicit discount rates without making
   5
    Anderson, Kellogg and Sallee (2012) offer an interesting look at consumer expectations
of gasoline prices using survey data. We discuss their finding in relation to ours in detail
in Section II.E.


                                             6
assumptions regarding consumer expectations of gasoline prices. As we dis-
cuss, such an estimate would provide a lower bound to the extent to which
consumers undervalue fuel savings.
    Finally, the results have implications for the literature on the optimal
gasoline tax (e.g., Parry and Small (2005)). The literature estimates the
optimal tax based partly on empirical estimates of the elasticity of gasoline
consumption to gasoline prices, under the assumption that the gasoline tax
and gasoline price elasticities of demand are the same. Our analysis focuses
on short-term responses to gasoline taxes and tax-exclusive prices. Although
we find evidence of differential responses in gasoline consumption from lagged
tax and price changes, we leave the estimation of long-run responses for future
research.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In section I, we present some background
on U.S. gasoline prices and taxes. We present our analysis of the aggregate
state-level data in section II and present our analysis of the household-level
data in section III. In section IV, we discuss the implications of our results for
the estimation of implicit discount rates and the elasticity of fiscal revenue.
Section V concludes.


I.    Background on U.S. Gasoline Prices and
      Taxes
Our empirical analysis employs changes in state gasoline taxes and tax-
exclusive prices to investigate the effects of taxes on gasoline consumption,
vehicles miles traveled, and vehicle choices. In this section, we discuss vari-
ation in U.S. gasoline prices and taxes.
    Taxes make up a substantial portion of U.S. retail gasoline prices. As
an illustration, we decompose gasoline prices into oil prices and excise taxes.
We regress the tax-inclusive price for state s and year t on crude oil prices,
federal and state excise taxes, state fixed effects, and state-specific linear

                                        7
time trends:



(1)            RetailP ricest = βOilP ricet + γτst + αs + δs t + est ,

RetailP ricest is the retail price, OilP ricet is the crude oil price, and τ is
the sum of federal and state excise taxes. The state fixed effects, αs , capture
time-invariant differences in gasoline prices that arise from differences in
transportation costs. The linear time trends allow the retail prices in each
location to adjust at a different linear rate over time. The coefficient on taxes
is 1.03 and is statistically indistinguishable from 1, suggesting that gasoline
taxes are heavily borne by consumers. This is consistent with the result
in Marion and Muehlegger (2011), which finds that, under typical supply
and demand conditions, state and federal gasoline taxes are passed fully on
to consumers and are incorporated fully into the tax-inclusive price in the
month of the tax change. Similar findings are also presented in Chouinard
and Perloff (2004), Alm, Sennoga and Skidmore (2009), and Davis and Kilian
(2011).
    Based on these estimates, Figure 1 decomposes the average U.S. retail
gasoline price into an oil component, a tax component, and the state fixed
effects and time trends. Although much of the intertemporal variation in na-
tional gasoline prices is correlated with changes in oil prices, taxes constitute
a significant portion of the tax-inclusive gasoline prices for much of the pe-
riod. Table 1 reports the average nominal gasoline price, state gasoline tax,
and federal gasoline tax, in cents per gallon for five-year intervals beginning
in 1966 and ending in 2008. In addition, for each period the table reports the
percentage of gasoline price changes explained by changes in gasoline taxes.
The percentage varies substantially over time, rising with the federal gasoline
tax (from 4 to 9 cpg in 1983, to 14.1 cpg in 1991, and then to 18.4 cpg in
1994) and state taxes, and falling during periods of high oil prices.
    National averages obscure substantial cross-state variation in gasoline

                                         8
taxes. Figure 2 displays snapshots of per-gallon state gasoline taxes in 1966
and 2006. Figure 3 depicts changes in state gasoline taxes from 1966 to 1987
and 1987 to 2008. Figure 4 presents the mean, maximum and minimum state
tax as well as the federal gasoline tax over the period. Although the mean
state gasoline tax rises slowly over time, state taxes rise more quickly in some
locations than in others. In 1966, the difference between the states with the
highest and lowest gasoline taxes was 2.5 cpg. In 2008, the difference was 30
cpg; Georgia’s excise tax was 7.5 cpg while Washington’s excise tax was 37.5
cpg.
    States vary substantially in the frequency and magnitude with which
they change gasoline excise taxes. From 1966 to 2008, state per-gallon taxes
changed in about 26 percent of the state-years.6 Gasoline taxes rose in 488
state-years and fell in 44 state-years, out of 2,064 total observations. Ne-
braska, North Carolina, and Wisconsin changed taxes most often, in 29, 24,
and 24 years, respectively.7 Georgia only changed the gasoline tax twice
during the period.
    Figure 5 graphs the proportion of the tax-inclusive retail price made up
by excise taxes. At the median, taxes make up approximately 26 percent of
the after-tax price. This varies substantially over time and across states; the
proportion is greatest during the late 1960s and late 1990s when oil prices
were relatively low and taxes were relatively high. The proportion is lowest
during the early 1980s and after 2005, when oil prices were high. At the
peak in 1999, the proportion varies from a low of 25 to 30 percent (at the
5th percentile) to a high of over 40 percent (at the 95th percentile).
    Although gasoline taxes constitute a large proportion of after-tax fuel
prices, relatively little research examines political and economic factors that
   6
     In the annual data, we only count years in which the average annual rate changed
relative to the previous year. We do not count multiple changes over the course of a year
as part of the total.
   7
     In fact, Nebraska changes its gasoline tax even more often than the annual figures
suggest. From 1983 to 2008, for which we have monthly data, Nebraska changed its
gasoline tax 56 times.


                                           9
drive state and national fuel taxes.8 The previous literature identifies a num-
ber of political and economic factors that correlate with fuel tax changes,
such as road revenues from other sources (Goel and Nelson (1999)), envi-
ronmental regulation and trucking industry employment (Decker and Wohar
(2007)), and government debt as a percent of GDP (Hammar, Lofgren, and
Sterner (2004)). Finally, Doyle and Samphantharak (2008) use gasoline tax
moratoria that were granted in Illinois and Indiana in 2000 to estimate the
incidence of gasoline taxes. Although in this case taxes were waived because
of high gasoline prices, gasoline tax moratoria are very rare and constitute
a negligible fraction of the variation in our sample. Overall, the past liter-
ature identifies political and economic factors correlated with tax changes,
but the variables considered explain only a small fraction of total variation.
We provide similar findings in our analysis below.
     The gasoline tax literature has failed to identify political and economic
factors driving gasoline taxes. We have collected 14 case studies to further
investigate the sources of tax variation in our data. These include the eight
case studies described in Watts, Frick and Maddison (2012) and six recent
tax changes observed in our data. The states represented in these case studies
lie in different regions, have different political makeups, have different initial
tax rates, and have different demographic trends. The case studies include
Idaho, Indiana, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New York, Ore-
gon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Utah, Virginia, Vermont, Washington, and
Wisconsin.
     Several patterns emerge from these case studies. First, the debate over
changing the state gasoline tax typically preceded action by at least several
years. The debate often begins with a report by a state agency or other
organization that describes a large and long-term difference between the per-
ceived needs for transportation infrastructure improvements and forecasted
  8
    See e.g., Goel and Nelson (1999), Hammar, Lofgren and Sterner(2004), and Decker
and Wohar (2007).



                                        10
available funds. The gap between needs and funds can arise for a variety of
reasons such as changes in population, business activity, or aging structures.
Occasionally, a major disaster such as a bridge collapse sparks the debate.
Debate often continues for several years after the precipitating event, until
the state legislature and governor decide whether to change the tax (state
referenda are less common). If the state changes its tax, the change is usu-
ally not immediate and it is phased in over several years. For example, in
2013 Maryland enacted a tax increase that will phase in by 2015 (this tax
change is not part of our data set, which ends in 2008). Another example is
Washington, which passed a law in 2005 to increase the tax 9.5 cents over 3
years.
    Second, there is typically a substantial amount of media coverage as the
state government deliberates. News articles usually mention the current level
of the state gasoline tax and the level that would exist if the proposed law is
enacted. Because of the lag between delay and implementation, the media
accounts inform consumers about changes before they occur. We document
the extent of media coverage below.
    The third pattern is that many states index their taxes rather than fixing
the rate (ITEP 2011). Starting in the late 1970s, certain states indexed their
taxes to the consumer price index, wholesale gasoline price, or retail gasoline
price. Many states adjust tax rates quarterly or every six months. In some
cases the tax includes a fixed-rate portion and a variable-rate portion that is
adjusted regularly; in other cases, the entire tax is indexed. Starting in the
late 1980s, however, many states that had adopted an indexed tax reverted
to a fixed rate tax. Lawmakers and voters stated a variety of reasons for this
reversal; for example, in Wisconsin concerns that market forces rather than
the state legislature set the tax rate ostensibly caused the state to return
to a fixed-rate tax. Declining and low oil prices between the mid 1980s and
late 1990s caused many states that indexed the gas tax to wholesale or retail
prices to eliminate their variable taxes.


                                      11
II.     Aggregate Data Analysis
In this paper, we examine two distinct data sources: (1) aggregate data
including gasoline consumption, taxes, and prices at the state level; and
(2) household-level data on vehicle ownership and driving decisions. We
employ the aggregate data to estimate gasoline consumption responses to
tax and price changes, and we use the household-level data to examine the
extensive margin (vehicle choice) and the intensive margin (vehicle usage).9
In this section, we present our empirical strategy, data, and results using the
aggregate data.


II.A.      Empirical Methodology
To compare the effects of gasoline taxes and tax-inclusive gasoline prices, we
employ a similar empirical approach to Marion and Muehlegger (2008). We
estimate the following linear equation, which decomposes the tax-inclusive
retail price into a tax-exclusive component and the excise tax rate (which
does not include ad valorem taxes):

                                              
                                        τsy
(2)      ln(qsy ) = αln(psy ) + βln 1 +            + Xsy Θ + δs + φy + esy
                                        psy

where qsy is the dependent variable, gasoline consumption per adult, by state
(s) and year (y); psy is the tax-exclusive gasoline price; τsy is the total state
and federal gasoline tax; Xsy is a vector of state-level observables; and δs and
φy are state and year fixed effects. Within-state deviations from the national
trend identify the correlation among the dependent variables, tax-exclusive
gasoline prices, and tax ratios.
    Following the above decomposition, we can derive the price and tax elas-
  9
    Although state-level VMT measures are available, we do not use them to examine the
intensive margin because of their well-known measurement errors.



                                         12
ticities of demand from the coefficients in equation (2). Our analysis in
the previous section as well as that in Marion and Muehlegger (2011) pro-
vide strong evidence that state taxes are fully (and rapidly) passed on to
consumers. Under the assumption that consumers bear the entire tax, the
tax-exclusive price is not affected by a change in the tax rate, and dp/dτ
is equal to zero. With this assumption, equation (2) provides a direct test
of whether taxes are more strongly correlated with behavior than are tax-
exclusive gasoline prices. If consumers respond equally to changes in the
gasoline tax and tax-exclusive price (of the same size), α should be equal
to β.10 In the empirical analysis, we test this equality explicitly and subse-
quently compare the effects of the gasoline tax and the tax-inclusive price.
On the other hand, if, and only if, consumers respond more to a tax change
than to a change in the tax-exclusive price (i.e., | ∂ln(q)
                                                       ∂τ
                                                            | > | ∂ln(q)
                                                                    ∂p
                                                                         |), it can be
shown that β should be larger than α in magnitude.


II.B.      Sources
We use a panel data set on gasoline consumption, gasoline prices, and state
and federal gasoline taxes by state-year from 1966 to 2008. The data are
taken from annual issues of the Highway Statistics Annual, published by
the Federal Highway Administration. Tax-inclusive retail gasoline prices are
from the Energy Information Administration State Energy Price Reports.
The data contain demographic variables, including population and average
family size from the Current Population Survey, Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) and the Census; and per capita income, gross state product, and
fraction of the population living in metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)
from BEA. The fraction of the population located in metro areas with rail
  10
    To see this, we take the derivative of equation (2) with respect to the tax-exclusive
price and obtain: p1 (α − β p+τ
                             τ
                                ). Under the assumption that dp/dτ is equal to zero, taking
                                                                  1
the derivative of equation (2) with respect to the tax yields: β p+τ . If α is equal to β, the
two semi-elasticities are equal.



                                             13
transit is calculated from the Statistical Abstract of the United States. There
are several additional vehicle-related variables from the Highway Statistics
reports: the number of licensed drivers, number of registered cars and trucks,
and miles of public roads. Except for the federal gasoline tax, all variables
vary by state and year.


II.C.     State Level Gasoline Consumption Results
Table 2 presents the main coefficient estimates in equation (2) from 8 regres-
sions. The dependent variable is gasoline consumption per adult in logarithm
and the key variables of interests are the price and tax variables. These 8 re-
gressions are grouped into four specifications where we successively add more
control variables. Columns 1 and 2 (specification 1) include only state fixed
effects while columns 7 to 8 (specification 4) include the most: state fixed
effects, year fixed effects and state-specific quadratic trends. Because the
specifications include different controls, different sources of variation identify
the coefficients on the tax-exclusive price and tax variables. For example,
while specification 1 mainly uses temporal price and tax variations, specifi-
cation 4 uses only time-varying deviations from the state average and state
trend.
    Columns 1, 3, 5 and 7 report estimates using the tax-inclusive gasoline
price as the main regressor for the purpose of comparison. Adding year
fixed effects decreases the estimate of the price coefficient dramatically from
column 1 to 3, suggesting the national-level factors (as captured by year fixed
effects) as an important source of price endogeneity. Column 5 adds a set of
demographic variables that are commonly used in the literature (e.g., Small
and Van Dender 2007). Column 7 further adds state-specific quadratic time
trends. The specification in column 7 provides an estimates of -0.10 for the
price elasticity of gasoline consumption.
    This estimate is broadly consistent with previous results from the liter-
ature. Small and Van Dender (2007), with a shorter sample (1966-2001) of

                                       14
state-level data and using a different estimation strategy, obtain estimates of
-0.09 to -0.17 for the price elasticity of gasoline consumption. Using monthly
data at the national level, Hughes, Knittel and Sperling (2008) find that the
price elasticity ranges from -0.21 to -0.34 during 1975-1980 and from -0.034
to -0.077 during 2001-2006. Espey (1998) provides a broad review based on
hundreds of gasoline demand studies; the short-run price elasticity ranges
from 0 to -1.36 with a median of -0.23 based on 363 estimates.
    Columns 2, 4, 6 and 8 in table 2 separate the gasoline price into the
tax-exclusive price and tax components. The estimates vary across the re-
gressions but in all four cases, the coefficient estimate on the tax variable is
much larger than that on the tax-exclusive price. The hypothesis that the
two coefficients are equal can be rejected at the one percent significance level
(p-values are provided in the table).11
    Because of the strong persistence of gasoline prices, taxes, and consump-
tion, we also estimate equation (2) using feasible generalized least squares
(FGLS) in which we allow for a state-specific first-order autocorrelation struc-
ture in the error term. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity
and correlation within states. We do not report these results to save space
but allowing for first order autocorrelation has virtually no effect on our re-
sults compared with those from our main specification. Therefore, we use
the regressions in columns 7 and 8 as our benchmark regressions through the
text.
    The coefficient estimates on the other variables (not reported but available
upon request) are intuitively signed when precisely estimated. The short-
run income elasticity, in line with the literature, is estimated to be 0.25
from the main specification and ranges from 0.22 to 0.33 across columns
5 to 8. The income elasticity estimate from Hughes, Knittel and Sperling
(2008) ranges from 0.21 to 0.75 across model specifications. In the review
  11
     The hypothesis that consumers respond more strongly to the gasoline tax than to the
tax-exclusive price (β > α) cannot be rejected at any conventional significance level.



                                          15
by Espey (1998), the median short-run income elasticity is 0.39 with a range
from 0 to 2.91 based on 345 estimates. The parameter estimates across the
specifications suggest that gasoline consumption increases with car ownership
and the number of drivers. Interestingly, the estimated effect of the access to
light rail on gasoline consumption becomes negative only when state-specific
trends are included in columns 5 to 8.
    Hughes, Knittel, and Sperling (2008) find that the price elasticity of gaso-
line demand decreased from late 1970s to early 2000s by comparing the es-
timates from two five-year periods in 1975-1980 and 2001-2006. In the same
spirit, we have estimated separate coefficients on the tax and tax-exclusive
variables by five-year time periods and find that, in five of the nine time
periods, the coefficient on the tax variable is larger in magnitude and the
difference is statistically significant. Although the tax variable is still larger
in magnitude in the remaining time periods, the difference is not statisti-
cally significant (see online Appendix Table 1). In principle, the difference
between the effects of taxes and tax-exclusive prices could arise because the
coefficients are identified by variation in different time periods, but these
results suggest that is not the case.
    To assess the magnitude of the coefficient estimates on the price and
tax variables, we calculate the percent change in gasoline consumption from
a 5-cent per gallon increase in gasoline price or tax. In doing so, we use
the average price and tax in 1988, the year which matches the means over
the sample period most closely. Panels 2 and 3 in Table 2 report the results
corresponding to the five specifications in the first panel. The percent change
in gasoline consumption from a 5-cent per gallon increase in (tax-inclusive)
gasoline price in column 1 is based on parameter estimates in column 1
while the effect from a 5-cent per gallon increase in gasoline tax is based
on parameter estimates in column 2. The results presented in column 5 are
based on our benchmark regressions. Across all five columns, the effect from
the change in gasoline tax are at least three times as large as that from the


                                       16
change in gasoline price.
    One may be interested in comparing semi-elasticities for the tax-exclusive
price and the tax. However, the comparison in panels 2 and 3 in Table 2 is
much more informative to the policy and economic questions discussed in
the introduction because the literature has focused on the tax-inclusive price
elasticity. The parameter estimates themselves in Table 2 also suggest that
consumers respond more to the tax than the tax-exclusive price. Because the
semi-elasticity to the tax-exclusive price is not statistically significant, we do
not focus on those results.


II.D.     Identification and Additional Tests
We perform a host of additional analyses to examine alternative explanations
for the estimated difference in the coefficients on the tax-exclusive gasoline
price and the tax rate. We have assumed that the tax-exclusive price and tax
rate are exogenous to other determinants of gasoline consumption. In the
following, we first investigate the exogeneity of gasoline taxes by examining
how the gasoline tax changes are determined. We then show additional re-
gression results to examine the robustness of our finding to different modeling
approaches.

II.D.a.   Exogeneity of Gasoline Taxes

To examine the exogeneity of the gasoline tax, we show that, after including
state and year fixed effects (which are also included in the gas consumption
regressions), economic and political variables do not predict state gas tax
changes. We regress year-to-year changes in nominal state gasoline taxes
(per gallon) on first-differenced economic and political variables. We include
socioeconomic variables (e.g. GSP per capita, unemployment, urbanization,
and educational attainment), political variables (e.g. League of Conservation
Voters scores for a state’s congressional delegation, a dummy for a governor


                                       17
belonging to the Democratic Party, the fraction of a state’s house and sen-
ate seats occupied by Democrats, and a state’s budget surplus as a fraction
of revenues), and industrial variables (e.g. manufacturing and mining GSP
shares). Table 3 presents the results. Specifications (1) through (3) cover the
full sample. Specifications (4) through (6) use a shorter sample, but include
several additional industrial and political variables. The three columns, for
both samples, regress the change in state gasoline taxes on lagged, contem-
poraneous and leading changes of the explanatory variables. Across the six
specifications, the only significant, consistent correlation we find is that past
and current and changes in state GSP are negatively correlated with gasoline
tax changes (recall that the main regression model controls for GSP).12 Col-
lectively, the political and economic variables explain little of the variation in
gasoline prices beyond what is explained by year fixed effects. The dependent
variables are not jointly significant in any of the six specifications.13
    The results in Table 3 suggest that tax changes are not correlated with
observable socioeconomic, political, and industrial variables. Based on the
state gas tax case studies mentioned above, there are several reasons state gas
tax changes are unlikely to be correlated with unobserved factors that are,
themselves, correlated with gasoline consumption. First, the lag between the
beginning of the public debate and the eventual tax change reduces potential
concerns that gas taxes may be contemporaneously correlated with other
variables affecting gasoline consumption. For example, in principle gasoline
tax increases could be more likely to pass a state legislature when the state
economy is expanding. Even if this is true, the phase-in period reduces the
possibility that tax changes are correlated with the business cycle.
  12
      As an alternative specification, we regressed on the same first-differenced explanatory
variables a dummy variable for whether state gasoline taxes rise year-on-year. We do not
find consistent significant correlations between the explanatory variables and the timing
of state gasoline tax increases.
   13
      Another possible source of tax endogeneity is that a state may set taxes to meet a
revenue target. However, the small number of tax decreases in our data set suggests that
this is not common.



                                             18
    Second, the fact that gaps between transportation funding and infras-
tructure needs motivate many tax increases also reduces concerns about a
contemporaneous correlation between gas taxes and other variables. Popu-
lation, long-run economic growth, and land development are major contrib-
utors to these gaps, and these variables tend to vary gradually over time.
Quadratic time trends used in the estimation are likely to control for these
variables, which allows us to identify the effect of tax changes from discrete
tax changes rather than long-term trends.
    Third, during the public debate over a potential tax change, media ac-
counts usually mention both the current level of the tax and the level of the
tax if the tax change occurs. These accounts therefore provide consumers
information about the level of the tax prior to and after the tax change oc-
curs, increasing the salience of the tax change. In other words, although
many consumers may not know the level of the state gas tax when the tax is
constant, media accounts provide information about the pre and post-change
tax levels, which increases saliency of the tax changes. We document media
coverage below when we discuss saliency as a possible explanation for the
large tax effects.
    Finally, states that index taxes to the wholesale or retail gas price pose a
concern because demand factors such as economic activity may affect whole-
sale or retail prices, which in turn affect taxes. However, omitting states and
years with variable tax rates causes a slight increase in the estimated tax
coefficient, suggesting that indexing is not driving our results.

II.D.b.   Instrumenting for the Tax-Exclusive Price and Additional
          Tests

Next, we turn to the exogeniety of the tax-exclusive price. The tax-exclusive
gasoline price may not be exogenous to gasoline consumption if state-level
demand or supply shocks are correlated with equilibrium prices and consump-
tion. Including state GSP controls for demand shocks to some extent, but


                                      19
there may be other variables, such as supply-side shocks, that are correlated
with both prices and consumption. We use crude oil prices to instrument and
correct for the potential endogeneity of the tax-exclusive price. We construct
two instruments: (1) the interaction of the tax-exclusive price in 1966 with
the average annual price of imported crude oil, and (2) one plus the gasoline
tax divided by the annual average price of imported crude oil.14 In perform-
ing the IV regressions, we drop data in 1966 and 1967 and use data from
1968-2008. The interaction of the tax-exclusive price in 1966 with the aver-
age annual price of imported crude oil is used to capture how time-invariant,
pre-sample conditions (e.g., market structure in wholesale and retail gasoline
markets, differences in land and labor costs, distance to refineries) in each
state interact with national average crude oil prices to influence state-level
tax-exclusive gasoline prices.15 The validity of this instrument rests on two
assumptions. First, the demand shocks after 1967 are not correlated with
demand or supply shocks in 1966. To the extent that the demand shocks
are serially correlated, this assumption may be violated, but we drop obser-
vations in 1967 to alleviate this concern. In other regressions, we further
restrict our sample to later years and obtain qualitatively similar results,
which supports the validity of the instruments. The second assumption is
that state-level demand shocks are not correlated with national average im-
ported crude oil prices. Crude oil prices are set in the international market
and demand shocks in a particular state (i.e., deviations from the state av-
erage and trend) in the U.S. are unlikely to affect world oil prices.
    We present the IV results in the top panel in Table 4. The first three
  14
     We use the average price of imported crude oil rather than the more commonly used
WTI or Brent crude spot price because the imported price series begins in 1968. Between
1985 and 2008, during which we observe all three series, the correlation coefficient between
the imported crude oil price and the WTI and Brent crude oil spot prices is 0.9988 and
0.9989, respectively.
  15
     Muehlegger (2004), Hastings (2004), Hastings and Gilbert (2005), Brown et al. (2008)
examine the effects on gasoline prices of market structure, in particular vertical relation-
ships, and environmental regulations from the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments.



                                            20
columns replicate columns 6, 8 and 10 in Table 2 using the slightly shorter
sample for which our instruments are available (1968 to 2008). The next
three columns present the IV results for the same specifications. After in-
strumenting, the point estimate for the coefficient on the log of the tax-
exclusive price falls in magnitude, while the point estimate for the coefficient
on ln(1 + taxratio) rises slightly in magnitude. In all six specifications, the
coefficient on ln(1 + taxratio) is significantly greater than the coefficient on
the log of the tax-exclusive gasoline price (p-values are provided in the table).
Panels 2 and 3 in Table 4 report the implied percent changes in gasoline con-
sumption from a 5-cent per gallon increase in the tax-inclusive gasoline price
or tax. In all regressions, including the preferred specification in columns
3 and 6, the estimated impacts from a change in gasoline taxes are much
larger than those from an equivalent change in the tax-inclusive gasoline
prices (which are obtained from a regression that does not decompose the
tax-inclusive price).
    To further investigate this issue, we conduct two analyses to examine
the effects of omitted variables that may be correlated with state tax rates,
tax-exclusive gasoline prices, and gasoline consumption, and which may con-
sequently drive a spurious difference between the estimated effects of the
tax rate and tax-exclusive gasoline prices. Of particular concern are unob-
served trending variables, e.g., omitted demographic trends affecting vehicle
ownership or driving intensity that are correlated with the state gasoline tax.
    First, we examine a shorter state-level panel where we have available
monthly gasoline taxes, prices, and consumption from 1983 to 2008. We
estimate a first-differenced version of (2) using the monthly data. First-
differencing the higher frequency data makes it less likely that omitted vari-
ables bias the coefficients because an omitted variable must change in the
same month as the state excise tax to bias the coefficients. We present the
results in Table 5. As a point of comparison, columns 1 and 2 re-create the




                                       21
earlier levels regressions from Table 2 using the shorter monthly panel.16 The
estimated coefficients from the regressions in levels are similar to the earlier
estimates using the longer, annual, panel. Columns 3 and 4 regress gasoline
consumption on the tax-exclusive price and tax rate, after first-differencing.
As in the levels regression, we find a significant difference between the coef-
ficients on the tax-exclusive price and the tax rate.
    One drawback to using first-differenced monthly data is the possibility
that consumers shift consumption in response to anticipated changes in gaso-
line prices or taxes. In this case, first-differenced gasoline consumption may
appear to be more responsive than in our levels regressions. As an addi-
tional check, we aggregate the data by season, year, and state before first-
differencing in columns 5 and 6. At the seasonal level, intertemporal sub-
stitution is unlikely to be a problem. Although the size of both coefficients
declines, we continue to find a statistically significant difference between the
coefficients on the tax-exclusive price and the tax rate. This suggests that
the results in columns 3 and 4 are not being driven entirely by the strategic
timing of gasoline purchases around tax changes.
    Figure 6 presents further evidence that omitted variables do not bias
the estimates. Trends existing prior to gasoline tax changes would suggest
the presence of omitted variables bias. The figure plots changes in gasoline
consumption over time prior to and following an increase in the gasoline tax
that occurs between period -1 and period 0. Specifically, we replace the tax
variable in equation (2) with two series of indicator variables. The first series
includes variables equal to one if the state tax increased four years earlier,
three years earlier, and so on, up to a variable equal to one if the state tax
increases four years in the future; the second series includes corresponding
indicator variables for tax decreases. The figure plots the coefficients on the
increase indicator variables, along with the 95 percent confidence intervals.
  16
     When regressing in levels, we include state fixed effects and time fixed effects. In the
first-differenced specification, we only include time fixed effects.



                                             22
The figure shows no evidence of a downward trend in gasoline consumption
prior to tax increases. There is a sudden and persistent decrease in gasoline
consumption in the year of the tax increase. Thus, there is no evidence of
a pre-existing trend. We do not report the coefficients on the tax decrease
variables because there are very few tax decreases in the data.
    Finally, we consider the dynamics in the effect of taxes and tax-exclusive
prices on gasoline consumption. The specifications in Table 2 assume a log-
linear and contemporaneous relationship between the dependent variables
and the tax and tax-exclusive price. In the following, we examine potential
asymmetric and lagged responses to price changes. There is some evidence
in the literature that consumers respond more to gasoline price increases
than to decreases. Because there are so few examples of tax decreases in the
data (about one per state on average), it is not possible to assess statisti-
cally whether there is a differential tax response. It is possible to investigate
asymmetric responses to tax-exclusive prices, however, by adding to the main
specification the interaction of the tax-exclusive price with a dummy equal
to one if the price increased between the previous and current years. If con-
sumers respond more to a price increase than to a decrease, the coefficient
would be negative, but in fact the coefficient is positive and statistically
significant. The coefficient is quite small, however, and we do not find an
economically meaningful difference in the response to tax-exclusive price in-
creases.
    Regressions in Table 6 investigate lagged responses by including lags of
the tax-exclusive price and the tax. The results show that adding three lags
of both variables reduces the point estimates on the current tax and tax-
exclusive variables. The coefficients on the lags are larger than the coefficients
on the current tax or tax-exclusive price, and are more precisely estimated.
The hypothesis is rejected at the five percent level that the sum of the current
and lagged tax-exclusive coefficients equal those for the gasoline tax variable;
the differential effect of gasoline taxes and tax-exclusive prices still exist.


                                       23
Even if we allow for lagged responses to taxes and tax-inclusive prices, we
find a larger response to taxes than tax-inclusive prices. This suggests that a
differential effect could exist even in the long-run responses to gasoline taxes
and tax-exclusive prices.


II.E.      Explanations
II.E.a.    Persistence

One possible explanation for the larger response to gasoline taxes than gaso-
line prices lies in the fact that the durable goods nature of automobiles im-
plies that consumers’ responses depend on their expectations of future fuel
costs. If consumers consider tax changes to be more persistent than gasoline
price changes due to other factors, a larger response to gasoline taxes than
prices could arise through vehicle choice in both the short and long run. Al-
though the short-run response of VMT to gasoline price changes is unlikely
to depend on the persistence of price changes, the longer-run response to
persistent changes could be greater than to temporary changes because of
transaction costs involved in travel mode and intensity decisions (such as
setting up carpooling or changing where to live and work).
    A formal test of this explanation is out of scope of this study. Neverthe-
less, in the following, we provide some suggestive evidence for its plausibility.
    To examine the persistence of gasoline taxes and gasoline prices, we con-
duct AR(1) regressions with these two variables using the state-level panel
data and controlling for state and year fixed effects. Using the dynamic panel
data approach in Blundell and Bond (1998), we obtain an AR(1) coefficient of
0.925 with a robust standard error of 0.018 for gasoline taxes and 0.822 with
a robust standard error of 0.018 for (tax-inclusive) gasoline prices.17 This
  17
     A coefficient estimate of 0.775 is obtained for tax-exclusive gasoline prices following
the same method. Adding the instrument based on crude oil prices as constructed above
for both tax-inclusive and tax-exclusive gasp prices changes their coefficients to 0.828 and
0.782, respectively.


                                            24
suggests that gasoline tax changes are more persistent even after including
state and year fixed effects; of course, consumer perceptions of persistence
could be different from these estimates, which we discuss further below. Nev-
ertheless, to examine what the difference implies for fuel costs, we calculate
the increase in the total expected discounted fuel costs during a vehicle’s
lifetime from a 5-cent increase in the current period of a) the gasoline tax
and b) the tax-exclusive gasoline price. For an average car that achieves 25
MPG, assuming that the VMT schedule during the lifetime decreases as in
Lu (2007), and assuming a 5 percent annual discount rate, the increase in
the total expected discounted fuel costs is $163 for a tax increase compared
with $111 for an equal gasoline price increase. For an average light truck
that achieves 18 MPG, the increases in the total expected discounted fuel
costs are $248 and $167, respectively. The larger difference for light trucks
is due to the lower fuel economy as well as the larger lifetime VMT for light
trucks.
    Based on survey data from 1993 to 2009 from the Michigan Survey of
Consumers, Anderson, Kellogg and Sallee (2012) find that, on average, con-
sumers assume that the expected future prices equals the current price. We
argue that this finding does not dismiss the persistence explanation for the
following three reasons. First, their analysis is on overall gasoline prices and
their finding does not rule out differential consumer beliefs for the two price
components–more specifically, differential consumer beliefs about within-year
deviations from state averages and trends, which are the basis for our identifi-
cation. Second, they document considerable cross-sectional heterogeneity in
consumer beliefs. The degree of heterogeneity increases with gasoline prices,
which suggests that some consumers do not expect gasoline price changes
(and possibly tax-exclusive price changes) to be fully persistent. Third, they
find that the characteristics of consumer beliefs differ over time. For exam-
ple, they deviate substantially from a no-change forecast after the financial
crisis hit in 2008. Our data period is from 1966 to 2008 and includes several


                                      25
episodes of economic downturns and volatile gasoline prices.

II.E.b.     Salience

A second possible explanation is that gasoline tax changes may be more
salient to consumers than changes in the tax-exclusive price. A number of
recent empirical studies demonstrate that consumer are more responsive to
salient price and tax changes (Busse, Silva-Risso, and Zettelmeyer (2006),
Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009), and Finkelstein (2009)). Although the
salience of gasoline taxes and pre-tax price changes may differ for a number of
reasons, we focus on news coverage and examine whether tax increases receive
more media attention than commensurate increases in the tax-exclusive price
of gasoline. If news coverage informs consumers of price and tax changes,
consumers may respond more to changes that are heavily covered in the news
media than changes that are not. Thus, our mechanism is similar to Rivers
and Schaufele (2012), who argue that the publicity surrounding the carbon
tax in British Columbia may explain may the large consumer response to the
tax.
    To test whether gasoline taxes receive disproportionate levels of media
attention, we collect data on the coverage of gasoline-related topics in major
U.S. newspapers and on nightly television news broadcasts. Our data on
print media come from LexisNexis and include the 15,623 unique articles
indexed by LexisNexis as being highly relevant to either gasoline prices or
gasoline taxes published in twenty-five major U.S. newspapers from 1985 -
2008.18 The newspapers include both national dailies (e.g., the New York
Times and USA Today) and major regional newspapers (e.g., the Denver
Post, Detroit News and Minneapolis Star Tribune).19 For each article, we
  18
     LexisNexis scans the content of all documents in its repository using a set of internally-
developed, pre-defined classifications rules. For each index term (e.g., gasoline prices or
gasoline taxes), LexisNexis calculates a relevancy score based on the frequency and location
of phrases in the article related to the term. We use articles classified by LexisNexis as
being “highly relevant” to either gasoline prices or gasoline taxes.
  19
     The comprehensive list of newspapers is: Los Angeles Times, Minneapolis Star Tri-

                                              26
observe the date it was published and article word count. To construct our
measures of print media coverage, we sum the word count of all articles
classified by Lexis-Nexis as highly relevant to “Gasoline Prices” and “Fuel
Taxes” in each month.
    Our data on nightly television news broadcasts are drawn from the Van-
derbilt Television News Archive. Our dataset covers 1983-2010 and includes
information on all 3,926 ABC, NBC, CBS, FOX and CNN nightly news seg-
ments for which the word “gasoline” appeared in the abstract of the segment.
In addition to the abstract, the archive provides the date, network and length
of the segment.20 Our measure of television media coverage is the total num-
ber of seconds of coverage of gasoline segments for which the words “price”
or “tax” appear in the detailed abstract in each month. As an example, the
segment cited in the footnote above would be classified as a segment related
to gasoline prices, but not a segment related to gasoline taxes.
    Our empirical approach and basic results can be summarized in a pair of
graphs. Figures 7 and 8 graph the word count, over time, of gasoline-related
articles in print media and the total seconds of gasoline-related nightly news
coverage. The solid vertical lines correspond to federal gas tax increases in
1990 (5.1 cpg) and 1993 (4.3 cpg) and the May 1996 congressional debate
over repealing the 1993 gas tax increase. The dashed lines correspond to
bune, Newsday, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Tampa Bay Times,
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, The Baltimore Sun, The Buffalo News, The Daily
Oklahoman, The Denver Post, The Detroit News, The Hartford Courant, The New York
Daily News, The New York Post, The New York Times, The Orange County Register, The
Philadelphia Daily News, The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Tampa Tribune, The Washing-
ton Post and USA Today. Although Lexis-Nexis includes the Journal of Commerce and
the Christian Science Monitor as ”Major U.S. Newspapers,” we exclude the publications
form our analysis as both are substantially different from daily newspapers.
  20
     As an example, ABC Nightly News aired a 90-second segment on May 22, 2013, with
the abstract “(Studio: Diane Sawyer) AAA predictions for the number of drivers out on
Memorial Day cited. (New York: Rebecca Jarvis) The continuing rise in gasoline prices
examined; gas price statistics cited. [GasBuddy.com oil industry analyst Tom Kloza - says
the prices are linked to refinery work in the middle of the country.] Some money-saving
driving tips outlined on screen.”



                                           27
the months in which tax-exclusive prices increased by similar amounts. Both
print media and nightly news coverage increase much more prior to actual or
proposed changes in the federal tax than to comparable changes in the tax-
exclusive price. Some gas price changes do trigger substantial media coverage,
but those price changes are much larger than the tax changes. Using print
media as an example, gasoline-related coverage in major US papers at the
time of the two tax changes and the 1996 gas tax debate was between 50,000
and 150,000 words per month. Tax-exclusive price changes that triggered
similar amounts of media coverage were at least 6 times larger than the
actual federal tax changes. It is important to note we estimate equation
(2) with year fixed effects that subsume the three national tax events and
identify the effects of gasoline taxes solely from changes in state tax rates.
Unfortunately, the Vanderbilt television archive only provides information
about national news broadcasts and thus, we are not able to examine state
television media coverage of the state tax changes alone.21 Nonetheless, the
media analysis for federal taxes provides insights into the salience of state
taxes.
    To formally test whether taxes receive disproportionate media coverage,
we regress print and television media coverage on the change in tax-inclusive
gasoline prices and per gallon gasoline taxes in the previous three months
and upcoming three months. Our specification is:

(3)      M ediaCoveraget = α + β1 ∗ ∆pt,t−3 + β2 ∗ ∆pt+3,t
                                    +γ1 ∗ ∆τt,t−3 + γ2 ∗ ∆τt+3,t + f (t) + t

where ∆pt,t−3 and ∆τt,t−3 are the changes in the average tax-inclusive price
and average per gallon tax over the previous three months, ∆pt+3,t and ∆τt+3,t
  21
    We are able to examine state print media coverage of all articles related to gasoline
and find that, before taxes rise, both state and federal gasoline taxes receive coverage of
similar magnitude. Furthermore, the coverage is significantly greater than that received
by commensurate changes in the price of gasoline.



                                            28
are the changes in the upcoming three months, and f (t) denote a set of time
effects.22 Marion and Muehlegger (2011) find strong evidence of full and
immediate pass-through of gasoline taxes to retail prices. Consequently, we
interpret the coefficients γ1 and γ2 as the amount of additional news coverage
following and preceding a change in gasoline taxes above what would be
expected for a commensurate change in the tax-exclusive price.
    Table 7 reports the estimates from the regression.23 The four columns
for print and nightly news coverage correspond to specifications using differ-
ent dependent variables. From left to right, the columns report the results
using as dependent variables the coverage related to gasoline prices, gaso-
line taxes, gasoline price or taxes, and the log of coverage of gasoline prices
or taxes. Focusing on any coverage related to gasoline, we estimate that a
one-cent change in retail prices over the preceding three months is associated
with 805 words of newspaper coverage and 14 seconds of additional nightly
news coverage. A one-cent change in gasoline taxes over the preceding three
months is associated with 2870 words of additional coverage. Moreover, a
one-cent change in taxes over the subsequent three months is associated with
3621 words of additional coverage and 129 seconds of additional network air-
time. Taken in aggregate before and after a change, a one-cent tax change
is associated with an order of magnitude greater increase in media coverage,
as compared to a one-cent change in the tax-exclusive price.
  22
     For print media coverage, we include a quadratic time trend to capture the gradual
addition of newspapers tracked by LexisNexis. For television media coverage, we include
dummy variables for portions of the study period during which the Vanderbilt Television
News Archive transcribed FOX and CNN news broadcasts in addition to ABC, CBS and
NBC broadcasts. In all specifications, we also include a dummy for the month of May
1996, during which congress debated repealing the 1993 federal gasoline tax increase.
  23
     We also perform regressions using log(gas tax) and log(1+tax ratio) as explanatory
variables and obtain the same qualitative findings.




                                          29
III.      Household Data Analysis
Vehicle purchase and driving constitute the extensive and intensive margins
through which the gasoline price affects gasoline demand.24 The purpose
of this section is to further examine how the gasoline tax and tax-exclusive
gasoline prices affect the two margins. We conduct analysis on household ve-
hicle purchase and travel using the 1995, 2001, and 2009 National Household
Travel Survey (NHTS). The NHTS, conducted by agencies of the Department
of Transportation through random sampling, provides detailed household-
level data on vehicle stocks, travel behavior, and household demographics at
the time of survey.


III.A.      Empirical Methodology
We employ a similar empirical strategy to the one used to examine the ag-
gregate data, but exploit the richer set of demographics and geographic char-
acteristics present in the household-level data. For the vehicle fuel economy
analysis, we focus on households who purchased at least one vehicle (new or
used) during the past 12 months. In the survey, the purchase time (year and
month) is available for the recently purchased vehicles. For these households,
it is possible to match the vehicle MPG and the gasoline price in the pur-
chase month and the preceding months. We estimate the following equation
to examine how gasoline prices affect vehicle purchases:
                                                     
                                              τsq
(4)    ln(M P Git ) = αm ln(psq ) + βm ln 1 +             + Xi Θm + δs + φt + ei ,
                                              psq

where i denotes a household surveyed in month t, s denotes the state, and
q denotes a quarter. MPGit is the average MPG of all the new and used
vehicles (cars and light trucks) purchased during the past 12 months by
  24
    Vehicle scrappage is part of the extensive margin but is not examined in this paper
due to data limitations.



                                          30
household i surveyed in month t. The key explanatory variables include the
tax-exclusive gasoline price and the tax ratio. Importantly, the tax and price
correspond to the household’s state and the quarter of purchase. We include
a large set of household demographics. We use quadratic functions for the
non-categorical variables: household size, the age of the reference person, the
number of adults, the number of workers and the number of drivers in each
household. We include full sets of fixed effects for the categorical variables:
household income, education of the reference person, MSA size, worker den-
sity by census tract, population density by census tract, rail availability, and
urban and rural indicator variables. We also include fixed effects for year,
month, and location (census division or state).
    To examine the effect of the tax-exclusive gasoline price and the gasoline
tax on household travel behavior, we estimate the following equation:
                                                
                                             τsq
(5)   ln(V M Tit ) = αv ln(psq ) + βv ln 1 +       + X i Θv + δ s + φt + e i ,
                                             psq

where VMTit is the daily total VMT across all vehicles belonging to house-
hold i that was surveyed in month t. The VMT equation includes the same
set of variables as the MPG equation with the exception of month fixed
effects, which are constructed to match the travel period.


III.B.     Sources
Household data from the NHTS provide detailed demographic characteris-
tics about each household. Each household is assigned to one of eighteen
income bins and eight education bins. The data include the number and
age of adults and the numbers of workers and drivers in the household. In
addition, the data provide detailed information about neighborhood (census
tract) demographics such as rural and urban indicators, population, working
population, housing density, and the availability of rail. Consequently, the
NHTS data provide a detailed set of controls for characteristics that may

                                        31
vary with both a state’s tax rate and the household’s driving or purchase
decisions.
    For the MPG analysis, we use the 1995, 2001, and 2009 NHTS. The data
include the make and model of the household’s vehicles, which we match to
the EPA fuel economy database to obtain MPG for each vehicle. Gasoline
prices at the time of purchase are based on the gasoline prices used in the ag-
gregate analysis. Because purchases of newer vehicles may respond more to
price changes than purchases of older vehicles, our analysis is conducted on
two separate samples. The first sample, with 52,128 observations, includes
households that purchased at least one used or new vehicle during the 12
months prior to the survey. The second sample focuses on newer vehicles. It
has 30,363 households who purchased at least one vehicle during the past 12
months and all the vehicles purchased are less than four years old. Table 8
provides summary statistics for the two samples. The average MPG of vehi-
cles in the two samples is almost the same and other variables are quite close
as well. The households in sample 2 (those who purchased newer vehicles)
have slightly smaller household size, higher income, and more education.
    We use a subset of the NHTS data to examine VMT. During the 1995
and 2001 surveys, participants received an initial survey followed by a sec-
ond survey several months later. In both, participants were asked to report
odometer readings of all of their vehicles. We calculate daily VMT per ve-
hicle across vehicles owned by a household by comparing the two odometer
readings for each vehicle. We also construct the average gasoline price during
the odometer reading period based on the date of the odometer readings and
weekly state gasoline prices. Unfortunately, not all survey participants re-
port the second odometer reading and there are many missing values for the
first odometer reading. We drop approximately two-thirds of the households
in the 1995 and 2001 survey waves that have missing data for either of the
two odometer readings for any of the vehicles owned by the household. The
final VMT data set contains 28,303 observations. Table 9 reports summary


                                      32
statistics under sample 1.
    To our knowledge, whereas the previous literature has used self-reported
annual VMT, this is the first use of VMT data based on two odometer read-
ings from the NHTS. We compare the results using odometer-based VMT
with the results using self-reported annual VMT. The data set with self-
reported annual VMT is larger and contains 61,795 observations. Table 9
reports summary statistics for the self-reported sample under sample 2.
    To compare daily VMT based on the two types of VMT estimates, we
use 24,528 households with both values. The (weighted) average daily VMT
based on odometer readings is 49.9 with a standard deviation of 35.3, while
the average self-reported daily VMT is 50.1 with a standard deviation of 45.4.
The top graph in Figure 9 plots Kernel densities of the two VMT measures;
the distributions of the two variables are quite similar. Nevertheless, the
comparison of the two distributions masks the differences that exist for a
given observation. We find that although the means of the two variables are
quite close, the difference between the two measures (for a given household)
can be quite large: the mean difference is 0.2 but the standard deviation is
38.5.
    To further understand the difference, we compare the two VMT measures
for two subsamples that are defined according to whether the odometer-based
VMT is above or below the sample mean of 49.9 (which we refer to as high
and low VMT households). The average daily odometer-based VMT for
the two subsamples is 83.0 and 26.0, while the average self-reported daily
VMT is 74.7 and 32.3 for the two subsamples. The middle graph in Figure
9 plots the kernel densities of the difference between the odometer-based
and self-reported VMT for the high and low VMT subsamples separately,
with vertical lines indicating the sample averages. High-VMT households
tend to under-report their travel intensity, and low-VMT households tend to
over-report.
    Because two odometer readings could happen any time during the year


                                     33
(and are 2-6 months apart in general), part of the differences could be caused
by seasonality in driving. To check if this is driven by seasonality, we compare
the two measures month by month and find that the pattern still holds in
each of the 12 months (see the bottom graph in Figure 9). To the extent
that gasoline prices are negatively correlated with travel, this finding implies
that using self-reported VMT in the regression analysis could attenuate the
effect of gasoline prices on travel demand.
    Because the observations used for our VMT analysis only constitute about
one-third of the full sample, it is important to know how representative the
estimation sample is. Table 10 compares the characteristics of the subsample
of participants who report two odometer readings with the characteristics of
the full 1995 and 2001 samples. We find that the mean tax-exclusive price
and gasoline taxes for the VMT subsample and full sample compare quite
closely. Households in the estimation sample are slightly older (mean age
50.66 vs. 49.59) and less likely to live in an MSA with a subway system
(14 percent vs. 16 percent). Overall, however, the mean and the 10th and
90th percentiles of the variables are quite similar for the full sample and
the estimation sample. Figures 10 and 11 show the distributions of the
categorical variables for both samples. Similarly to the other variables, the
distributions for these variables are very similar for the full NHTS and the
estimation samples. These comparisons suggest that the estimation sample
may be representative of the full NHTS sample, but we treat the estimation
results with caution.25
    The empirical strategy for gasoline consumption and VMT uses cross-
state and time-series variation in the tax-exclusive prices and gasoline taxes.
An important concern is that the tax-exclusive prices, taxes, and the de-
  25
    In addition, we preform a logit regression using the self-reported sample in which the
dependent variable indicates whether the two odometer readings are missing. Explanatory
variables are the same as in equation (5). Most of the demographic variables are not
statistically significant although households with higher income are more likely to have
missing odometer readings. Importantly, the key explanatory variables, the tax-exclusive
gas price and tax, are not statistically significant.


                                           34
pendent variables may be correlated with omitted variables. To investigate
this possibility, we examine whether gasoline taxes and tax-exclusive prices
are correlated with the independent variables. In particular, we separate
states according to whether they have high gasoline taxes or tax-exclusive
prices. Across the samples, we compare the means and the 10th and 90th
percentiles of the independent variables. In general, we find that the distri-
butions are quite similar, which is consistent with the assumed exogeneity of
tax-exclusive prices and taxes.


III.C.       Results
Table 11 reports key parameter estimates for 12 regressions, examining how
gasoline prices and taxes affect the fuel economy of recently purchased vehi-
cles. The table also provides implied percent changes in gasoline consumption
from a 5-cent per gallon increase in the gasoline price or tax. Panel A shows
six regressions of the effect of the tax-inclusive gasoline price on the average
MPG of recently purchased vehicles. Columns 1 to 3 use sample 1 (all house-
holds), and columns 4 to 6 use sample 2 (households purchasing vehicles less
than four years old).
    Columns 1 to 3 differ according to whether census division dummies or
state dummies are included. The parameter estimates are all statistically
significant and are very similar across the three regressions. The estimates
from sample 2 (presented in columns 4 to 6) are similar across the three
specifications, and they are only slightly larger than their counterparts from
sample 1. The elasticity estimates provided by the coefficient estimates on
the price variable are close to those in several recent studies: Small and Van
Dender (2007) estimate a short-run elasticity of 0.044; Gillingham (2010)
finds a medium-run (2-year) fuel economy elasticity of 0.09; Klier and Linn
(2010) estimate an elasticity of about 0.12 using monthly data.26
  26
   In all the regressions, the gasoline prices are matched to the month of vehicle purchase.
We also estimate the same regressions using the 3-month or 12-month averages of the


                                            35
     Panel B shows regressions that separate the gasoline tax from the tax-
exclusive gasoline price; columns are analogous to those in Panel A. In all six
regressions, the coefficient estimate on the tax ratio variable (β) is larger than
that on the tax-exclusive gasoline price (α), with the difference being more
pronounced using the smaller sample focusing on newer vehicles. The p-value
for the hypothesis that consumers respond equally to the two components
is 0.08 in column 3 (with all households) and 0.03 in column 6 (with the
smaller sample). This comparison is intuitive and is consistent with the
persistence explanation: if the differential effect is driven by the durable
good nature of automobiles, we would expect a stronger effect among newer
vehicles that have a longer remaining lifetime.27 Supporting this hypothesis,
Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013) find that the adjustment in the new
vehicle market to gasoline price changes is primarily in market shares, while
it is primarily in vehicle prices in the used vehicle market.
     For the VMT analysis, Table 12 presents key parameter estimates as
well as the implied changes in gasoline consumption from changes in the
gasoline price and tax. The six regressions in Panel A include total gasoline
prices on the right side, while those in Panel B separate tax-exclusive prices
from gasoline taxes. The dependent variable in columns 1 to 3 is the log of
household daily odometer-based VMT (sample 1), and that in columns 4 to
6 is the log of self-reported VMT (sample 2).
     The VMT elasticity with respect to gasoline prices from sample 1 ranges
from -0.33 to -0.50 in the three specifications. The preferred specification
in column 3 with state fixed effects provides an estimate of -0.39. When
separating gasoline taxes from tax-exclusive gasoline prices in Panel B, the
coefficient estimates on the key variables are rather close. In additions, the
gasoline price and tax (including the purchase month and months prior to purchase). The
results (not reported) are similar to those in Table 11.
  27
     We have estimated equation (4) using older vehicles (four years or older) and we
cannot reject the hypothesis of no differential effects from gasoline taxes and tax-exclusive
prices.



                                             36
standard errors are quite large, especially when state fixed effects are included
in column 3. This could reflect more limited variations in gasoline taxes than
for the MPG analysis (recall that the VMT analysis only uses the 1995 and
2001 NHTS because the second odometer readings were not collected in the
2009 survey). In all specifications, the coefficient estimate on the tax ratio
variable is larger than that on the tax-exclusive gasoline price but none of
the differences is statistically significant.
    We conduct the same analysis in columns 4 to 6 based on self-reported
VMT. We use average gasoline prices over the same period as the VMT
reporting. The VMT elasticity to gasoline prices is -0.27 from column 4,
while it is smaller in magnitude and statistically insignificant in columns 5
and 6. The regressions in the second panel separate the gasoline tax from
the tax-exclusive gasoline price. There are no statistically significant dif-
ferential effects on VMT from the tax-exclusive gasoline price and gasoline
tax. Nevertheless, when state fixed effects are included, the difference in
the two coefficient estimates is quite large in magnitude with equally large
standard errors. We conduct additional regressions using self-reported VMT
data based on a larger sample that also includes data from the 2009 NHTS.
The findings, not reported here, are qualitatively the same. The difficulty in
obtaining precise estimates of the VMT responses to gasoline price changes is
common in studies using household-level survey data. For example, based on
the Consumer Expenditure Survey from 1984-1990, Goldberg (1998) reports
imprecise and large estimates of the effects of the gasoline price on quarterly
VMT in a unified model of vehicle demand and utilization.
    Although we find that vehicle purchase decisions (as reflected in average
MPG) respond more strongly to gasoline tax changes than commensurate
tax-exclusive price changes, there is no statistically significant evidence of a
differential effect for VMT. Recall that we find strong and significant differ-
ential effects on gasoline consumption based on the state-level data. Given
that it takes time for changes in the MPG of new vehicles to significantly


                                       37
change fleet fuel economy, one might find these two sets of findings to be at
odds with each other. We reconcile them from the following three angles.
    First, the limited variations in gasoline taxes in the VMT analysis could
prevent us from precisely estimating a differential effect. The odometer-based
VMT analysis, which includes the years 1995, 1996, 2000 and 2001 (from
1995 and 2001 NHTS survey), contains only 22 tax changes (15 percent of
state-year observations). The average change (in magnitude) is 2.43 cents, in
2008 dollars. In our state-level analysis, there are 488 gasoline tax changes
(about 24 percent of state-year observations) and the average change (in
magnitude) is 3.64 cents. Thus, tax changes are larger and more common in
the state-level analysis than the household-level analysis.
    Second, the differential effects found in state-level data are based on an-
nual observations while our household-level VMT analysis are based on the
few months (on average 3 months) between the two odometer readings. The
differential effect in VMT, if it exists, is likely to be smaller in the short
term because there are fewer accessible adjustment margins. A large portion
of VMT is determined by job and housing locations as well as availability
and access to public transit. These factors are difficult to change in the
short-term.28
    Third, the state-level analysis may include margins other than MPG and
VMT, which were the focus of the household-level analysis. For example,
multi-vehicle households may reallocate driving across vehicles when gasoline
prices or taxes change. Unfortunately, we lack sufficient gasoline tax variation
in the household-level data to investigate these possibilities. Nevertheless,
the fact that the state-level results could reflect a wider range of behavior
than the household-level results may partly explain why we do not detect as
strong a response in the household-level data as in the state-level data.
  28
    In the long run, because of adjustment costs, taxes could have a larger effect than tax-
exclusive prices on consumer location decisions (and, hence, travel distance and possibly
travel mode). The long-run response remains an open question.




                                            38
IV.        Implications
Our central and robust finding of differential responses to gasoline taxes and
tax-exclusive prices has important implications for the effectiveness of using
gasoline taxes to address climate change, air pollution, and energy security.
In particular, gasoline taxes would be more effective at reducing gasoline
consumption than suggested by previous empirical estimates of the effect of
gasoline prices on gasoline consumption. The results also have implications
for the implicit discount rate and the tax revenue from gasoline taxes, which
we discuss in this section.


IV.A.        Implicit Discount Rate
Our analysis points to an empirical strategy to confront a challenging identi-
fication problem in estimating implicit discount rates in consumer decisions.
To understand this, consider consumers’ vehicle purchase decisions when fac-
ing an array of choices that have different upfront costs (i.e., purchase price),
future operating costs (e.g., fuel costs), and other vehicle characteristics. Due
to the durable good nature of automobiles, a rational consumer makes the
decision based on total (discounted) expected costs and total (discounted)
utility to be derived from the vehicle. To examine how consumers trade up-
front purchase costs with future operating costs, researchers often estimate
the implicit discount rate in a vehicle demand or hedonic framework. A
high discount rate is interpreted as evidence that consumers fail to properly
consider future costs. The undervaluation of future fuel cost savings is a
manifestation of the “energy paradox”. If present, it could hinder the ef-
fectiveness of gasoline taxes and hence lend support for CAFE standards.
Whether, and to what extent, the energy paradox holds in the automobile
sector is still a contentious empirical issue.29 This is partly due to the iden-
  29
     Allcott and Wozny (2010), Busse, Knittel and Zettelmeyer (2013), and Sallee, West
and Fan (2010) are among recent studies using very rich data sets to investigate this issue.
Helfand and Wolverton (2010) offers a recent review.


                                            39
tification challenge researchers face in the empirical analysis because neither
consumers’ discount rates nor their expectation of future gasoline prices is
observed. Consequently, it is not possible to estimate implicit discount rates
without making assumptions on consumer expectations of future gasoline
prices.
     However, separating gasoline taxes from tax-exclusive gasoline prices can
aid the identification of the implicit discount rate. The central assumption
is that consumers treat taxes as more persistent than tax-exclusive prices,
which is consistent with the main results and the estimates of the AR(1)
specification described in section II.E.a. Under this assumption, approaches
used in the recent literature could be modified by decomposing the retail
gasoline price into the tax-exclusive price and the tax. If gasoline tax changes
are different from gasoline price changes in both persistence and salience as
we documented above, the implicit discount rate based on the tax component
should provide a lower bound on the implicit discount rate for how consumers
value future fuel costs. In addition, the difference in salience is consistent
with the presence of consumer inattention as one of the underlying causes for
energy paradox (Allcott and Greenstone 2012). We leave the investigation
of these issues to future work.


IV.B.      Tax Elasticity of Tax Revenues
Finally, our approach may have implications for fiscal policy related to gaso-
line taxes. As an illustration, we calculate the change in tax revenues as-
sociated with a 5 cent-per-gallon increase in federal gasoline taxes based on
(1) a naive estimate using the tax-inclusive semi-elasticity in column (10) in
Table 2; and (2) the corresponding tax semi-elasticity estimate from column
(10) of Table 2. The naive estimate implies that a 5-cent per gallon increase
in state gasoline prices would increase tax revenues approximately 12.4 per-
cent in 2008. This corresponds to tax revenue of about $4 billion, which is
about one-quarter of the deficit for the Highway Trust Fund forecasted by

                                      40
the Congressional Budget Office. Using the separately estimated tax and
price coefficients, a 5-cent per gallon tax increase would raise tax revenue
by 11.2 percent. Interestingly, the naive prediction does not substantially
overestimate the implied increase in tax revenues associated with a gasoline
tax increase. Gasoline demand is sufficiently inelastic and gasoline taxes are
sufficiently far from the revenue maximizing level to make the distinction
between techniques less relevant for fiscal policy.


V.      Conclusion
Despite multiple policy goals that the gasoline tax can help to achieve, the
United States taxes gasoline at the lowest rate among industrialized coun-
tries. In 2009, average state and federal gasoline taxes were 46 cents per
gallon, compared to $3.40 per gallon in the United Kingdom. Heightened
environmental and energy concerns, a record national budget deficit, and an
insolvent Highway Trust Fund have renewed interest in raising the gasoline
tax in the United States. Estimates of the effects of higher gasoline taxes of-
ten rely on the estimated gasoline demand elasticity with respect to gasoline
prices, with an implicit assumption that the consumer response to a gasoline
tax change is the same as to a commensurate change in tax-inclusive gasoline
prices.
    This paper directly estimates consumer responses to gasoline taxes by
distinguishing gasoline taxes and tax-exclusive gasoline prices. We exam-
ine the short-run impacts of taxes on gasoline consumption, vehicle miles
traveled, and vehicle choices using both state-level and household-level data.
We find strong and robust evidence that gasoline tax changes are associated
with larger changes in gasoline consumption and vehicle choices than are
commensurate changes in tax-inclusive gasoline prices.
    The finding that not all variations in gasoline prices are created equal
has important implications for transportation and tax policies. First and


                                      41
foremost, our work indicates that fuel taxes may be a more effective measure
for reducing gasoline consumption or inducing consumers to adopt more fuel
efficient vehicles than previously thought. Second, our research shows that
gasoline tax changes could provide a useful means of identifying the implicit
discount rate and to quantify the extent of an energy paradox in automobile
demand. Third, our estimates suggest that traditional analysis on gasoline
taxes may slightly overestimate the fiscal benefits of raising the gasoline tax.
    Our research points to three questions that warrant further investigation.
First, recent studies have estimated that the optimal gasoline tax in the
United States is more than twice as large as the current level (Parry and
Small, 2005, and West and Williams, 2007). One of the key inputs for the
analysis is the long-run consumer response to gasoline taxes, using the long-
run price elasticity as a proxy. Our analysis provides evidence that the effect
of current and lagged taxes is greater than the effect of current and lagged
tax-inclusive prices, but the precise long-run estimates and their implications
for the optimal gasoline tax are unknown.
    Second, we provide some evidence that the greater persistence of tax
changes as well as the greater salience of tax changes (relative to the same-size
tax-exclusive price changes) could contribute to our main findings. Further
work is needed to assess the relative importance of these and other potential
factors. Perhaps most importantly is the question of generality. Our finding
suggests that it may be important to consider the source of the price variation
when estimating price elasticities of demand and conducting policy analysis
for other goods and services.




                                       42
References

 [1] Hunt Allcott and Nathan Wozny (forthcoming). Gasoline Prices, Fuel
     Economy and the Energy Paradox, Review of Economics and Statistics.

 [2] Jeffrey Ang-Olson, Martin Wachs, and Brian D. Taylor (1999). Variable-
     Rate State Gasoline Taxes.

 [3] Antionio M. Bento, Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen and Roger
     H. von Haefen (2009). Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased
     U.S. Gasoline Taxes. American Economic Review, 99(3): 667-699.

 [4] James Alm, Edward Sennoga, and Mark Skidmore (2009). Perfect Com-
     petition, Urbanization and Tax Incidence in the Retail Gasoline Market.
     Economic Inquiry, 47: 118-134.

 [5] Soren T. Anderson and James M. Sallee (2011). Using Loopholes to
     Reveal the Marginal Cost of Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy
     Standards. American Economics Review, 101 (4): 1375-1409.

 [6] Soren T. Anderson, James M. Sallee and Ryan Kellogg (2012). What
     Do Consumers Believe About Future Gasoline Prices? NBER Working
     Paper w16974.

 [7] David Austin and Terry Dinan (2005). Clearing the Air: The Costs
     and Consequences of Higher CAFE Standards and Increases in Gasoline
     Taxes. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 50(3):
     562-582.

 [8] Steven Berry, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1995). Automobile
     Prices in Market Equilibrium. Econometrica, 63: 841-890.

 [9] Richard Blundell and Stephen Bond (1998). Initial conditions and mo-
     ment restrictions in dynamic panel data models. Journal of Economet-
     rics, 87: 115-143.

[10] Andrea Baranzini and Sylvain Weber (2012). Elasticities of Gasoline
     Demand in Switzerland. Working paper



                                     43
[11] Brown, Jennifer, Justine Hastings, Erin T. Mansur, Sovia B. Villas-Boas
     (2008). Reformulating Competition? Gasoline Content Regulation and
     Wholesale Gasoline Prices. Journal of Environmental Economics and
     Management, 55(1): 1-19.
[12] Meghan Busse, Jorge Silva-Risso and Florian Zettelmeyer (2006). $1000
     Cash-Back: the Pass-through of Auto Manufacturing Promotions.
     American Economic Review, 96(4): 1253-1270.
[13] Meghan Busse, Christopher R. Knittel and Florian Zettelmeyer (2013),
     Are Consumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.
     American Economic Review, 103(1): 220-256.
[14] Raj Chetty, Adam Looney and Kory Kroft (2009). Salience and Taxa-
     tion: Theory and Evidence. American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145-
     1177.
[15] Hayley Chouinard and Jeffrey M. Perloff (2004). Incidence of Federal
     and State Gasoline Taxes. Economics Letters, 83: 55-60.
[16] Congressional Budget Office (2003). The Economic Costs of Fuel Econ-
     omy Standards Versus a Gasoline Tax. U.S. Congress: Washington, DC.
[17] Michael C. Davis and James D. Hamilton (2004). Why Are Prices
     Sticky? The Dynamics of Wholesale Gasoline Prices. Journal of Money,
     Credit, and Banking, 36: 17-37.
[18] Lucas Davis and Lutz Kilian (2011) Estimating the Effect of a Gaso-
     line Tax on Carbon Emissions. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26(7):
     1187-1214
[19] C. Decker and M. Wohar (2007). Determinants of State Diesel Fuel
     Excise Tax Rates: The Political Economy of Fuel Taxation in the United
     States. The Annals of Regional Science, 41: 171-188.
[20] Doyle, Joseph J. and Krislert Samphantharak (2008), $2.00 Gas! Study-
     ing the Effects of a Gas Tax Moratorium. Journal of Public Economics,
     92: 869-884.
[21] Jeffrey A. Dubin, and Dandiel L. McFadden (1984). An Econometric
     Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption.
     Econometrica, 52: 345-362.

                                    44
[22] Molly Espey (1998). Gasoline Demand Revisited: An International
     Meta-Analysis of Elasticities. Energy Economics 20: 273-295.

[23] Amy Finkelstein (2009). E-Ztax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 124(3): 969-1010

[24] Carolyn Fischer, Winston Harrington, and Ian W. H. Parry (2007), Do
     Market Failures Justify Tightening Corporate Average Fuel Economy
     (CAFE) Standards? Energy Journal, 28 (4): 1-30.

[25] Kelly S. Gallagher and Erich Muehlegger (2011). Giving Green to Get
     Green? Incentives and Consumer Adoption of Hybrid Vehicle Technol-
     ogy, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 61: 1-15.

[26] Kelly S. Gillingham (2010). How Do Consumers Respond to Gasoline
     Price Shocks? Heterogeneity in Vehicle Choice and Driving Behavior.
     Working paper.

[27] Rajeev K. Goel and Michael A. Nelson (1999). The Political Economy
     of Motor-Fuel Taxation. Energy Journal, 20: 43-59.

[28] Pinelopi Koujianou K. Goldberg (1998). The Effects of the Corporate
     Average Fuel Efficiency Standards in the US. Journal of Industrial Eco-
     nomics, 46: 1-33.

[29] Henrik Hammar, Asa Lofgren and Thomas Sterner (2004). Political
     Economy Obstacles to Fuel Taxation. Energy Journal, 25: 1-17.

[30] Jerry A. Hausman (1979). Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase
     and Utilization of Energy-Using Durables. Bell Journal of Economics,
     10: 33-54.

[31] Gloria Helfand, and Ann Wolverton (2010). Evaluating the Consumer
     Response to Fuel Economy: A Review of the Literature. U.S. Environ-
     mental Protection Agency.

[32] Jonathan E. Hughes, Cristopher R. Knittel and Daniel Sperling (2008).
     Evidence of a Shift in the Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline De-
     mand. Energy Journal, 29(1): 113-134.




                                    45
[33] Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP, 2011). Building a
     Better Gas Tax: How to Fix One of State Government’s Least Sustain-
     able Revenue Sources.

[34] Mark R. Jacobsen (2013). Evaluating U.S. Fuel Economy Standards in a
     Model with Producer and Household Heterogeneity. American Economic
     Journal: Economic Policy, 5(2): 148-87.

[35] Thomas Klier and Joshua Linn (2010). The Price of Gasoline and New
     Vehicle Fuel Economy: Evidence from Monthly Sales Data. American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(3): 134-53.

[36] Shanjun Li, Christopher Timmins, and Roger H. von Haefen (2009).
     How Do Gasoline Prices Affect Fleet Fuel Economy? American Eco-
     nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2): 113-37.

[37] S. Lu (2006). Vehicle Scrappage and Travel Mileage Schedules. National
     Highway Traffic Safety Administration Safety Technical Report, January
     2006.

[38] Justin Marion and Erich Muehlegger (2011). Fuel Tax Incidence and
     Supply Conditions. NBER Working Paper w16863.

[39] Ian W. H. Parry and Kenneth A. Small (2005). Does Britain or the
     United States Have the Right Gasoline Tax? American Economic Re-
     view, 95(4): 1276-1289.

[40] Ian W. H. Parry, Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington (2007). Auto-
     mobile Externalities and Policies. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(2):
     373-399.

[41] Nicholas Rivers and Brandon Schaufele (2012). Carbon Tax Salience and
     Gasoline Demand. Working paper.

[42] James Sallee, Sarah West, and Wei Fan (2010). Do Consumers Recog-
     nize the Value of Fuel Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and
     Gasoline Price Fluctuations. Working paper.

[43] Kenneth A. Small and Kurt Van Dender (2007). Fuel Efficiency and
     Motor Vehicle Travel: The Declining Rebound Effect. Energy Journal,
     28(1): 25-51.

                                     46
[44] K. Rebecca Scott (2012). Rational Habits in Gasoline Demand. Energy
     Economics, 34(5): 1713-1723.

[45] Richard A. Watts, Karen TrapenbergT. Frick, and Jonathan Maddison
     (2012). Policy Making, Incrementalism, and News Discourse: Gasoline
     Tax Debates in Eight U.S. States. Public Works Management Policy,
     17(3): 238-55.

[46] Sarah E. West and Roberton C. Williams III (2007). Optimal taxation
     and Cross-price Effects on Labor Supply: Estimates of the Optimal Gas
     Tax. Journal of Public Economics, 91: 593-617.

[47] Yuqing Zheng, Edward W. McLaughlin and Harry M. Kaiser (2012).
     Taxing Food and Beverages: Theory, Evidence and Policy. Working
     paper.




                                   47
48
                        Figure 1: Gasoline Price Decomposition

                               Decomposition of U.S. Gasoline Price
      400 300
Cents/Gal
  200 100
      0




                      1970                  1980                1990                    2000         2010
                                                              Year

                                       Crude Oil                                         Gas Taxes
                                       State FE and Time Trend
                Specification includes state FE and a common linear time trend for all states.
                State−level data aggregated nationally.




                                                           49
                          Figure 2: State Gasoline Tax Rates

                                        State Gasoline Taxes (cpg), 1966

     7.5                                             6
                                 6
                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                       7
                    6                                6                                       7                    6
      6                                                                                                                                                     6.5
                                                                                                                                                                  7
                                        5                                                                                                           6
                                                                                  7                                                                          6.5
                                                      7.5                                                                                                   6 7
                                                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                 5                      7                               6
                                                                                                          6
               6          6                                                                                                                       7 7
                                                 6                                                                               7
                                                               5                      5
           7                                                                                                  7                           7

                                                                   6.5                                 7                              7
                                                                                      7.5
                          7                  6
                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                              7       7               6.5
                                                          5
                                                                                      7

(30,35]
(25,30]                                                                                                                     7
(20,25]
(15,20]
(10,15]
[5,10]


                                        State Gasoline Taxes (cpg), 2006

      34                                             23
                                27.75
                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                      26.8
                    25                               22                                     29.9              19
     24                                                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                                                                             19.6
                                        14                                                                                                        23.95
                                                                              20.7                                                                            21
                                                     27.1                                                                                                   25 30
                                                                                                                                          31.2
                                                                                                 19                    28                           10.5
                                                                                                       18
               24        24.5                                                                                                                 23.523
                                             22                                                                                 27
                                                              24                      17
          18                                                                                               19.7                       17.5

                                                                   17                                 20                             29.9
                                                                                  21.5
                         18              18.875
                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                            18.4      18              7.5
                                                          20
                                                                                      20

(30,35]
(25,30]                                                                                                                 14.9
(20,25]
(15,20]
(10,15]
[5,10]




                                                                         50
                          Figure 3: State Gasoline Tax Rates

                                State Tax Increase, 1966 to 1987 (cpg),

    10.5                                          7
                                14
                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                            7
                   8.5                            7                                 13                   9
      6                                                                                                                                          6.5
                                                                                                                                                       7
                                      3                                                                                                  2
                                                                            9                                                                      4.5
                                                  10.4                                                                                           13 8
                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                         8                   7.7                             2
                                                                                                 8
              10          13                                                                                                       11.5 9
                                           12                                                                    8.300001
                                                            6                   6
          2                                                                                          8                      10.5

                                                                9.5                          10                            8.5
                                                                                6
                          9               8
                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                      8      6               1
                                                       10
                                                                                9

(25,30]
(20,25]                                                                                                          2.7
(15,20]
(10,15]
(5,10]
[0,5]


                                State Tax Increase, 1987 to 2008 (cpg),

    19.5                                          10
                                7.8
                                                                       5.5
                                                                                                                                                           14.4
                   10.5                           9                                 10.9                 4
     12                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                                     5.6
                                      6                                                                                                 16.5
                                                                            5                                                                     10
                                                   8.1                                                                                           6 15
                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                         6                   13.3                         2.5
                                                                                                 4
              8           5.5                                                                                                          5 7
                                              4                                                                     16.9
                                                           13                   6
          9                                                                                          7.5                     0

                                                                1                            3                             14.6
                                                                                8
                          2               4.9
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                     3.4     5               0
                                                       5
                                                                                4

(25,30]
(20,25]                                                                                                          5.9
(15,20]
(10,15]
(5,10]
[0,5]




                                                                      51
                               Figure 4: Distribution of Gasoline Taxes, by year

                                              State and Federal Gasoline Taxes
                40
                30
cents/gal
   20           10
                0




                                  1970               1980            1990             2000                2010
                                                                  year

                                               Mean State Gas Tax             Min State Gas Tax
                                               Max State Gas Tax              Federal Gas Tax




                                Figure 5: Tax Fraction of Retail Price, by year

                                     Distribution of Tax Fraction Over Time
            .4




                                                                                                      300
Tax Fraction of Retail Price




                                                                                                      Gasoline Price (cpg)
                   .3




                                                                                                                   200
       .2




                                                                                                       100
            .1




                                                                                                      0




                                  1970            1980            1990         2000           2010
                                                               year

                                         Median Tax Fraction         95th Percentile
                                         5th Percentile              Median Tax−Inclusive Gas Price




                                                               52
Figure 6: Change in Gas Consumption, pre- and post-tax change




                             53
  Figure 7: Print Media Coverage, Gasoline Price and Tax Changes


                         Word Count of Articles Related to Gasoline
            150000
               100000
  Gasoline Word Count
  50000     0




                1985m1        1990m1       1995m1       2000m1        2005m1
                                            Date



Note: The y-axis measures monthly total word count of articles in
major US newspapers classified by LexisNexis as highly relevant to
gasoline prices or taxes. Solid vertical lines represent dates of (1) the
December 1990 federal gas tax change (5.1cpg), (2) the October 1993
federal gas tax change (4.3cpg), and (3) the May 1996 debate over
repealing the 1993 gas tax. Dashed vertical lines represent months
with comparable tax-exclusive price increases.




                                          54
 Figure 8: Nightly News Coverage, Gasoline Price and Tax Changes


                                                 Nightly News Seconds Devoted to Gasoline
                                       5000
  Nightly News Seconds (ABC, CBS, NBC)
     1000     2000    3000
                        0      4000




                                              1985m1     1990m1     1995m1     2000m1       2005m1
                                                                   Date



Note: The y-axis measures monthly seconds of gasoline-related nightly
news coverage on ABC, CBS and NBC. Solid vertical lines represent
dates of (1) the December 1990 federal gas tax change (5.1cpg), (2) the
October 1993 federal gas tax change (4.3cpg), and (3) the May 1996
debate over repealing the 1993 gas tax. Dashed vertical lines represent
months with comparable tax-exclusive price increases.




                                                                  55
Figure 9: Densities of Daily VMT from Odometer Readings and Self-reported
Annual VMT                .015


                                                                                VMT based on odometer readings
                                                                                Self−reported VMT
                          .01
      Density
                          .005
                          0




                                                 0             200                   400                    600
                                                               Average Daily Household Miles
                          .04




                                                                                             High−VMT households
                                                                                             Low−VMT households
                          .03
      Density
       .02                .01
                          0




                                                −100      −50                0                 50             100
                                                       VMT from odometer readings − Self−reported VMT
                                           10
      Average difference of two VMT measures
                                  5




                                                                        High−VMT households
                                                                        Low−VMT households
           −5          0  −10




                                                 0                5                     10                     15
                                                                           Month




                                                                         56
Figure 10: Summary Statistics for NHTS Categorical Variables

          App Fig 3.1: Income Group Shares                                         App Fig 3.2: Income Group Shares
              by Sample (unweighted)                                                     by Sample (weighted)
  0.12                                                               0.12

   0.1                                                                0.1

  0.08                                                               0.08

  0.06                                                               0.06

  0.04                                                               0.04

  0.02                                                               0.02

    0                                                                      0
          1       3    5     7       9   11     13   15    17                  1       3    5     7       9   11 13 15 17
                       NHTS                Estimation                                      NHTS               Estimation

         App Fig 3.3: Education Group Shares                                   App Fig 3.4: Education Group
               by Sample (unweighted)                                          Shares by Sample (weighted)
 0.35                                                                 0.35

  0.3                                                                  0.3

 0.25                                                                 0.25

  0.2                                                                  0.2

 0.15                                                                 0.15

  0.1                                                                  0.1

 0.05                                                                 0.05

    0                                                                      0
          1       2     3  4         5    6      7    8                            1    2   3             4   5    6    7   8
                      NHTS                    Estimation                               NHTS                   Estimation


         App Fig 3.5: Housing Density Group                                    App Fig 3.6: Housing Density
           Shares by Sample (unweighted)                                        Group Shares by Sample
                                                                                        (weighted)
 0.35                                                               0.35
  0.3                                                                0.3
 0.25                                                               0.25
  0.2                                                                0.2
 0.15                                                               0.15

  0.1                                                                0.1

 0.05                                                               0.05

    0                                                                 0
              1        2         3         4      5             6              1            2         3       4       5     6
                      NHTS               Estimation                                        NHTS               Estimation



                                                     57
Figure 11: Summary Statistics for NHTS Categorical Variables (Cont.)

                 App Fig 3.7: Worker Density Group                                         App Fig 3.8: Worker Density Group
                  Shares by Sample (unweighted)                                              Shares by Sample (weighted)

      0.2                                                                      0.25
     0.18
     0.16                                                                       0.2
     0.14
     0.12                                                                      0.15
      0.1
     0.08                                                                       0.1
     0.06
     0.04                                                                      0.05
     0.02
        0                                                                            0
                 1       2      3          4       5    6     7           8                   1     2   3       4       5    6    7           8
                             NHTS                  Estimation                                      NHTS                 Estimation

                App Fig 3.9: Population Density                                           App Fig 3.10: Population Density
                  Group Shares by Sample                                                 Group Share by Sample (weighted)
                         (unweighted)
      0.25                                                                    0.25

       0.2                                                                     0.2

      0.15                                                                    0.15

       0.1                                                                     0.1
      0.05
                                                                              0.05
            0
                 1       2     3       4       5     6    7       8       9     0
                                                                                          1       2  3      4       5      6    7     8       9
                         NHTS                      Estimation                                     NHTS                  Estimation

                App Fig 3.11: Urban Group Share                                           App Fig 3.12: Urban Group Share
                    by Sample (unweighted)                                                     by Sample (weighted)
       0.3                                                                       0.4
                                                                                0.35
      0.25
                                                                                 0.3
       0.2
                                                                                0.25
      0.15                                                                       0.2
                                                                                0.15
       0.1
                                                                                 0.1
      0.05
                                                                                0.05
            0                                                                        0
                     1             2           3         4            5                           1     2           3         4           5
                         NHTS                      Estimation                                      NHTS                 Estimation




                                                              58
                  Table 1: Nominal Prices and Taxes (cpg), over time

                     Average                           Tax Fraction     Percent of Retail
                   Tax-Inclusive   Average   Average     of Retail       Gas Variation
                      Retail        State    Federal   Gasoline Price    Explained by
Period                Price          Tax      Tax       in Percent       Tax Changes

1966   -   1970        34.0          6.7       4.0          31.5              48.3
1971   -   1975        44.6          7.6       4.0          26.0               2.3
1976   -   1980        80.4          8.4       4.0          15.4               2.1
1981   -   1985        121.8        11.2       7.0          14.9              19.3
1986   -   1990        98.0         15.1      10.1          25.7              11.4
1991   -   1995        113.9        19.1      16.7          31.4              25.5
1996   -   2000        125.0        20.3      18.4          30.9               2.2
2001   -   2005        163.3        20.8      18.4          24.0               2.0
2006   -   2008        278.0        21.8      18.4          14.5               0.6




                                             59
                       Table 2: Estimation Results from Gasoline Consumption Regressions
                                    Specification 1            Specification 2         Specification 3        Specification 4
                                    (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)

     Panel 1: Coefficient Estimates
     Log(gas price)          -0.060***                      -0.192***               -0.157***               -0.097**
                              (0.009)                        (0.061)                 (0.048)                 (0.037)

     Log(tax-excl. price)                       -0.078***               -0.207***               -0.163***              -0.113***
                                                 (0.010)                 (0.061)                 (0.048)                (0.038)

     Log(1 + tax ratio)                         -0.331***               -0.765***               -0.470***              -0.292***
                                                 (0.040)                 (0.176)                 (0.086)                (0.084)
     p-value: α = β                              <0.001                  <0.001                  <0.001                  0.009


     Panel 2: Percent changes in gas consumption from a $0.05/gallon increase in gasoline price
     Gas price             -0.203***              -0.566***            -0.468***              -0.286***
                            (0.027)                (0.180)              (0.141)                (0.109)


     Panel 3: Percent changes in gas consumption from a $0.05/gallon increase in gasoline tax




60
     Gas tax                                    -0.979***               -2.263***               -1.391***              -0.864***
                                                 (0.118)                 (0.520)                 (0.254)                (0.248)


     p-value: equal effects in panels 2 and 3    <0.001                   0.002                   0.002                  0.033

     State FE                       X              X           X           X           X           X           X          X
     Year FE                                                   X           X           X           X           X          X
     Covariates                                                                        X           X           X          X
     State quadratic trend                                                                                     X          X

     R-Squared                    0.756           0.777       0.897       0.905       0.942       0.944      0.973       0.973
     Notes: The dependent variable is log(gasoline consumption per adult), by state and year. The number of observations is
     2,064 in all regressions. Standard errors in all columns are clustered by state. Covariates include average family size, log
     road miles per adult, log number of registered cars per capita and log number of registered trucks per capita, log number
     of licensed drivers per capita, log real income per capita, fraction of the population living in metro areas, and fraction
     of population living in metro areas with rail transport. Panels 2 and 3 report percent changes in gasoline consumption
     from a $0.05/gallon increase from either overall gasoline price or gasoline tax based on estimates in columns (1) to (8)
     of the five specifications in the Table. The estimates use the average tax and tax-exclusive gas price in 1988 (24.1 cpg
     and 69.2 cpg), inflated to 2008 dollars, the last year of our sample. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and
     1 percent levels.
                        Table 3: Gasoline Taxes and Political Environment
                                      Explanatory Var., 1966-2008           Explanatory Var., 1985-2008

                                     Lagged         Contemp.   Leading     Lagged     Contemp.    Leading

GSP per capita (000s)               -0.164***       -0.107**    -0.026     -0.120*    -0.0954**     -0.017
                                     (0.0564)       (0.0430)   (0.0495)   (0.0603)     (0.0472)    (0.062)

Mean family size                     -0.0377          0.105     -0.169     -0.0113      -0.683      -0.595
                                     (0.246)         (0.163)   (0.213)     (0.474)     (0.443)     (0.429)

Autos per capita                      0.269           0.751     -0.125      0.538       -0.505      -0.427
                                     (0.903)         (0.642)   (1.013)     (1.038)     (0.757)     (0.992)

Drivers per capita                    0.471           -0.655    -0.314      0.382       -0.526      -0.912
                                     (0.852)         (0.535)   (0.761)     (1.164)     (0.749)     (0.938)

Fraction of adults graduating HS     0.0885         0.00714     0.0286     0.0808      -0.0644      -0.030
                                    (0.0893)        (0.0860)   (0.0734)    (0.155)     (0.148)     (0.142)

Fraction of adults with BA           -0.0557          -0.113    -0.131      -0.112      -0.249      -0.210
                                     (0.281)         (0.208)   (0.198)     (0.365)     (0.305)     (0.326)

Urban population share                -8.958          -11.05    -11.13      11.86       -7.765     -31.50*
                                     (9.594)         (9.127)   (8.595)     (15.93)     (15.75)     (17.85)

Pop. share in MSA with rail           -0.573          0.195    1.514**      0.350       0.176       1.244
                                     (0.529)         (0.844)   (0.713)     (3.239)     (1.228)     (1.153)

Democrat Governor                   0.0951*          0.0847     0.0048     0.0645      0.0697       0.037
                                    (0.0524)        (0.0815)   (0.0621)   (0.0689)     (0.117)     (0.100)

Fraction of Dem. in State Senate      -0.166          -0.312    -0.419      0.567       -0.302      -0.792
                                     (0.335)         (0.489)   (0.514)     (0.512)     (0.927)     (0.828)

Fraction of Dem. in State House       0.158          0.839*     0.626       0.528       0.668       0.575
                                     (0.471)         (0.448)   (0.454)     (0.817)     (1.153)     (0.688)

Unemployment Rate                    0.0331          0.0117     -0.0141    -0.132*     0.0230      -0.189*
                                    (0.0382)        (0.0274)   (0.0333)   (0.0659)     (0.127)     (0.101)

Percent State Budget Surplus          -0.103          -0.131    0.168       0.165       -0.283      0.315
                                     (0.204)         (0.261)   (0.294)     (0.456)     (0.381)     (0.289)

Avg. Senate LCV rating                                                    0.000423     -0.00129    -0.00298
                                                                          (0.00232)   (0.00200)   (0.00205)

Avg. House LCV rating                                                     0.00769*     0.00136     0.00281
                                                                          (0.00398)   (0.00233)   (0.00343)

Manufacturing Share of GSP                                                  0.494       1.290       1.952
                                                                           (3.250)     (3.042)     (3.384)

Mining Share of GSP                                                         -7.144     6.666*       2.925
                                                                           (9.131)     (3.355)     (3.638)

Observations                          1607           1653       1608        923          969        969
R-Squared                             0.214    61    0.221      0.221      0.179        0.193      0.201

p-value on F-test                     0.13            0.15       0.17       0.31        0.45        0.19
of joint-significance
Notes: Standard Errors clustered at the state level. All specifications include year fixed effects. *, **,
and *** denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.
                           Table 4: IV Estimates of Gasoline Demand

                              Uninstrumented (1968-2008)             Instrumented (1968-2008)

Variables                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)

Panel 1: Coefficient Estimates

Log(tax-excl. gas price)    -0.214***   -0.161**    -0.122**    -0.104***   -0.136***     -0.0697**
                             (0.0598)   (0.0494)    (0.0382)     (0.0199)    (0.0194)      (0.0240)

Log(1 + tax ratio)          -0.732***   -0.469***   -0.290**    -0.795***   -0.501***     -0.323***
                             (0.175)     (0.0898)   (0.0895)     (0.179)     (0.0913)      (0.0828)
p-value: α = β               <0.001      <0.001       0.024      <0.001      <0.001         0.002

Panel 2: Percent changes in gas consumption from a $0.05/gallon increase in gas price

Gas Price                   -0.606***   -0.470***   -0.319***   -0.844***   -0.320***      -0.148*
                             (0.171)     (0.144)     (0.111)     (0.254)     (0.063)       (0.076)

Panel 3: Percent changes in gas consumption from a $0.05/gallon increase in gas tax

Gas Tax                     -2.163***   -1.385***   -0.856***   -2.350***   -1.479***     -0.955***
                             (0.518)     (0.265)     (0.143)     (0.529)     (0.270)       (0.245)
p-value: equal effects        0.004       0.002       0.003       0.010      <0.001         0.002

State FE                       X           X            X           X           X             X
Year FE                        X           X            X           X           X             X
Covariates                                 X            X                       X             X
State Quadratic Trends                                  X                                     X
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of gasoline consumption per adult. The standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by state. All specifications include year and state fixed effects. The log
of the oil price interacted with the tax-exclusive gasoline price in 1966 and 1 + gasoline tax / oil
price instrument for the tax-exclusive gasoline price and 1 + tax ratio. Covariates are identical to
those in Table 2 and include average family size, log road miles per adult, log number of registered
cars per capita and log number of registered trucks per capita, log number of licensed drivers per
capita, log real income per capita, fraction of the population living in metro areas, and fraction of
population living in metro areas with rail transport. Panels 2 and 3 report estimated percent changes
in gasoline consumption from a $0.05/gallon increase from either overall gasoline price or gasoline tax
corresponding to each specification. The estimates use the average tax and tax-exclusive gas price in
1988 (24.1 cpg and 69.2 cpg), inflated to 2008 dollars, the last year of our sample. *, **, and ***
denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.



                                           62
    Table 5: Gasoline Taxes, tax-exclusive Prices, and Consumption, monthly

                                                                                First-differenced
                                     Levels             First-differenced        Seasonal Data
Variable                       (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)       (5)          (6)

Log(gas price)              -0.196***                -0.248***                 -0.109*
                             (0.030)                  (0.030)                  (0.057)
Log(tax-excl. gas price)                 -0.217***                -0.365***              -0.172***
                                          (0.028)                  (0.047)                (0.061)
Log(1 + tax ratio)                       -0.414***                -0.769***              -0.394***
                                          (0.046)                  (0.157)                (0.140)

p-value: α = β                            <0.001                   <0.001                  0.038

Observations                  14,898      14,898       14,763       14,763      4,893      4,893
R-squared                      0.987      0.987         0.446        0.446      0.466      0.467
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of gasoline consumption per adult. All specifications
include time fixed effects. Levels regressions also include state fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are clustered by state. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.




                                              63
Table 6: Coefficient Estimates: Lagged Prices and Taxes


 Variable                              (1)             (2)

 Log(gas price)                    -0.066*
                                   (0.034)
 1-year lag gas price               -0.019
                                   (0.024)

 2-year lag gas price              -0.037*
                                   (0.019)

 3-year lag gas price              -0.066**
                                    (0.029)

 Log(tax-excl. gas price)                             -0.060
                                                     (0.036)
 1-year lag tax-excl. gas price                       -0.029
                                                     (0.027)
 2-year lag tax-excl. gas price                       -0.037
                                                     (0.022)

 3-year lag tax-excl. gas price                     -0.065**
                                                     (0.031)

 Log(1 + tax ratio)                                   -0.084
                                                     (0.078)

 1-year lag Log(1 + tax ratio)                       -0.117*
                                                     (0.064)

 2-year lag Log(1 + tax ratio)                       -0.106*
                                                     (0.056)

 3-year lag Log(1 + tax ratio)                      -0.157**
                                                     (0.072)

 Specification                       Total        Separate tax
                                   gas price   from tax-excl. price
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of gasoline consumption
per adult. Specifications are the same as in columns 5 and 6 of
Table 2, except that 1-, 2-, and 3-year lag of the gas price and tax
variables are added.


                                  64
                                      Table 7: Media Coverage, Gasoline Price and Tax Changes

                                     Print Media Coverage: Word Count                       Nightly News Coverage: Seconds
                            Gas Prices Gas Taxes       All Gas    Log(All Gas)     Gas Prices Gas Taxes     All Gas    Log(All Gas)

     Change in Gas Price     748.7***      97.94***     805.9***      0.0123***     11.80***     1.899**     14.05***     0.00740**
     Previous 3 Months        (161.4)       (34.55)      (173.8)      (0.00279)      (3.888)     (0.840)      (4.501)     (0.00327)

     Change in Gas Tax      2833.3***       377.2       2869.8***     0.177***        3.330        0.353       18.42       0.193**
     Previous 3 Months       (914.0)       (278.3)       (1025.0)     (0.0383)       (15.92)      (7.804)     (34.06)      (0.0898)

     Change in Gas Price    -291.8***       17.85       -271.0***    -0.00486***    -10.32***     0.0455     -11.80***    -0.0113***
     Next 3 Months           (73.23)       (12.44)       (72.56)      (0.00102)      (2.737)      (0.785)     (3.539)      (0.00282)




65
     Change in Gas Tax       1432.9**      2163.2*      3621.5***     0.275***        49.22      73.92**      129.0**      0.392***
     Next 3 Months            (684.3)      (1193.8)      (1372.1)     (0.0567)       (36.56)     (36.37)      (58.61)      (0.0979)

     May 1996 Gas Tax       52682.8***    67826.7***   102400.1***    2.301***      2536.6***   3767.1***    3029.6***     2.940***
     Repeal Debate           (3184.5)       (816.4)      (3412.9)     (0.0827)       (119.5)     (32.17)      (138.2)       (0.204)

     Constant               8423.6***     2504.7***    10898.5***     8.169***      109.7***     40.93***    239.2***      4.398***
                             (2438.7)      (829.3)      (2757.0)       (0.196)       (36.16)      (13.77)     (43.54)       (0.153)

     Observations              282           282           282           282           330          330         330          330
     R-Squared                0.574         0.383         0.567         0.537         0.267        0.256       0.423        0.153
     Notes: Columns (1) through (4) include a quadratic time trend. Columns (5) through (8) includes fixed effects corresponding to the
     period of time CNN and FOX transcripts are included in the Vanderbilt Television News Archive. Robust standard errors are reported
     in parentheses.
      Table 8: Summary Statistics: MPG of Recently Purchased Vehicles

                               Sample 1: All Purchases          Sample 2: Newer Vehicles
Variable                    Mean     S.D.    Min.     Max.    Mean     S.D.   Min.     Max.

Average MPG                 21.44    5.17    10.00    49.80   21.40    5.30   10.12    49.25
Tax-excl. gas price          1.64    0.76     0.70     3.94    1.60    0.75    0.70     3.94
Gas tax                      0.42    0.07     0.24     0.69    0.42    0.07    0.24     0.69
Household size               2.97    1.43        1       14    2.82    1.35       1       14
Number of drivers            2.11    0.83        0       10    2.06    0.76       0       10
Number of adults             2.12    0.79        1       10    2.07    0.73       1       10
Number of workers            1.59    0.94        0       10    1.55    0.90       0       10
Age of reference person     45.37   14.53       17       92   46.99   14.64      17       92
Household income            10.71    5.21        1       18   12.10    4.93       1       18
Education of ref. person     3.03    1.13        1        5    3.23    1.11       1        5
MSA size                     4.13    1.45        1        6    4.16    1.39       1        6
Worker density              1,192   1,442       25    5,000   1,227   1,436      25    5,000
Population density          3,596   4,912       50   30,000   3,636   4,747      50   30,000
With rail                    0.21    0.41        0        1    0.24    0.43       0        1
Without rail                 0.79    0.41        0        1    0.76    0.43       0        1
Second city                  0.19    0.39        0        1    0.18    0.38       0        1
Suburban                     0.27    0.45        0        1    0.31    0.46       0        1
Town and country             0.42    0.49        0        1    0.39    0.49       0        1
Urban                        0.12    0.33        0        1    0.12    0.33       0        1
Notes: Sample 1, with 52,128 observations, includes households who purchased at least one
vehicle within the past year, from the 1995, 2001, and 2009 NHTS. Sample 2, with 30,363
observations, includes households who purchased at least one vehicle during the past year such
that all the vehicles purchased are less than four years old. Tax-exclusive gasoline price and
gasoline tax correspond to the purchase month (and are averaged in case of multiple vehicle
purchases). Household income, education of reference person, MSA size, worker density, and
population density at the Census tract level are all categorical variables.




                                            66
                       Table 9: Summary Statistics: Household VMT

                                     Sample 1: Odometer Readings       Sample 2: Self-reported VMT
Variable                             Mean      S.D.    Min.    Max.    Mean    S.D.    Min.    Max.

Average daily VMT                    50.82     35.71   0.01   347.96   58.94   50.03   0.00   499.09
Tax-excl. gas price                   1.07      0.12   0.74     1.69    1.13    0.13   0.87     1.68
Gas tax                               0.46      0.06   0.29     0.71    0.45    0.06   0.29     0.68
Household size                        2.33      1.32      1       12    2.51    1.38      1       14
Number of drivers                     1.69      0.67      0        6    1.79    0.73     -8       10
Number of adults                      1.74      0.66      1        8    1.83    0.71      1        9
Number of workers                     1.16      0.88      0        6    1.32    0.91     -8       10
Age of reference person              50.98     16.42     17       88   47.85   16.12     17       88
Household income                      9.33      4.96      1       18    9.48    4.96      1       18
Education of reference person         3.09      1.18      1        5    3.02    1.15      1        5
MSA size                              4.06      1.40      1        6    4.10    1.42      1        6
Worker density at census tract       1,397     1,507     25    5,000   1,396   1,531     25    5,000
Population density at census tract   4,000     4,907     50   30,000   3,890   4,856     50   30,000
With rail                             0.22      0.41      0        1    0.21    0.41      0        1
Without rail                          0.78      0.41      0        1    0.79    0.41      0        1
Second city                           0.21      0.41      0        1    0.21    0.41      0        1
Surbaban                              0.32      0.47      0        1    0.29    0.45      0        1
Town and country                      0.34      0.47      0        1    0.37    0.48      0        1
Urban                                 0.13      0.34      0        1    0.13    0.34      0        1
Notes: Sample 1, with 28,303 observations, is from the 1995 and 2001 NHTS and includes households
who reported two odometer readings for each of the vehicles owned. Sample 2, with 61,795 observations,
includes households with self-reported annual VMT for each vehicle owned. In sample 1, the tax-
exclusive gasoline price and gasoline tax are averaged during the period of the two odometer readings.
Household income, education of reference person, MSA size, worker density, and population density at
the Census tract level are all categorical variables.




                                          67
       Table 10: Comparison of NHTS and Estimation Subsample


                           Panel A: Unweighted

                             Full NHTS Sample    Estimation Subsample
                              N     Mean   SD      N     Mean    SD
     Tax-exclusive price    45,459  0.89  0.12   34,234 0.89     0.12
     Tax                    41,389  0.40  0.04   34,234 0.40     0.04
     Household size        106,831 2.60   1.34   34,234 2.56     1.29
     Number of drivers     106,831 1.85   0.77   34,234 1.88     0.70
     Number of adults      111,850 1.89   0.82   34,234 1.91     0.65
     Number of workers     106,831 1.36   0.96   34,234 1.35     0.94
     Age                   111,850 49.59 18.79   34,234 50.66 15.67




68
     MSA has subway        111,850 0.16   0.37   34,234 0.14     0.34


                             Panel B: Weighted

                             Full NHTS Sample    Estimation Subsample
                              N     Mean   SD      N     Mean    SD
     Tax-exclusive price    45,459  0.87  0.12   34,234 0.89     0.12
     Tax                    41,389  0.37  0.04   34,234 0.37     0.04
     Household size        106,831 2.54   1.34   34,234 2.53     1.35
     Number of drivers     106,831 1.85   0.73   34,234 1.84     0.73
     Number of adults      111,850 1.89   0.70   34,234 1.88     0.70
     Number of workers     106,831 1.30   0.94   34,234 1.31     0.93
     Age                   111,850 50.25 16.15   34,234 49.76 15.97
     MSA has subway        111,850 0.20   0.40   34,234 0.22     0.41
    Table 11: Gasoline Taxes, Tax-Exclusive Prices, and Vehicle MPG

                              Sample 1: All Purchases      Sample 2: Newer Purchases
                               (1)      (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)

Panel A: Effect from Total Gas Price

Log(gas price)                0.076     0.069     0.065     0.084     0.082     0.076
                             (0.017)   (0.018)   (0.019)   (0.026)   (0.027)   (0.028)
∆ in MPG in percent:          0.187     0.169     0.159     0.204     0.201     0.185
5c ↑ gas price               (0.041)   (0.044)   (0.046)   (0.063)   (0.066)   (0.068)
R-squared                     0.054     0.056     0.059     0.082     0.084     0.091

Panel B: Separating Gas Tax and Tax-exclusive Price

Log (tax-excl. gas price)     0.087     0.085     0.105     0.099     0.111     0.134
                             (0.020)   (0.019)   (0.029)   (0.024)   (0.027)   (0.037)
Log(1 + tax ratio)            0.151     0.174     0.288     0.201     0.274     0.405
                             (0.082)   (0.073)   (0.126)   (0.067)   (0.077)   (0.148)
p-value: α = β                0.354     0.170     0.080     0.109     0.018     0.030
∆ in MPG in percent:          0.418     0.482     0.798     0.557     0.759     1.123
5c ↑ gas tax                 (0.227)   (0.202)   (0.348)   (0.187)   (0.213)   (0.409)
R-squared                     0.053     0.055     0.059     0.082     0.085     0.091

Census division dummies        No       Yes        No        No       Yes         No
State dummies                  No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes
Observations                 52,128    52,128    52,128    30,363    30,363     30,363
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of average household MPG. Columns 1 to 3
are based on all households who purchased at least one vehicle during past 12 months
prior to the survey. The dependent variable is the log of the average MPG across all
vehicles purchased during the past 12 months. Columns 4 to 6 focus on households who
purchased at least one vehicle during the past 12 months, and all the vehicles purchased
are less than four years old. All regressions include the variables listed in Table 8. We
use dummy variables for the categorical variables. Sampling weights are used in all
regressions. Clustered standard errors at the state level are reported in parentheses.




                                          69
       Table 12: Gasoline Taxes, Tax-exclusive Prices, and Household VMT

                            Sample 1: 2 odometer readings    Sample 2: reported annual VMT
                              (1)      (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)         (6)

Panel A: Effect from Total Gas Price

Log(gas price)              -0.497     -0.329     -0.391      -0.274    -0.122       0.108
                            (0.11)    (0.113)    (0.133)     (0.156)   (0.123)      (0.284)
∆ in VMT in percent:         -1.631    -1.079     -1.284      -0.868    -0.388       0.343
5c ↑ gas price              (0.359)   (0.372)    (0.435)     (0.496)   (0.389)      (0.901)
R-squared                    0.447    0.448        0.45       0.361     0.362        0.363

Panel B: Separating Gas Tax from Tax-exclusive Price

Log(tax-excl. gas price)     -0.496    -0.329     -0.446      -0.253    -0.066      -0.246
                            (0.107)   (0.113)    (0.249)     (0.182)   (0.145)      (0.42)
Log(1 + tax ratio)           -0.523    -0.339     -0.593      -0.387    -0.273      -1.423
                            (0.304)    (0.21)    (0.809)     (0.334)   (0.147)       (1.3)
p-value: α = β               0.914    0.950       0.804       0.744     0.246        0.218
∆ in VMT in percent:         -1.722    -1.115     -1.950      -1.231    -0.870       -4.532
5c ↑ gas tax                (1.000)   (0.692)    (2.661)     (1.064)   (0.468)      (4.142)
R-squared                    0.447    0.448        0.45       0.361     0.362        0.364

Census division dummies       No       Yes          No          No      Yes           No
State dummies                 No        No         Yes          No       No          Yes
Observations                28,303    28,303      28,303      61,795   61,795       61,795
Notes: The dependent variable in all specifications is the log of daily household VMT for all
vehicles owned. Columns 1 to 3 are based on households who reported two odometer readings
for each of the vehicles owned from the 1995 and 2001 NHTS. Columns 4 to 6 are based on
self-reported annual VMT. All regressions include the control variables listed in Table 9. We
use dummy variables for the categorical variables. Sampling weights are used in all regressions.
Clustered standard errors at the state level are reported in parentheses.




                                          70
