                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         SEARCH FATIGUE

                                            Bruce Ian Carlin
                                             Florian Ederer

                                         Working Paper 17895
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17895


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2012




We are grateful to Steve Lippman for important comments during the beginning of this project. We
also thank Simon Board, Vince Crawford, Heikki Rantakari, Joel Sobel, and seminar participants at
the 2012 Southwest Economic Theory conference for their thoughtful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Bruce Ian Carlin and Florian Ederer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Search Fatigue
Bruce Ian Carlin and Florian Ederer
NBER Working Paper No. 17895
March 2012
JEL No. D43,D83

                                             ABSTRACT

Consumer search is not only costly but also tiring. We characterize the intertemporal effects that search
fatigue has on oligopoly prices, product proliferation, and the provision of consumer assistance (i.e.,
advice). These effects vary based on whether search is all-or-nothing or sequential in nature, whether
learning takes place, and whether consumers exhibit brand loyalty. We perform welfare analysis and
highlight the novel empirical implications that our analysis generates.


Bruce Ian Carlin
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu

Florian Ederer
University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA)
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Cornell Hall, Suite D515
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
florian.ederer@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

It is now well-accepted in economics that search is costly, unless you are lucky enough to be a

µ-type (i.e., a shopper or an expert with zero search costs). Search may take place sequentially

(e.g., Lippman and McCall, 1976; Reinganum, 1979; Stahl, 1989; Stahl, 1996), by examining a

fixed sample of options (e.g., MacMinn, 1980), or via an all-or-nothing approach (e.g., Salop and

Stiglitz, 1977; Varian, 1980). Producer and consumer behavior in these settings have been widely

studied, and equilibria typically share two standard features: price dispersion and heterogeneous

sophistication. Baye, Morgan, and Scholten (2006) provide a thorough review of this literature.1

    The fact that search is tiring (and can affect future behavior) has been overlooked. Fatigue from

searching in one period may affect the costs and incentives to become informed in future periods. In

this paper, we characterize oligopoly behavior cognizant of consumers’ tendency to become fatigued

from search. In contrast to standard search models, accounting for fatigue leads to time-varying

prices and consumer assistance (i.e., advice) as well as product proliferation. We also explore how

learning, brand loyalty and the type of search that occurs impacts oligopoly outcomes.

    In our setting, firms offer products for sale over an infinite horizon. In each period, every firm

offers one product of fixed value and has discretion to offer other products with zero value. Prices,

consumer assistance, and the length of the product line are set competitively and optimally. We

begin by considering a single consumer who purchases one item in each period from one of the firms

and rationally chooses whether to search for the best alternative, taking into account the impact

that fatigue from search has on future behavior. We consider three types of search: all-or-nothing

search, sequential search in which the consumer incurs a cost for each additional firm she visits,

and sequential search in which the consumer pays a fixed cost to have the freedom to sort products

systematically.

    This initial analysis yields the following findings. Whereas a monopolist always chooses to

produce only the valuable product, firms competing in an oligopoly usually engage in socially

wasteful product proliferation. But the amount of product proliferation that occurs depends on the
   1
     See also Diamond (1971), Stiglitz (1979), Weitzman (1979) Braverman (1980), Braverman and Dixit (1981),
Salop and Stiglitz (1982), Burdett and Judd (1983), Carlson and McAfee (1983), and Rob (1985).



                                                     1
search technology. When search is sequential and the consumer incurs an incremental cost per firm

she visits, the equilibrium mimics that of Diamond (1971) in which no search occurs and there is no

product proliferation. This is not surprising because all firms enjoy local monopoly power. However,

when all-or-nothing search is used or when the consumer pays a fixed cost for the freedom to search

sequentially, product proliferation arises. Interestingly, in the all-or-nothing search setting, the

average amount of product proliferation for each firm is monotonically decreasing in the number of

firms. In contrast in the fixed cost sequential search setting, firms maximally expand their product

lines in a uniform way, independent of the number of firms in the market. We show that this is the

most severe form of product proliferation.

   When there is a monopolist or search occurs with incremental costs, prices do not vary across

time and are set at monopoly levels. However, when all-or-nothing search or fixed cost sequential

search occurs, time-varying prices and consumer assistance arise. In those periods when consumers

are fatigued, prices evolve at monopoly levels and consumer assistance is highest. During periods

of search, prices are lower, but no consumer assistance is offered.

   We then extend our model to include consumer learning and to allow firms to alter their product

lines dynamically. In this extension, we show that product proliferation is time-varying because

the firms extend their product lines during search and only offer the product of fixed value when

search does not take place. In this setting, providing assistance is a dominated strategy because

the firm could instead lower the number of extraneous products that they offer and save the cost

of production. Also, since learning takes place over time, which is modeled as a time-varying cost

function, product proliferation becomes more severe as time progresses. Intuitively, the firms need

to increase their product lines to assure that the consumer continues to require rest intermittently.

This implies that redundant product proliferation and industry maturity are positively correlated.

   Finally, we conclude our analysis by considering that a mass of consumers search for the best

alternative. At any time, there is a fraction of rested consumers and a group that is fatigued

from previous search. The equilibrium that we derive exhibits features that are similar to the

one consumer case: time-varying prices and consumer assistance. Several additional findings arise.

First, the firms play a mixed strategy in prices that is time varying depending on the fraction of


                                                  2
fatigued consumers. The distribution is similar to that in Varian (1980) and Stahl (1989), except

that it varies period to period. Also, like Rosenthal (1980), the distribution of prices depends on

the number of firms: the stronger the degree of competition the more likely it is that firms choose

to set higher prices. Finally, brand loyalty does not cause our results about time-varying price

distributions and consumer assistance to disappear. Rather, brand loyalty affects the distribution

that the firms choose in equilibrium. When there is less loyalty, the firms compete more vigorously

in the market, which causes the lower bound on the price distribution to decrease, but leads firms

to place more probability weight on higher prices.

   The results in this paper apply to markets in which consumers search intermittently and repeat-

edly for the best alternative: money management, travel, shipping services, loans and credit terms,

to name a few. It also applies to industries that share consumers (e.g., banking and insurance) who

search intermittently for related products. To our knowledge, the empirical implications that we

highlight throughout the paper are new to the search literature. Testing them empirically is the

subject of future research.

   Our paper adds to a growing literature in which firms can make search more difficult, either

via obfuscation (Spiegler, 2006; Ellison and Wolitzky, 2011; Carlin and Manso, 2011), complexity

(Carlin, 2009), or shrouding attributes (Gabaix and Laibson, 2006). In contrast, to previous studies,

we endogenize both the consumer’s search choice and the firms strategic decisions in a dynamic

framework. Additionally, we consider issues such as consumer assistance, product proliferation,

and brand loyalty, which are all new considerations in this literature.

   To ease the reader’s search for our salient ideas and to prevent fatigue, we provide the following

outline for the paper. In Section 2, we describe the setup of our model of search fatigue. Section 3

analyzes monopoly and oligopoly behavior in several search settings. Section 4 explores time-

varying product proliferation and learning. Section 5 reconsiders our analysis with a continuum of

consumers and heterogeneous fatigue. We also analyze the effect that brand loyalty has on search

fatigue and oligopoly behavior. Section 6 concludes. All proofs are contained in Appendix A. Some

other model variations are explored in Appendix B.




                                                 3
2    The Model

Consider a market in which n firms, indexed by j ∈ N = {1, ..., n}, offer a line of goods to a single

consumer over an infinite horizon. Time evolves in discrete periods indexed by t ∈ {1, . . . , ∞}, and
                                                                     1
utility (i.e., profits or consumer surplus) is discounted by δ =    1+r   per period. Each firm makes

three strategic choices during the game: the length of its product line, prices for all of its products,

and how much assistance to offer the consumer when she visits its store. The timing of the game

is described below and is depicted in Figure 1.
                                                                           Pn
    The length of each firm’s product line is denoted by ℓj and L ≡          j=1 ℓj .   Each product line

must contain a single product of fixed value q̄. We refer to this as the special product. Each firm

has discretion to offer additional products of zero value and incurs an initial cost of κ for each
                                                                                              q̄
additional product it adds. As such, the average quality of each firm’s products is           ℓj .   In our

analysis, we start by considering the case in which the product line decision occurs once at the

beginning of time. Subsequently, in Section 4 we analyze the case in which firms can alter their

product lines in each period t.

    In each period, every firm chooses prices for each of its products. Let p1j denote the price of

firm j’s special product and denote the other prices by pm
                                                         j , where m ∈ {2, ..., ℓj }.

    The consumer purchases one product in each period and chooses whether to search for the best

alternative. Search may be all-or-nothing or sequential in nature. We analyze both of these cases

and compare the equilibrium outcomes. Before making a search decision, the consumer observes

how many firms are in the market and how many total products are offered. In period t, the

consumer’s search cost is c(xt−1 ), where xt−1 is the number of products she examined in the prior

period. We assume that x0 = 0, that c(·) is increasing in its argument, and that c(∞) = ∞.

Therefore, when the consumer chooses whether to search, she has to take into account the effect

her decision has on her choice next period as well as the resulting firm behavior. To make the

analysis economically meaningful, we assume that 0 < c (0) < q̄.

    If the consumer chooses not to search, she is randomly allocated to one of the L products in

the market with equal probability. Unless the firm offers assistance, the consumer can only decide



                                                   4
       τ =1                           τ =2                        τ =3                         τ =4
 Consumer chooses                    Firms                       Firms                    Consumers make
   search or not.                 choose prices.            choose assistance.           purchase decisions.

Figure 1: Search fatigue game. At the beginning of the game, each firm chooses the length of its
product line. Then, in each period t ∈ {1, 2, . . .}, the choices of the consumer and firms take place
according to this timeline. First, at τ = 1, the consumer decides whether she wants to search.
At τ = 2, the firms choose their prices. At τ = 3, when the consumer visits a particular firm, it
chooses whether to provide consumer assistance or not. Finally, at τ = 4, the consumer chooses
whether to proceed with her purchase or walk away.



whether or not buy this randomly chosen product at the price offered by the firm.2

       Define Jt as the number of stores that a consumer visits in period t. When a consumer visits a

firm’s store and there are multiple products to choose from, the firm may offer assistance aj ∈ {0, 1}

at no cost. When aj = 1, the consumer is directed to the special product, even if the consumer

was randomly allocated to another product offered by the firm. In this case, the consumer saves on

the search costs incurred at that store. When a firm chooses aj = 0, the consumer is left to make

choices on her own without assistance and without a decrease in future search costs. As such, the

effective xt with advice may be computed as

                                                            X
                                                 xt = L −          ak ℓk .                                           (1)
                                                            k∈Jt

       The timing of the game is as follows. At the beginning of the game t = 0, each firm chooses ℓj .

Then, each period t ∈ {1, 2, . . .}, is divided into four parts. At τ = 1, the consumer first observes

how many firms and products are in the market and decides whether to search. Then, at τ = 2

the firms set prices for each of their products. At τ = 3, if the consumer visits firm j’s store, it

chooses whether to offer consumer assistance. Finally, at τ = 4, the consumer makes her purchase

decision. The consumer makes a purchase only if her utility is weakly greater than walking away.
   2
     As will soon become apparent, if we pose an alternative model with inertia, our results are unchanged. Specifically,
if the consumer remains with the same firm when she does not search, our results on product proliferations, time-
varying prices, and consumer assistance remain. See Remark 3.




                                                           5
3     Results

We define a subgame perfect equilibrium by the tuple of vectors (ℓ∗ , Ft∗ (p), a∗t , s∗t ). The vector

ℓ∗ ≡ [ℓ∗1 , . . . , ℓ∗n ] lists the product line choices that the firms choose at t = 0. The vectors Ft∗ (p)

and a∗t are the time-varying equilibrium pricing and advice strategies that the firms use. As we will

show shortly, in the one consumer case, pricing entails pure strategies, whereas with heterogeneous

fatigue (i.e., Section 5), the firms utilize mixed strategies. Finally, s∗t is the time-varying search

decision by the consumer.

    Going forward, we make the assumption that

                                                         δq̄
                                             κ<                 .                                       (2)
                                                  n2 (L̄   − 1)

This condition is sufficient to assure participation of each of the firms. It simplifies the analysis

because it allows us to abstract away from the coordination problems that arise in joint production

problems. Indeed, it assures that the initial cost of adding products is not too high, and that all

firms consider producing extra products.

3.1    Monopoly

We begin by analyzing the case where n = 1, which will serve as a benchmark of comparison to

the oligopoly case.

    Suppose the consumer chose to search in the current period t. In that case she selects the

product that yields the highest utility. Given that the monopolist can extract all the surplus from

the transaction, he sets prices to make the consumer indifferent between buying the special product

and walking away. The equilibrium price for special product is p1 = q̄ while all other prices are

pj > 0 for j 6= 1. The monopolist chooses a = 0 and its per period profits are equal to q̄. The

consumer earns zero utility from purchasing the special product and she incurs the cost of search.

    Now suppose the consumer does not search in period t. The monopolist can choose a = 1 and

direct her toward the special product. In this case, the monopolist’s per period profits are q̄. The

consumer again earns zero utility from purchasing the special product, but she does not incur the

cost of search.


                                                     6
   The consumer receives a surplus of −c (ℓ) per period when she searches and 0 when she does

not search. Hence, for any ℓ the consumer never searches. As a result, the monopolist maximizes

profits by producing only one product, namely the special product, ℓ = 1.

   The following proposition summarizes this result.

Proposition 1. (Monopoly) Suppose that a firm is a monopolist in the market (n = 1). The

equilibrium outcome vector (ℓ∗ , Ft∗ (p), a∗t , s∗t ) is such that the monopolist produces one product,

ℓ∗ = 1, p1,∗ = q̄ for all t, no search takes place, s∗t = 0, and no assistance is given, a∗t = 0.

Consumer surplus is zero and the firm’s expected discounted profits are

                                                    1
                                            Π∗ =       q̄.                                         (3)
                                                   1−δ

   Before moving to the analysis of oligopoly competition, it is important to note a few straight-

forward observations. First, there is no product proliferation in the monopoly case. Since the

monopolist collects all of the rents from production, there is no reason to offer suboptimal prod-

ucts. Second, there is no consumer search; since there is only one firm and one valuable product,

no effort is wasted on search and there is no fatigue. Thus, the monopoly case is most efficient from

a welfare standpoint. Since prices are merely transfers, zero costs are expended on extra product

proliferation and sorting products. This efficiency is not retained in the oligopoly setting.

3.2     Oligopoly

In what follows, we consider the two types of search in turn. In both cases we solve by backward

induction period by period.

3.2.1    All-or-Nothing Search

In this search setting, if the consumer elects to search in period t she pays c(xt−1 ), and she becomes

completely informed about the products and prices offered by every firm in period t. Recall that

xt−1 is the number of products that she examined in the prior period without assistance, x0 = 0,

c(·) is increasing in its argument, 0 < c (0) < q̄, and c(∞) = ∞.

   Let us first suppose that the consumer chooses to search and that a total of L products and n

special products are offered in the market. Given that the consumer searches, the firms set prices

                                                   7
such that pj = 0 for all products due to Bertrand competition. The consumer selects one of the

special products from one of the n firms and earns a surplus of q̄ − c(xt−1 ), while all the firms earn

zero profits. It is important to note that there is no inherent benefit for the manager at any of the

firms to provide consumer assistance.

    Now, suppose that the consumer does not search. It is straightforward to show that each firm

sets prices p1j = q̄ for all j and, to ensure that the special product is always purchased, pm
                                                                                             j > 0 for

all j and m 6= 1. Further, it is clear that if the consumer arrives at firm j, it is optimal for the

manager to choose aj = 1 so that the consumer correctly identifies the special product. Otherwise,

the consumer might try to purchase a suboptimal product m > 1 yielding the firm zero profit.

With assistance, the consumer purchases the special product and earns zero surplus, but the firm

earns profits equal to q̄.

    Given this purchase behavior the firms all strictly prefer that the consumer does not search as
                                                                                            q̄
they earn zero profits when search occurs and they have a positive expected profit          n    in each period

when no search occurs. Given that c (0) < q̄, the consumer is always willing to search in the current

period if she did not search in the previous period. However, if the consumer is sufficiently fatigued,

she will not search and this preserves rents for the firms in the market. In the context of our model,

the consumer is willing to search if and only if q̄ > c(L) and rests otherwise. Hence, because c(·) is

monotonically increasing, there exists a unique threshold L̄ above which the consumer is unwilling

to search in the current period if she searched in the previous period without assistance. More

formally, L̄ is the smallest integer such that q̄ ≤ c(L̄).


Proposition 2. (All-or-Nothing Search) Suppose that n firms compete in a dynamic all-or-nothing

search setting and that (2) is satisfied. The equilibrium outcome tuple (ℓ∗ , Ft∗ (p), a∗t , s∗t ) is such that

L∗ = L̄ and

  (i) In all odd number periods (t = 1, t = 3, . . . ), the consumer searches, s∗ = 1, a∗j = 0 for all j,

      and pm,∗
           j   = 0 for all j ∈ N, m ∈ ℓj .

 (ii) In all even number periods (t = 2, t = 4, . . . ), no consumer search occurs, s∗ = 0, aj = 1 for

      all j, pj1,∗ = q̄ for all j, and pm,∗
                                        j   > 0 for all j ∈ N, m ∈ ℓj such that m > 1.

                                                      8
Each firm earns discounted expected profits equal to

                                                   δq̄
                                        Π∗j =              − (ℓ∗j − 1)κ,                                       (4)
                                                n(1 − δ2 )

and the consumer’s expected discounted surplus is

                                                         1
                                                U∗ =          q̄.                                              (5)
                                                       1 − δ2

   According to Proposition 2, search, prices, and consumer assistance are time-varying. The firms

have an incentive to produce enough products to ensure that a consumer who searches becomes

fatigued. By construction, the consumer searches in the first period because her search cost is c(0)

and she stands to gain q̄. However, because L∗ = L̄, her second period search cost c(L̄) is greater

than q̄ whence it is optimal for her to rest during the second period. In this case, the firm that she

goes to has monopoly power and directs her to the special product.

   None of the firms have a unilateral incentive to deviate from this equilibrium. First, no firm

has a reason to give a searching consumer any assistance. If one firm did so, then the consumer

would not get as tired during search and would search again in the subsequent period: because
                                                                                   q̄
c(L̄−1) < q̄, assistance would decrease the firm’s expected profits from           n    to zero. Therefore, no firm

will offer the consumer assistance when she is actively searching. In contrast, when the consumer is

not searching and is randomly paired with a particular firm, that firm will offer assistance to direct

the consumer to the special product that yields revenue q̄ > 0. Much like the monopoly case, the

firm has a strong incentive to assure that the consumer ignores products that have no value for the

consumer.

   Second, no firm has a reason to change its product line unilaterally, given the behavior of the

other firms. Suppose L = L̄. If a particular firm j deviates and produces more products than ℓ∗j ,

it incurs an extra cost of κ per additional product, but it does not change its expected revenues:

this is not a profitable deviation. Suppose that the firm deviates and produces any fewer products

than ℓ∗j . The best possible deviation would be to produce only the special product and to avoid
                                                                           q̄
paying (ℓ∗j − 1)κ. In this case, the expected profit drops from            n    to zero. But because (2) holds,

this is never a profitable deviation.


                                                        9
   It is also straightforward to show that while L̄ is unique, a unique equilibrium does not exist.

For example, suppose n = 4 and L̄ = 9. There are many permutations in which the firms can

produce that will constitute an equilibrium. As long as L̄ products are produced by all the firms

in the market, there is no reason for any one firm to deviate.

3.2.2   Sequential Search

We now consider two types of sequential search, one in which the consumer pays an incremental

cost for each additional firm that she visits and one with a fixed cost that the consumer pays

to search firms sequentially. In both cases when the consumer searches a firm, she examines all

products at the firm.


Incremental cost of search        Suppose in each period that the consumer is randomly paired with

a firm and then pays c(xt−1 ) for each additional firm she visits. As before, xt−1 is the number

of products that the consumer examined in the prior period without assistance, and the previous

assumptions regarding the search cost continue to hold.

   The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium of this game.

Proposition 3. (Incremental Sequential Search) Suppose that n firms compete in a dynamic in-

cremental sequential search. Then, no search takes place, ℓ∗j = 1 for all j, no assistance is needed,

p1j = q̄ for all t, consumer surplus is zero, and the firms’ expected profits are

                                                      1
                                           π∗ =            q̄.                                    (6)
                                                  (1 − δ)n

   The result in Proposition 3 mimics that in Diamond (1971). Since the consumer faces a fixed

but positive search cost, the equilibrium involves uniform monopoly pricing. The consumer has

no incentive to pay a cost to search since all products and prices are the same. Given that the

consumer does not search, the firms have no incentive to add superfluous products to their lines.

The equilibrium is similar to that in Proposition 1, which is not surprising: the incremental search

costs endows each firm with local monopoly power so that there is no incentive for socially wasteful

product proliferation.



                                                   10
Fixed cost of sequential search          Suppose at the beginning of each period, the consumer chooses

whether to pay c(xt−1 ). If she does so, she can search sequentially with no incremental cost for

doing so. If not, she is randomly paired with one firm as in the all-or-nothing search setting. As

before xt−1 is still the number of products that the consumer examined in the prior period without

assistance, and the previous assumptions regarding the search cost continue to hold.


Proposition 4. (Fixed Cost Sequential Search) Suppose that n firms compete in a dynamic fixed

cost sequential search game. Suppose that (2) holds. Then, there exists an equilibrium ℓ∗j = L̄ for

all j such that

  (i) In all odd number periods (t = 1, t = 3, . . . ), the consumer searches, a∗j = 0 for all j, and

      pm,∗
       j   = 0 for all j ∈ N, m ∈ ℓj .

 (ii) In all even number periods (t = 2, t = 4, . . . ), no consumer search occurs, aj = 1 for all j,

      p1,∗                    m,∗
       j = q̄ for all j, and pj   > 0 for all j ∈ N, m ∈ ℓj such that m > 1.

Each firm earns discounted expected profits equal to

                                                δq̄
                                    Π∗j =               − (L̄ − 1)kp ,                                (7)
                                             n(1 − δ2 )

and the consumer’s expected discounted surplus is

                                                       1
                                              U∗ =          q̄.                                       (8)
                                                     1 − δ2

   The proof and intuition of Proposition 4 follows the same logic as Proposition 2, except that

it leads to more severe product proliferation. Since the pricing during periods of search yields

a Bertrand paradox, the consumer only visits one firm. In this case, each firm must produce L̄

products to induce sufficient fatigue so that the consumer rests intermittently. Compared to the

all-or-nothing search setting in which there are L̄ products in the market, nL̄ products are made

available when sequential search is used. This maximizes socially wasteful product proliferation

and leads to a drop in welfare.

Remark 1. Fixed-sample search in which the consumer compares the products from k firms may
                                                                          L̄
also be analyzed in the same fashion (e.g., MacMinn, 1980). For any       k    that is integer valued, the

                                                     11
                          L̄
case in which ℓ∗j =       k    leads to equilibrium that is qualitatively similar to that in Propositions 2 and 4.

The condition in (2) is sufficient and the degree of product proliferation Lk is monotonically de-

creasing in k such that L̄ < Lk < nL̄.3

Remark 2. It is straightforward to show that the same results would hold with a unit mass of

identical consumers who all begin the game with x0 = 0 (i.e., they are initially rested). We will

show this to be the case in the Section 5 when we consider heterogenous fatigue.

Remark 3. Our assumption about the random choice of product whenever the consumer does not

search can also be relaxed. It is straightforward to show that if instead of random choice, a consumer

who does not search in period t is allocated to the same product that she purchased in period t − 1,

all of our results still hold. If the consumer purchases the same product again when she does not

search, the price is equal to q̄.


4        Time-Varying Product Proliferation and Learning

So far, we have restricted firms to make their product line choices once and not adapt to consumer

search. In this section, we build on our all-or-nothing search framework to relax that assumption.

Additionally, we have assumed that the consumer does not learn from period to period. Implicitly,

we have restricted our analysis to a consumer that already has expertise in buying the products

under study. In what follows, we reconsider this assumption and allow the consumer to learn as

time evolves.

        Consider the setup in Section 2 with two modifications. First, let us suppose that each firm

chooses ℓj,t at the beginning of each period t ∈ {1, . . . , ∞}. The cost of producing non-valuable

products is still κ, but this cost is incurred in each period the extra products are offered. The

timing for the game is portrayed in Figure 2.

        Second, let us suppose that the consumer’s cost function is time-varying. Specifically, assume

that ct (z) > ct+1 (z) for all t and any z. This captures the idea that during each period, the

consumer learns at least something new about the market under study. However, we make no

assumption regarding the importance of what she learns.
    3
        Analytical results for k-sample search are available upon request from the authors.


                                                            12
   τ =1                      τ =2               τ =3                        τ =4               τ =5
   Firms               Consumer chooses        Firms                       Firms          Consumers make
 choose ℓj .             search or not.     choose prices.            choose assistance. purchase decisions.

Figure 2: Search fatigue game with time-varying product lines. In each period t ∈ {1, 2, . . .}, the
choices of the consumer and firms take place according to this timeline. At τ = 1, each firm chooses
the length of its product line. Then, at τ = 2, the consumer decides whether she wants to search.
At τ = 3, the firms choose their prices. At τ = 4, when the consumer visits a particular firm, it
chooses whether to provide consumer assistance or not. Finally, at τ = 5, the consumer chooses
whether to proceed with her purchase or walk away.



    Given these assumptions the threshold L̄ to induce intermittent search behavior by the consumer

will be time-varying. We denote this dependence by L̄t and specify L̄t as the smallest integer such

that q̄ ≤ ct (L̄t ).


Proposition 5. (Recurring product line choices and learning) Suppose that n firms compete in a

dynamic all-or-nothing search setting and that at every time t

                                                          δq̄
                                              κ<                  .                                        (9)
                                                    n2 (L̄ t − 1)

Then, there exists an equilibrium tuple (ℓ∗ , Ft∗ (p), a∗t , s∗t ) such that L∗t = L̄t and

  (i) In all odd number periods (t = 1, t = 3, . . . ), the consumer searches, s∗ = 1, aj = 0 for all j,

       and pm,∗
            j   = 0 for all j ∈ N, m ∈ ℓj .

 (ii) In all even number periods (t = 2, t = 4, . . . ), no consumer search occurs, s∗ = 0, a∗j = 0 for

       all j, ℓ∗j = 1 for all j, and p1,∗
                                      j = q̄ for all j.



    The results in Proposition 5 contrast with those in Proposition 2 in three ways. First, prod-

uct proliferation is time-varying. In periods in which the consumer searches, the firms produce

enough products to tire her out. However, during periods in which she rests, no product prolif-

eration takes place. Second, consumer assistance is a superfluous consideration. That is, it is a

dominated strategy for any firm to produce extra products during even number periods and grant

assistance. Instead, it is optimal for them to only produce the special product and save on the

                                                      13
costs of proliferation. Third, Proposition 5 and the construction of our model implies that aggre-

gate product proliferation will increase in time as the consumer becomes more experienced. This

implies that empirically we should observe more redundant product proliferation in markets that

are more seasoned.

        The condition in (9) is related to that in (2) except that L̄ is time-varying and increasing.

However, it is important to point out that we are also implicitly assuming that the consumer’s cost
                                                                                       δq̄
function doesn’t get too small as time went on. If it did so that κ >              n2 (L̄t −1)
                                                                                                 , then there would

exist a critical time after which search would occur in every period. That is, for a finite time, prices

and product proliferation would vary with time. After that, product proliferation would stop and

prices would evolve at Bertrand prices.


5        Aggregate Time-Varying Fatigue

In this section, we extend our analysis to consider time-varying fatigue in which a fraction of

consumers begins the game rested and the remainder is too fatigued to search in the initial period.

We derive an equilibrium with a time-varying distribution of prices, product proliferation, and

consumer assistance. Following that, we explore the additional consideration of brand loyalty.

Indeed, some consumers may have switching costs or inertia, and we analyze how this affects our

analysis.

5.1       Heterogeneous Fatigue

Consider an all-or-nothing search environment in which µt is the fraction of consumers who choose

to search in any period t and 1 − µt is the fraction who is randomly paired with a firm. The setup

is otherwise unchanged from Section 2. The firms initially choose ℓj and then the timing proceeds

according to the timeline in Figure 1. For ease, we make three simplifying assumptions. First, we

assume that c(0) = 0 so that consumers will incur zero current search costs in a period if they are

rested. Second, we assume that κ is positive but arbitrarily small.4 Third, we assume that the
    4
    A condition like that in (2) could be calculated for the case of heterogeneous fatigue. Rather than express it
explicitly, any arbitrarily low value for κ will assure that we avoid the coordination problems that arise in joint
production problems.




                                                        14
firms can distinguish µt -types when they visit their stores. As we discuss shortly, this assumption

is not necessary to derive a symmetric equilibrium, but makes our characterization easier. Indeed,

in Appendix B we consider an alternative model in which firms cannot detect types during visits.


Proposition 6. (Heterogeneous Fatigue) Suppose that n firms compete in a dynamic all-or-nothing

search game in which µt of the consumers search at any time t. Then, there exists an equilibrium

(ℓ∗ , Ft∗ (p), a∗t ) where L = L̄ and all firms set their prices according to a continuous, monotoni-

cally increasing, time-varying distribution function Ft (p) over the support [p∗t , q̄]. The distribution

function is computed as
                                               "                       #    1
                                                                           n−1
                                               (q̄ − p)(1 − µt )
                                  Ft (p) = 1 −                                   ,                  (10)
                                                     npµt
with lower bound
                                                         q̄
                                            p∗t =    nµt           .                                (11)
                                                    1−µt      +1
In equilibrium, µt = µ0 for all even periods t ∈ {2, 4, . . .} and is equal to 1 − µ0 otherwise.

   The lower bound p∗t is monotonically decreasing in µt and n. The function Ft (p) is monotonically

increasing in µt and decreasing in n for all p. As n → ∞, p∗t → 0 and Ft (p) → 0 for all p.

   According to Proposition 6, the fraction µ0 search during t = 1 and get the best deal in the

market. Their payoff is q̄ − pmin . The firms provide no assistance to searching customers and as

such they are fatigued after analyzing L̄ products. Given their fatigue, they do not search at time

t = 2. In contrast, each consumer in the fraction 1 − µ0 does not search and is randomly paired

with a firm. They each receive assistance and all purchase the special product from the firm that

they visit. Their payoff is also almost surely positive and depends on their firm’s draw from F ∗ (p).

Since they do not search, however, they become rested at time t = 2 and search during that period.

Therefore, in each period the roles of the consumers switch. As such, there will be time-varying

price distributions that take values in one of two states, alternating each period depending on µ0

and 1 − µ0 .

   Not surprisingly, in each period, the firms play a mixed strategy equilibrium with regard to

prices. This result is consistent with previous all-or-nothing search models (e.g., Salop and Stiglitz,


                                                    15
1977; Varian, 1980) and price dispersion results from the impossibility of a pure strategy equilib-

rium. In this case, however, the distribution of prices varies over time due to the heterogeneous
                                                           1
and intermittent fatigue of the consumers. Only if µ0 =    2   will Ft (p) be constant over time. As µ0

departs from one-half will there be increasing variation across periods. In the extreme, when µ0

is one, the firms will set prices as they did in Section 3.2.1, that is alternating between Bertrand

competition and monopoly prices. Therefore, Proposition 6 nests a result in Proposition 2 as a

special case when consumers are homogeneous.

   According to our comparative statics results, with more firms (higher n), the lower bound of

the distribution decreases, consistent with more competition. However, F (p) also decreases, which

implies that firms tend to put more probability on setting higher prices. In the limit as n → ∞,

even though the lower bound converges to zero, the firms all choose pj = q̄ almost surely. This

is not surprising since increasing competition makes it less likely to be the low-price firm in the

market. This effect was first described by Rosenthal (1980), that is the ability of competition to

induce rising prices.

Remark 4. The assumption that the firms observe which consumers are searching is not necessary

to derive an equilibrium in the spirit of Proposition 6. In Appendix B, we derive one in the case when

the firms share the burden of producing L̄ products equally. Compared to the case in Proposition 6,

the lower bound of the support is lower, but Ft (p) is lower for all p. This change arises because

each firm can no longer direct non-searching searching consumers to the special product.

5.2   Brand Loyalty

So far in our analysis, we have made the somewhat unrealistic assumption that consumers (may)

switch products every period and start afresh. Now, we relax that assumption and suppose that

consumers can develop brand loyalty, either due to inertia, switching costs that are outside the

model, or relationships with someone at the firm.

   Consider the same setup as Section 5.1 except that at any time t, a fraction 1 − λt of consumers

have brand loyalty. We assume that 1 − λt is evenly distributed among the firms, so that no firm

has a brand advantage. Of the remaining λt fraction of consumers, a proportion µt are rested and


                                                 16
search during period t. The remaining 1 − µt fraction of λt are each randomly paired with a firm.

Proposition 7. (Brand Loyalty) Suppose that n firms compete in a dynamic all-or-nothing search

game in which 1 − λt of the consumers have brand loyalty at any time t. Then, there exists an

equilibrium (ℓ∗ , Ft∗ (p), a∗t ) where L = L̄ and all firms set their prices according to
                                                  "                     # 1
                                                    (q̄ − p)(1 − λt µt ) n−1
                                     Ft (p) = 1 −                            ,                   (12)
                                                          npλt µt
over the support [p∗t , q̄] with lower bound

                                                             q̄
                                               p∗t =    nλt µt
                                                                       .                         (13)
                                                       1−λt µt    +1
    The lower bound p∗t is monotonically decreasing in λt . The function Ft (p) is monotonically

decreasing in λt for all p.

    Much of the structure of the equilibrium with brand loyalty is unchanged from the results in

Proposition 6. The fraction of searching consumers alternates in each period, the firms use a mixed

strategy when choosing prices, and firms help non-searching consumers (including those with brand

loyalty).

    The distribution of prices is the only dimension that changes with brand loyalty. In periods of

high brand loyalty (low λ), the lower bound of the distribution is higher, but the firms place less

probability weight on high prices. When there is low brand loyalty, there is more competition for

searchers and p∗t is lower. However, given a lower chance of being the low-priced firm, all firms

weight higher prices more within Ft (p). This implies that there is likely to be more price dispersion

in periods of low brand loyalty than when there is more brand loyalty.


6    Conclusion

In this paper, we analyze how fatigue affects consumer behavior and oligopoly outcomes. Our model

variations focus on one industry and generally we find that fatigue induces product proliferation

and time-varying prices and consumer assistance.

    Our analysis would apply equally well to a case in which a consumer searches for goods in

multiple industries. In the context of our model, as long as there is a probability that the consumer

                                                        17
searches for an item in each industry in each period, firms should still find it optimal to produce

multiple products, and prices (or price distributions) should be time varying. As such, we believe

that our model’s empirical predictions can be extended across industries as well, especially those

in which consumers search for related items (e.g., loans, investments, and insurance).




                                                18
References
Baye, M., Morgan, J., 2001. Information gatekeepers on the internet and the competitiveness of
homogeneous product markets. American Economic Review 91, 454-474.

Baye, M., Morgan, J., Scholten, P., 2006. Information, search, and price dispersion. In: Hender-
shott, T.(Ed.), Handbook on Economics and Information Systems. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam,
323-371.

Braverman, A., 1980. Consumer search and alternative market equilibria. Review of Economic
Studies 47, 487-502.

Braverman, A. and A. Dixit, 1981. Consumer search and market equilibria: A note. Review of
Economic Studies 48, 657-658.

Burdett, K. and K. Judd, 1983. Equilibrium price dispersion. Econometrica 51, 955-970.

Carlin, B., 2009. Strategic Price Complexity in Retail Financial Markets. Journal of Financial
Economics 91: 278-287.

Carlin, B., and Manso, G., 2011. Obfuscation, Learning, and the Evolution of Investor Sophistica-
tion. Review of Financial Studies 24: 754-785.

Carlson, J., McAfee, P., 1983. Discrete equilibrium price dispersion. Journal of Political Econ-
omy 91, 480-493.

Diamond, P., 1971. A model of price adjustment. Journal of Economic Theory 3, 156-168.

Ellison, G., and Wolitzky, A., 2011. A Search Cost Model of Obfuscation. MIT Working Paper.

Gabaix, X., and Laibson, D., 2006. Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
Suppression in Competitive Markets. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 505-540.

Lippman, S., McCall, J., 1976. The Economics of Job Search. Economic Inquiry 14, 155-189.

MacMinn, R., 1980. Search and Market Equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy 88, 308-327.

Reinganum, J., 1979. A simple model of equilibrium price dispersion. Journal of Political Econ-
omy 87, 851-858.

Rob, R., 1985. Equilibrium price distributions. Review of Economic Studies 52, 487-504.

                                                 19
Rosenthal, R., 1980. A Model in which an Increase in the Number of Sellers Leads to a Higher
Price. Econometrica 48, 1575-1579.

Salop, S., Stiglitz, J., 1977. Bargains and ripoffs: A model of monopolistically competitive price
dispersion. Review of Economic Studies 44, 493-510.

Salop, S. and J. Stiglitz, 1982. The theory of sales: A simple model of equilibrium price dispersion
with identical agents. American Economic Review 72, 1121-1130.

Spiegler, R., 2006. Competition over Agents with Boundedly Rational Expectations. Theoretical
Economics 1, 207-231.

Stahl, D., 1989. Oligopolistic pricing with sequential consumer search. American Economic Re-
view 79, 700-712.

Stahl, D., 1996. Oligopolistic pricing with heterogeneous consumer search. International Journal
of Industrial Organization 14, 243-268.

Stiglitz, J., 1979. Equilibrium in product markets with imperfect information. American Economic
Review 69, 339-345.

Varian, H., 1980. A model of sales. American Economic Review 70, 651-659.

Weitzman, M., 1979. Optimal search for the best alternative. Econometrica 47, 641-654.




                                                20
Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1.

The proof proceeds by backward induction for each period. Denote the product offering of the
monopolist by ℓ ≥ 1.
   Suppose the consumer searches in period t and the consumer chooses the product with the
highest utility. To induce her to buy the special product, for any ℓ the monopolist optimally sets
prices p1 = q̄ and pj > 0 for j 6= 1 and earns a profit of q̄. The consumer’s surplus is equal to
−c(xt−1 ) ≤ 0.
   Suppose the consumer does not search in period t. The consumer is willing to buy the product
to which she was allocated as long as it offers non-negative utility. For any ℓ > 1, the monopolist
optimally chooses a = 1 and sets prices p1 = q̄ and pj > 0 for j 6= 1. As such, its profits are q̄ and
the consumer earns zero surplus.
   Thus, in every period the consumer prefers not to search for any ℓ. The monopolist maximizes
profits by producing only one product, namely the special product, and earns
                                                      1
                                             Π∗ =        q̄.                                        (A1)
                                                     1−δ
Given that only one product is produced, a = 0 for all t. 

Proof of Proposition 2.

The proof proceeds by backward induction for each period. There are L products offered in the
market and n special products.
   Suppose the consumer searches in period t and the consumer selects the product with the highest
utility. Bertrand competition between the firms offering identical products leads to pm
                                                                                      j = 0 for all
j and m. To show this, suppose that pm
                                     j = 0 for all j and m, and that firm j deviates by setting
pm
 j > 0 for any m. For m ≥ 2, the payoff to the consumer from purchasing such a product from
firm j would be negative, which would lead to no sale. For m = 1, if p1j > 0, the consumer would
purchase the special product from another firm. Therefore, increasing prices is not a profitable
deviation. In this case, the consumer selects one of the special products from one of the n firms
and earns a surplus of q̄ − c(xt−1 ). All firms earn zero profits.
   Suppose the consumer does not search in period t. The consumer is willing to buy the product
to which he was allocated as long as it offers non-negative utility. If the consumer is randomly
allocated to firm j and ℓj > 1, the firm optimally chooses aj = 1. For any ℓj , each firm j optimally
sets prices p1 = q̄ and pj > 0 for j 6= 1 and its profits are q̄. All other firms earn zero profits. Each
                                                q̄
firm’s expected per period profit is equal to   n.   The consumer earns zero surplus.

                                                     21
   Hence, the consumer searches in period t, if and only if q̄ > c(xt−1 ). If the consumer did not
search in period t − 1 (i.e., xt−1 = 0), she searches in period t because c(0) < q̄. Let L̄ be the
smallest integer such that q̄ ≤ c(L̄). If L < L̄, the consumer searches in every period and each firm
earns zero discounted expected profits. If L ≥ L̄, the consumer searches in all odd number periods
(t = 1, t = 3, . . . ) and does not search in all even number periods (t = 2, t = 4, . . . ). In this case,
each firm j earns discounted expected profits equal to
                                                   δq̄
                                        Π∗j =              − (ℓj − 1)κ,                              (A2)
                                                n(1 − δ2 )
and the consumer’s expected discounted surplus is
                                                          q̄
                                                 U∗ =          .                                     (A3)
                                                        1 − δ2
   Suppose that in equilibrium all other n − 1 firms choose to produce a total of x < L̄ products.
We now show that firm j prefers to produce L̄ − x products to deter search in all even number
periods. The assumption in (2) assures this to be the case. Further, when the consumer searches
in odd-numbered periods, firm j has a strict incentive to set aj = 0 since c(L̄ − 1) < q̄.
   Suppose that the total number of products offered in the market is equal to L̄. If a particular
firm j produces ℓ∗j + 1 instead of ℓ∗j products, it incurs an extra cost κ and thus reduces its expected
discounted profits. Now, suppose that the firm only produces the special product. It avoids paying
(ℓ∗j − 1)κ in product line costs, but its (expected) per-period profit drops to zero. Because (2) holds,
this is never a profitable deviation.
   Hence, there is a unique equilibrium number of products L = L̄. 

Proof of Proposition 3.

We prove our claim using an induction argument. The logic follows that in Diamond (1971). We
start by conjecturing that each firm only produces the special product and then show that this is
the case in equilibrium.
   Suppose that in period t the consumer has already searched n − 1 firms and has received price
quotes from each of them. Define Pn−1 as the set of prices quoted to the consumer previously and
pn−1 as the minimum element of Pn−1 . Suppose that the consumer has chosen to visit firm n. Firm
n’s optimal strategy is to set a price pn−1 − ǫ and earn profits of pn−1 − ǫ. However, looking forward
and reasoning back, since ǫ < c(xt ), the consumer will choose not to visit firm n.
   Now consider the pricing behavior of the (n − 1)th firm, given that the consumer has chosen to
search for a price from this firm. Define Pn−2 and pn−2 accordingly. It is optimal for pn−1 = pn−1 −ǫ.
If the consumer stops searching, firm n − 1 earns pn−1 − ǫ. If the consumer continues searching,
firm n − 1 earns zero, but as we proved this will never happen. Therefore, looking forward and

                                                        22
reasoning back, the consumer will not search the (n − 1)th firm because ǫ < c(xt ). By induction,
the consumer arrives at the first firm it samples and does not search further. As such, p1j = q̄ for
all j.
    Now, we can prove our claim that ℓj = 1 for all j. Suppose that instead that ℓj > 1 for a
particular firm j. Suppose that the consumer visits this firm first. The consumer will identify the
special product as the weakly optimal product to purchase. Indeed, as long as pm
                                                                               j > 0 for m ≥ 2,
the consumer will not consider the alternatives. As such, all non-valuable products will not benefit
for the firm. Now, suppose that the consumer visits another firm i 6= j first. By the previous
argument, the consumer will not choose to search further for a special product from another firm.
Certainly, the extra non-valuable products at other firms does not induce search. Therefore, making
ℓj > 1 is a dominated strategy.
    Given this, ℓj = 1. In each period t, p1j = q̄ for all j, and st = 0. Consumer surplus is zero and
each firm’s expected profits are
                                                         1
                                           Π∗ =               q̄.                                   (A4)
                                                     (1 − δ)n
  

Proof of Proposition 4.

The proof proceeds by backward induction for each period. There are L products offered in the
market and n special products.
    Suppose the consumer searches in period t and the consumer selects the product with the highest
utility. Bertrand competition between the firms offering identical products leads to pm
                                                                                      j = 0 for all
j and m. To show this, suppose that pm
                                     j = 0 for all j and m, and that firm j deviates by setting
pm
 j > 0 for any m. For m ≥ 2, the payoff to the consumer from purchasing such a product from
firm j would be negative, which would lead to no sale. For m = 1, if p1j > 0, the consumer would
purchase the special product from another firm. Therefore, increasing prices is not a profitable
deviation. In this case, the consumer selects one of the special products from one of the n firms
and earns a surplus of q̄ − c(xt−1 ). All firms earn zero profits.
    Suppose the consumer does not search in period t. The consumer is willing to buy the product
to which he was allocated as long as it offers non-negative utility. If the consumer is randomly
allocated to firm j and ℓj > 1, the firm optimally chooses aj = 1. For any ℓj , each firm j optimally
sets prices p1 = q̄ and pj > 0 for j 6= 1 and its profits are q̄. All other firms earn zero profits. Each
                                                q̄
firm’s expected per period profit is equal to   n.   The consumer earns zero surplus.
    Hence, the consumer searches in period t, if and only if q̄ > c(xt−1 ). If the consumer did not
search in period t − 1 (i.e., xt−1 = 0), she searches in period t because c(0) < q̄. Let L̄ be the
smallest integer such that q̄ ≤ c(L̄). If L < L̄, the consumer searches in every period and each firm

                                                      23
earns zero discounted expected profits. If L ≥ L̄, the consumer searches in all odd number periods
(t = 1, t = 3, . . . ) and does not search in all even number periods (t = 2, t = 4, . . . ). In this case,
each firm j earns discounted expected profits equal to
                                                  δq̄
                                       Π∗j =              − (ℓj − 1)κ,                                 (A5)
                                               n(1 − δ2 )
and the consumer’s expected discounted surplus is
                                                          q̄
                                                U∗ =           .                                       (A6)
                                                        1 − δ2
   Each firm j optimally chooses ℓj = L̄. Producing L̄ + 1 instead of L̄ products incurs an extra
cost κ without any added benefit. The firm will also not produce ℓj < L̄ because (2) holds. Hence,
there is a unique equilibrium in which number of products in the market is L = nL̄.            

Proof of Proposition 5:

The proof proceeds by backward induction for each period. There are L products offered in the
market and n special products.
   Suppose the consumer searches in period t and the consumer selects the product with the highest
utility. Bertrand competition between the firms offering identical products leads to pm
                                                                                      j = 0 for all
j and m. To show this, suppose that pm
                                     j = 0 for all j and m, and that firm j deviates by setting
pm
 j > 0 for any m. For m ≥ 2, the payoff to the consumer from purchasing such a product from
firm j would be negative, which would lead to no sale. For m = 1, if p1j > 0, the consumer would
purchase the special product from another firm. Therefore, increasing prices is not a profitable
deviation. In this case, the consumer selects one of the special products from one of the n firms
and earns a surplus of q̄ − c(xt−1 ). All firms earn zero profits.
   Suppose the consumer does not search in period t. The consumer is willing to buy the product
to which he was allocated as long as it offers non-negative utility. If the consumer is randomly
allocated to firm j and ℓj > 1, the firm optimally chooses aj = 1. For any ℓj , each firm j optimally
sets prices p1 = q̄ and pj > 0 for j 6= 1 and its profits are q̄. All other firms earn zero profits. Each
                                                  q̄
firm’s expected per period profit is equal to     n.   The consumer earns zero surplus.
   Hence, the consumer searches in period t, if and only if q̄ > ct (xt−1 ). If the consumer did not
search in period t − 1 (i.e., xt−1 = 0), she searches in period t because ct (0) < q̄. Let L̄t be the
smallest integer such that q̄ ≤ ct (L̄t ). If L < L̄t , the consumer searches in every period and each
firm earns zero discounted expected profits. If L ≥ L̄t , the consumer searches in all odd number
periods (t = 1, t = 3, . . . ) and does not search in all even number periods (t = 2, t = 4, . . . ). In this
case, each firm j earns discounted expected revenues equal to
                                                          δq̄
                                               Rj∗ =              ,                                    (A7)
                                                       n(1 − δ2 )

                                                        24
and the consumer’s expected discounted surplus is
                                                        q̄
                                               U∗ =          .                                     (A8)
                                                      1 − δ2
    Now, we can observe that it is a dominated strategy for any firm to choose ℓj > 1 and aj = 1
in even periods. Instead, each firm optimally chooses ℓj = 1 and aj = 0 to save the cost of κ per
extra product.
    In each odd period, suppose that the n − 1 firms produce zt products. The optimal choice of
ℓj,t is L̄t − zt . If it produces L̄t − zt + 1 instead, it incurs an extra cost κ but does not enjoy any
benefit for doing so. Now, suppose that the firm only produces the special product. It avoids paying
(L̄t − zt − 1)κ in product line costs, but its (expected) per-period profit drops to zero. Because (9)
holds, this is never a profitable deviation.
    Finally, when the consumer searches in odd-numbered periods, each firm j has a strict incentive
to set aj = 0 since ct (L̄t − 1) < q̄.
    Hence, there is a unique equilibrium number of total products offered in every odd period
L = L̄t . 

Proof of Proposition 6.

Outline of proof: The proof proceeds by backward induction. In each period, we first consider con-
sumer buying behavior and the consumer assistance offered by each firm conditional on identifying
which consumers are searching. Following that, we consider the firms’ pricing strategies. Working
backward, we then consider the search decision by consumers. Finally, we show the existence of an
equilibrium ℓ∗ .

Step One: Buying behavior and consumer assistance
At any time t, µt -type consumers identify all products and prices in the market and choose the
one that gives the highest payoff. By construction, xt = L, so that their next period search cost is
c(L). When a firm identifies a searching consumer, it chooses aj = 0 as there is a cost to lowering
future search costs and no benefit to giving assistance. At time t, (1 − µt )-type consumers are
randomly paired with a firm. In this case, the firm will offer aj = 1 and direct the consumer to
the product that is most profitable for the firm. As we will show shortly, in equilibrium this is the
special product.

Step Two: Pricing
First let us consider the price of the special product and assume that the firm always directs (1−µt )-
types to this product. Eventually, we will show that this is indeed always optimal in equilibrium.



                                                      25
Define J ∗ as the set of firms who quote the lowest price for the special product and nj ∗ as the
number of firms in J ∗ . Then, the payoff function for each firm j ∈ N is

                                         max         πj (pj ) = pj Qj ,                           (A9)
                                        pj ∈[0,q̄]

where the expected demand Qj is calculated as
                                                µ 1{j∈J ∗ } 1 − µ
                                        Qj =               +      ,
                                                   nj ∗       n
Given this, the payoff to each firm is continuous, except when its price is the lowest and equal to
at least one of its competitors.
   We prove existence of a symmetric mixed-strategy equilibrium by appealing to Theorem 5 in
Dasgupta and Maskin (1986). Using their notation, let Aj = [0, q̄] be the action space for firm j
and let aj ∈ Aj be a price in that space. As such, Aj is non-empty, compact, and convex for all
j. Define A = ×j∈N Aj and a = (a1 , . . . , an ). Let Uj : A → R be defined as the profit function in
(A9). Define the set A∗ (j) by

                            A∗ (j) = {(a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ A|∃i 6= j s.t. pj = pi }

and the set A∗∗ (j) ⊆ A∗ (j) by

                    A∗∗ (j) = {(a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ A|∃i 6= j s.t. pj = pi = pmin > 0}.

As such, the payoff function Uj is bounded and continuous, except over points ā ∈ A∗∗ (j). The sum
P
  j∈N Uj (a) is continuous since discontinuous shifts in demand from informed consumers between
firms at points in A∗∗ = ×j∈N A∗∗ (j) occur as transfers between firms who have the same low
price in the industry. Finally, it is straightforward to show that Uj (aj , a−j ) is weakly lower semi-
continuous. Since any time pi = pj = pmin , firm i and j share the demand, there exists a λ ∈ [0, 1]
large enough such that
                        (pj − ǫ)(1 − µ)             (pj − ǫ)(1 − µ)   pj µ pj (1 − µ)
        λ[(pj − ǫ)µ +                   ] + (1 − λ)                 ≥     +           ],        (A10)
                               n                           n           2        n
for ǫ arbitrarily small. Rearranging and letting ǫ → 0 yields
                                                           pj µ
                                                 λpj µ ≥        ,                               (A11)
                                                            2
which is true for all λ > 0. Therefore by Theorem 5 in Dasgupta and Maskin (1986), there exists a
symmetric mixed-strategy equilibrium for this subgame, conditional on the firms always directing
non-searching consumers to the special product.
Now, we can prove properties about F ∗ (p), again conditional on the firm always directing consumers
to the special product.

                                                      26
   i. Continuity: Suppose that there did exist a countable number of mass points in the distribution
      of F ∗ (p). Then, we can find a mass point p′ and an ǫ > 0 such that f ∗ (p′ ) = a > 0 and
      f ∗ (p′ − ǫ) = 0. Now consider a deviation by firm j to choose F̂ (p) such that fˆ(p′ ) = 0 and
      fˆ(p′ − ǫ) = a. Since E[πj (p)] using F ∗ (p) is strictly less than using F̂ (p), this would be a
      profitable deviation. Therefore, in equilibrium, no mass points can exist.

  ii. Strict monotonicity (Increasing): Suppose there exists an interval [pa , pb ] within [0, q̄] such
      that F (pb )−F (pa ) = 0. Then, for any p̂ such that pa < p̂ < pb , [1−F (p̂)]n−1 = [1−F (pa )]n−1 .
      Since p̂[1 − F (p̂)]n−1 > pa [1 − F (pa )]n−1 and p̂[1 − (1 − F (p̂))n−1 ] > pa [1 − (1 − F (pa ))n−1 ],
      then there exists a profitable deviation. Thus, F (pb ) − F (pa ) 6= 0 for any interval [pa , pb ]
      within [0, q̄].


   Given continuity and strict monotonicity, we can write the symmetric F (p) explicitly. For any
price p that a firm may choose,

                                                                          p(1 − µ)
                                  πj (p) = pµ[1 − F (p)]n−1 +                      .                   (A12)
                                                                              n
Since each firm needs to be indifferent between setting an price over a support [p∗ , q̄], we can write

                                                            p(1 − µ)   q̄(1 − µ)
                                pµ[1 − F (p)]n−1 +                   =           .                     (A13)
                                                               n            n
Rearranging yields the expression in (10). We can then solve

                                                p∗ (1 − µ)   q̄(1 − µ)
                                       p∗ µ +              =                                           (A14)
                                                     n            n
for p∗ , which yields (11). Finally, inspecting (11), it is clear that p∗ > 0 for any µ < 1. Therefore,
the firms will always direct non-searching consumers to the special product since they don’t make
positive profits by selling alternative products.
   The comparative statics in Proposition 6 are derived by straightforward differentiation. Taking
                 h i 1
the derivative of n1
                     n−1
                         with respect to n yields

                                         h1i     1    h n ln n − n + 1 i
                                                n−1
                                                                            ,
                                          n              n(n − 1)2

which is positive for all n ≥ 2. Therefore, 1 − F (p̂) is strictly increasing in n. Taking the limit
                                                      h1i     1
                                                             n−1
                                              lim                  → 1.
                                              n→∞       n




                                                            27
Step Three: Consumer Search Decision
It is straightforward that in each period, any consumer with xt−1 = 0 will search, since c(0) = 0.
For the consumers with xt−1 > 0, they will search if and only if

                                       q̄ − E[pmin |F (p)] > c(xt−1 ).                             (A15)



Step Four: Firms Choice of Product Lines
Given that c(·) is strictly increasing in its argument, there exists an L̄ such that q̄ − E[pmin |F (p)] <
c(L̄), so the consumer does not search. With the condition (2), proving that any ℓ∗ that induces
L = L̄ follows the same logic as in Proposition 2. Given this, µt = µ0 for all even periods
t ∈ {2, 4, . . .} and is equal to 1 − µ0 otherwise.    

Proof of Proposition 7.

   The proof follows with the exact same logic as the Proof of Proposition 6. The only difference
is the computation of Ft (p).
   In any period t, for any price p that a firm may choose,

                                                           pλt (1 − µ) p(1 − λt )
                        πj (p) = pµλt [1 − Ft (p)]n−1 +               +           .                (A16)
                                                                n          n
Since each firm needs to be indifferent between setting an price over a support [p∗ , q̄], we can write

                                       pλt (1 − µ) p(1 − λt )   q̄(1 − µ) q̄(1 − λt )
                pµλ[1 − Ft (p)]n−1 +              +           =          +            .            (A17)
                                            n          n             n         n
Rearranging yields the expression in (12). We can then solve

                                 p∗ (1 − µ) p∗ (1 − λt )   q̄(1 − µ) q̄(1 − λt )
                        p∗ µ +             +             =          +                              (A18)
                                      n          n              n         n
for p∗ , which yields (13).
   The comparative statics regarding λt in Proposition 7 are derived by straightforward differen-
tiation.   




                                                      28
Appendix B
B.1    Heterogeneous Fatigue: Fatigue Private Knowledge

Consider the setup in Section 5.1, except that the firms can distinguish µt -types when they visit their
stores and firms share the burden of L∗ in equilibrium when one exists. This latter assumption
is not necessary for an equilibrium to exist, but makes characterization easier. Otherwise, the
equilibrium may involve asymmetry in mixed strategies.

Proposition B1. (Heterogeneous Fatigue) Suppose that n firms compete in a dynamic all-or-
nothing search game in which µt of the consumers search at any time t. Then, there exists an
equilibrium (ℓ∗ , Ft∗ (p), a∗t ) where L = L∗ and all firms set their prices according to a continuous,
monotonically increasing, time-varying distribution function Ft (p) over the support [p∗t , q̄]. The
distribution function is computed as
                                                "                        #    1
                                                                             n−1
                                               (q̄ − p)(1 − µt )
                                  Ft (p) = 1 −                                     ,               (B19)
                                                     Lpµt
with lower bound
                                                           q̄
                                              p∗t =    Lµt
                                                                     .                             (B20)
                                                      1−µt      +1
In equilibrium, µt = µ0 for all even periods t ∈ {2, 4, . . .} and is equal to 1 − µ0 otherwise.
   The lower bound p∗t is monotonically decreasing in L and the function Ft (p) is monotonically
increasing in L for all p.

Proof:
   The proof follows with the exact same logic as the Proof of Proposition 6. The only difference
is the computation of Ft (p).
   In any period t, for any price p that a firm may choose,
                                             p(1 − µ) 1                      p(1 − µ) 1
               πj (p) = pµ[1 − F (p)]n−1 +              = pµ[1 − F (p)]n−1 +          L
                                                                                        .          (B21)
                                                 n    ℓ                          n    n
Since each firm needs to be indifferent between setting an price over a support [p∗ , q̄], we can write
                                               p(1 − µ)   q̄(1 − µ)
                                pµ[1 − F (p)]n−1 +      =           .                              (B22)
                                                  L           L
Rearranging yields the expression in (B19). We can then solve
                                              p∗ (1 − µ)   q̄(1 − µ)
                                     p∗ µ +              =                                         (B23)
                                                   L           L
for p∗ , which yields (B20).
   The comparative statics regarding L in Proposition B1 are derived by straightforward differen-
tiation.   

                                                      29
