                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                LONG—TERM BEHAVIOR OF YIELD CURVES




                         Andrew F. Siegel



                        Charles R. Nelson




                      Working Paper No. 1789




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   bEER Working Paper #1789
                                                   Januaxy 1986




                    Iong-'Ienn Bthavior of Yield Curs




    Tb. flattening of yield curve, at long—tsr. nturitie. is proven to be
approximately proportional to the reciprocal of th. time to maturity under
gen.ral conditions. Thiu is a consequence of th. persistence of earlier
forward rates in th. averaging Proc... which produce. yields f to. forward
rate.. Thu relationship suggest. the u.s of a "reciprocal maturity yield
curt." which •ignificaatly facilitates the interpretation of the behavior of
long—tsr. yields by linearizing them for display over a shorter interval.
This is illustrated using a yield curve for U.S. Treasury bills.




tharles It Nelson                                  Afl&EG P. Sie1
part'ent of Etx,rntd                               Lepartnents of Statisti,
thiversity of Washington                           Managenent Scier, aM
Seattle, Washington 98195                          Finan
                                                   Utersity of Washiriaton
                                                   Seattle, Washington 98195
I. INTRODUCTION

    Consider a class of similar securities with differing maturities, each

involving   an initial investment at time zero and providing a single known
payment at maturity. Let flu) denote the yield to maturity so that $1.00
invested now would return an amount expim R(a)) at time a. We will be
interested in the long term behavior of this yield curve R(m) for large a,
and, in particular, in the approach of R(m) to its asymptotic value.
    The forward rate function r(a) describes the (instantaneous) rate of
return of a very short term investment at time ii in the future which might be
represented by a portfolio defined by selling securities which mature at time
m and buying an equal (in present value) amount which mature at time m + £.
Standard relationships (for example, Malkliel 1966, or Nelson 1972) represent
the yield and forward rates in terms of one another:

    (1.1)       flu) —      —
                            a I         r(t) dt

    (1.2)       r(m)   •   R(m) +   a   R' (a).


Examination   of (1.1) suggest. that P(m) might decay towards its asymptotic
value at a rate c/rn for some constant c because short and medium term
behavior of the forward rate will tend to persist at a rate 1/rn in the
averaging process.
    Our primary objective is to show that this reciprocal   maturity decay doe.

indeed   happen under fairly general assui.ptions and to propose a graphical
technique based on these conclusions for examining long—term yields in actual
data.




                                              1
       These results may be interpreted in the context of the Expectations

Hypothesis, which states that the forward rates represent the yields expected

at future time     periods.   Even if these expectations decay quickly towards

soae   very   long term value, the yield curve will decay slowly due to the

persistence of earlier forward rate changes in the averaging process (I.!).

Moreover, the yields will tend to decay like the reciprocal of the time to

maturity and will not directly reflect the rate of decay of the expectations

of future yields. A discussion of the Expectation Hypothesis and the term

Structure of interest rates may be found in Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1981).


2. ASSUMPTIONS AND RESULTS.

    We will require two assumptions. The first will guarantee existence of

an asymptotic yield while the second will guarantee that the approach to this

asymptotic value does not proceed too slowly. Precisely, the first

assumption is that the forward rate has a finite limiting value:

    (2.1)        r() •   ha   r(m) exist, and is finite.



Livingston and lain (1982) proved that yield curves •ust approach an

asymptotic limit in the case of par bonds; our assumption is needed to deal

with the more general case.

    The second assumption requires that          the   forward rate approach this

asymptotic value quickly enough; precisely:


    (2.2)        c •
                       ( [r(t) — r()J   dt       exists and i. finite.



Implicit in this assumption is the mathematical consequence that the absolute

integral is also finite. The assumption (2.2) is not overly restrictive:




                                             2
exponential decay      r(.) — r(o&)      —
                                             exp(—m/t)      with positive t easily      satisfies

the    assumption, as does       the   macI. slower algebraic decay r(m) — r(s)           —



for    large a with any       a ) 1.
       Under these assumptions (2.1 and 2.2) it follow, that the asymptotic

yield exists and it equal to the asymptotic forward rate. That it,


       (2.3)       k(e) a     lip R(a) •
                               4e
                                             r()
bnsus.

                   jIt(a) —    r(sfl Si
                                         •0
                                          J         Ir(t)    —   r()f   dt



where the right—hand side tend, to zero as a 4— because of assumption (2.2).

       Th.   main result    concerns    the long—term behavior of the yield. Under the

assumptions (2.1 and 2.2) we can prove that


       (2.4)       Urn) —     It(s) + c/u    +   f(m)

where c was defined in assumption (2.2) and                   the resainder    term   f(m) tends to
sero at a rate fnt•r than Urn as p                4. (that       is, mf(.) 4   0).    This result

says   that    th. yield R(.) tends towards its asymptotic value R() with decay

dominated by c/a,      with higher—order (faster) decay                 terms represented by the

remainder      term f(.).
      To prove (2.4), we need only show that m 1(m) 4 0. where f() it                         defined
by (2.4) itself. To see this, substitute                    (2.3)   and (2.2) into (2.4). then

rearrange terms to obtain




                                                        3
                      pM
       •    f(m) —
                     jo
                           [r(t)   —   r(a))   dt —
                                                      j0
                                                           [r(t)   —   r(w)J   dt



                      p

                  —j       (r(t)   —   r()}    dt



which       tends to zero as m 4e as a consequence of the integrability of
r(t)    —   r()   assumed in (2.2).


3.   THE RECIPROCAL MATURITY YIELD CURVE.

                                   provides theoretical justification for a
       The asymptotic expansion (2.4)

particular reecaling of the maturity axis in yield tunes, which will reflect
the greater difference one month makes in shorter s compared to longer term
maturities. We define the              "reciprocal maturity yield curve" as a display of

yield      plotted against X       s   —j/,    the   negative reciprocal       of   the time to
maturity. The minu, sign is used to keep the data in the same increasing
time    order.       Ignoring the smaller remainder term in (2.4), we han the

approximation


       (3.1)         Yield R() — c         X,        where X a


       This reciprocal maturity yield curve overcomes the difficulty inherent in

understanding the behavior of long—term yields from a conventional yield

curve.       The conventional yield curve typically                shows a curved arc •xtending
over    a long distance to the right            in    the plot. The      reciprocal maturity yield
curve      simplifies this behavior in two ways to a nearly straight line                     over a
short    distance. Because of the asymptotic expansion (2.4), use of the


                                                      4
logarithm of the time to maturity (which i. found in some    sources)   may not be

as appropriate as the negative reciprocal re—expression we propose here.

    Consider the yield curve for U.S. Treasury bills on December 24, 1981,

shown in Figure 1. These data represent continuously compounded rates of

return based on the asked discount price from Federal teserve Bank of New

York quote sheets. Note that there is no clear indication of just how far

the yield curve might rise at a very large distance to the right. In

particular, has it leveled off already at around 13%, or is it continuing to

rise strongly beyond that?

    Figure 2 shows the yield curve using the reciprocal maturity scale for

this same date set. Note th. clear tendency toward, a regular steady linear

increase for the longer ter, bills at th. right. For comparison, note that

the yield values are the same and are in the same order as in Figure 1. By

compressing the time scale at longer maturities, the reciprocal maturity plot

(Figure 2) expresses the expected decay towards an asymptotic yield as a

simple straight line. In particular, we gain the clear impression that

yields would actively continue their rise beyond 13%. Thi. fact ii difficult

to ascertain from the conventional yield curve (Figure 1).


ACKNOWLEDGNZNTS

    This research was supported in part by the Center for the Study of

Banking and Financial Markets at the University of Washington. We are

grateful to Vance Roley for assistance in obtaining data, and to Ann Kre.er

for research assistance. Nelson'. participation was also supported by the

National Science Foundation under a grant to the National Bureau of Economic

Research.




                                      S
                                 RI FE RE N C ES


Cmi, John C., Ingersoll, Jonathan E. Jr., and Ross, Stephen A. (1981). A
     Re—examination of Traditional Hypotheses about the Term Structure of
     Interest Rates. Journal of Finance 36, 169—199.

Livingston, Miles B., and lain, Suresh K. (1982). Flattening of Bond   Yield
     Curves for Long Maturities. Journal of Finance 37, 157.46?.

Nalkiel, Burton 0. (1966). The Term Structure of Interest Rates;
     Expectations and Behavior Patterns. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
     University Press.

Nelson, Charles (1972). The Term Structure of Interest Rates. New York:
     Basic Books.

Nelson, Charles, and Siegel, Andrew F. (1984). Parsimonious Modeling of
     Yield Cutve. for U.S. Treasury Bills. NBER Working Paper No. 1594.




                                       6
                       0.14
                                                                                 *
                                                                             x
                       0.13
                                                            xxx
               t
                                                          xx
                       0.   12
               I—I
                                                     KK
                 a)
                •i-I                               xx
               >-                               'C
                       0.11                   'C
                                           xx
                                         xx
                       0.10
                                     K
                       oo9•                                         300              400
                                 0                   100     200
                                                      Days to maturity
Fiurs 1 The yield curve for U.S. treasury bills on December 21, 1981.
Note the difficulty in nseusing thedsgree to which the yields han levelled
off at long maturities.
                         0.   14
                                                                                                           'C
                         fl 10
                         I.J.L%J                                                                        *
                                                                                                       'C
                                                                                                      'C
                                                                                                  'IC
                                                                                                  AC
                                                                                                  *
                         0.12                                                                    1
                   a.'
                   r4
                  >—                                                                         x
                         0.11                                                            *
                                                                                    xx                          0
                                                                           xx
                         0.10                              x
                                      'C
                         o.og•                                               •
                                        20     30 40     100                                                w
                              Days to maturity (reciprocal scale)
Piture   2.   The reciprocal maturity yield   curve    for US   treasury bills on
December  21, 1981.    Note, in comparison        to    Figure   1,   the simple
interpretation of long—term yields as a linear   (rather than curved) approach
over a shortened interval.
