NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES UNIVERSAL COVERAGE IMPROVE HEALTH? THE MASSACHUSETTS
EXPERIENCE
Charles J. Courtemanche
Daniela Zapata
Working Paper 17893
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17893
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

We thank James Cunningham, David Frisvold, Michael Grossman, Jon Gruber, Stephen Holland, Ted
Joyce, Dave Ribar, Chris Ruhm, Ken Snowden, Chris Swann, Rusty Tchernis, Joe Terza, Nicolas Ziebarth,
and seminar participants at Cornell University, Georgia State University, the University of Georgia,
the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Yale University, the National Bureau of Economic
Research Spring Health Care Meeting, and the Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting for
valuable comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Charles J. Courtemanche and Daniela Zapata. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Universal Coverage Improve Health? The Massachusetts Experience
Charles J. Courtemanche and Daniela Zapata
NBER Working Paper No. 17893
March 2012, Revised January 2013
JEL No. I12,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
In 2006, Massachusetts passed health care reform legislation designed to achieve nearly universal
coverage through a combination of insurance market reforms, mandates, and subsidies that later served
as the model for national reform. Using data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System,
we provide evidence that health care reform in Massachusetts led to better overall self-assessed health.
Various robustness checks and placebo tests support a causal interpretation of the results. We also
document improvements in several determinants of overall health: physical health, mental health, functional
limitations, joint disorders, and body mass index. Next, we show that the effects on overall health
were strongest among those with low incomes, non-whites, near-elderly adults, and women. Finally,
we use the reform to instrument for health insurance and estimate a sizeable impact of coverage on
health.
Charles J. Courtemanche
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu
Daniela Zapata
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 26170
Greensboro, NC 27402
d_zapata@uncg.edu

I. Introduction
A major objective of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) signed into
law in March of 2010 is to increase health insurance coverage in the United States to nearly
universal levels through a combination of insurance market reforms, mandates, subsidies, and
Medicaid expansions. Although the mandates survived constitutional challenges and the 2012
election outcomes make full repeal unlikely, the implementation of the law still faces challenges,
such as the denial of funds during the budgetary process or some states opting not to expand
Medicaid. This ongoing debate highlights the need for projections of the law’s impacts on health,
health care utilization, and state and federal budgets. The multi-faceted nature of the reform and
breadth of the population affected suggests that evidence from coverage expansions in other
contexts will be of only limited usefulness.
The most similar intervention to date to the ACA is the Massachusetts health care reform
of April 2006, entitled “An Act Providing Access to Affordable, Quality, Accountable Health
Care” and commonly called “Chapter 58” (Long, 2008). 1 The law enabled Massachusetts to
lower its uninsurance rate to 2% by 2010 through a strategy called “incremental universalism,”
or “filling the gaps in the existing system … rather than ripping up the system and starting over”
(Massachusetts’ Division of Health Care, Finance and Policy, 2010; Gruber, 2008a:52). Gruber
(2010) describes Massachusetts’ approach to incremental universalism as a “three legged stool”
of insurance market reforms, mandates, and subsidies/Medicaid expansions (Gruber, 2010).
The first leg of the stool reforms non-group insurance markets in an effort to ensure the
availability of coverage for those without access to employer-provided or public insurance.
Insurers are not allowed to deny or drop coverage based on pre-existing conditions (guaranteed
1

For a more detailed description of the law, see Long (2008), McDonough et al. (2006) and Gruber (2008a, 2008b).

1

issue) or vary premiums to reflect health status aside for limited adjustments for age and
smoking status (community rating) (Kirk, 2000; McDonough et al., 2006). A health insurance
exchange, the Commonwealth Health Insurance Connector Authority, offers plans developed by
licensed health insurance companies for those without access to group markets. Enrollment on
the Connector began in October 2006 for those with incomes below 100% of the federal poverty
line (FPL), in January 2007 for those up to 300% FPL, and in May 2007 for everyone else.
Additionally, private health insurance plans are required to provide coverage for young adults on
their parents’ plans for up to two years after they are no longer dependents or until their 26th
birthday (McDonough et al., 2006).2
This first leg alone would likely lead to adverse selection and a “death spiral” with rising
premiums gradually driving healthy individuals out of the non-group market. The second leg of
the three-legged stool therefore involves mandates requiring adults to be covered by health
insurance and employers to provide health insurance. Individuals without adequate coverage face
a penalty of half of the lowest premium they would have paid in a Health Connector-certified
plan. Employers with more than 10 employees must make a “fair and reasonable” contribution
toward an employer health insurance plan or pay a state assessment of up to $295 per full-time
equivalent worker per year (Massachusetts Health Insurance Connector Authority, 2008).3 The
mandates took effect in July 2007.
To help low- and middle-income households be financially able to comply with the
mandate, the third leg of the Massachusetts reform provides subsidies and Medicaid expansions.

2

Guaranteed issue and community rating have been in place in Massachusetts since 1996. The 1996 law only
allowed premiums to vary with age and geography; Chapter 58 further allowed them to vary with tobacco use. The
insurance exchange and the requirement regarding young adults on their parents’ plans both started with Chapter 58.
3 Minimum requirements plans must meet to satisfy the mandates include coverage for prescription drugs and
preventive and primary care, as well as maximums on deductibles and out-of-pocket spending.

2

Chapter 58 specifies that health insurance be free for people below 150% FPL and that premiums
be subsidized on a sliding scale between 150% and 300% FPL with no deductibles.4 The reform
also expands Medicaid to cover children below 300% FPL (McDonough et al., 2006).
Taking into account the costs of the subsidies and Medicaid expansions as well as the
savings from reduced safety net payments, Raymond (2009) estimates the annual fiscal cost of
the reform to be $707 million. Through a waiver allowing for a more flexible use of federal
Medicaid matching money, half of this amount comes from the federal government, leaving the
state government’s share at $353 million.
Table 1 compares Massachusetts’ approach to incremental universalism with that of the
Affordable Care Act. Though there are differences in some of the details, both the Massachusetts
and national reforms were clearly motivated by the same “three-legged stool” approach to
incremental universalism. Both featured guaranteed issue, community rating, insurance
exchanges, mandates, Medicaid expansions, and subsidies. For these reasons, analyzing the
effects of health care reform in Massachusetts provides the best available predictor to date of the
implications of the Affordable Care Act.
Given that recent nature of the Massachusetts reform, researchers are only beginning to
understand its impacts. Long et al. (2009) find that by 2008 the uninsured rate decreased by 6.6
percentage points for the overall nonelderly population and 17.3 percentage points for lowerincome adults.5 Long and Stockely (2011) find a decrease in unmet medical needs because of
cost among lower income adults but also some evidence of delays in care from being unable to
find a provider. Yelowitz and Cannon (2010) show that Chapter 58’s impact on coverage was

4

For instance, in 2008 a family with an income between 150% and 200% of the poverty line paid a premium of $35
per adult, while a family with an income in the 250% to 300% range paid $105 per adult.
5 These results support preliminary evidence found by Long (2008) using information from 2006 and 2007.

3

mitigated by the crowding out of private insurance. They also investigate the effect on selfassessed health, finding mixed results: an increase in the probability of individuals reporting at
least good health but a decrease in the probability of reporting at least very good health. Cogan et
al. (2010) estimate that the reform increased employer-sponsored insurance premiums by about
6%. Kolstad and Kowalski (2010) show that the reform reduced levels of uninsurance by 36%
among the population of hospital discharges. Length of stay and the number of inpatient
admissions originating from the emergency room both decreased, with some evidence also
suggesting an increase in the utilization of preventive services, a decline in hospitalizations for
preventable conditions, and an improvement in quality of care. Miller (2011a) finds a reduction
in non-urgent emergency room visits, consistent with the newly-insured having access to such
care in other settings. Miller (2011b) focuses on children’s outcomes, finding a substitution from
emergency room care to office visits, a reduction in medical needs unmet because of cost, and an
increase in the probability of reporting excellent health. Kowalski and Kolstad (2012) exploit the
reform’s effect on employer-provided health insurance to show that wage reductions almost
completely offset the cost of health insurance benefits.
We contribute to this growing literature by conducting the most comprehensive analysis
to date of Chapter 58’s effect on the self-assessed health of adults. Though many open questions
remain about the reform’s effectiveness, as Gruber (2011b:190) writes, “the most significant of
these is the impact of reform on the health of citizens.” We utilize individual-level data from the
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), which allows for the use of longer pre-

4

and post-treatment periods, a much larger sample, and a broader range of health-related
questions than Yelowitz and Cannon (2010), enabling us to obtain clearer results.6
First, an ordered probit difference-in-differences analysis shows that the reform increased
the probability of individuals reporting excellent or very good health. A variety of robustness
checks and placebo tests support a causal interpretation of the results. The estimates imply that
annual government spending per adult transitioned into excellent or very good health is $11,465,
split evenly between the Massachusetts and federal governments. We then provide evidence that
the reform improved several determinants of overall health: physical health, mental health,
functional limitations, joint disorders, and body mass index. Next, we examine heterogeneity and
find that the reform’s effect on overall health was strongest for low-income people, racial
minorities, near-elderly adults, and women. Finally, we use the reform to instrument for
insurance coverage and estimate a large effect of coverage on health.
II. Health Insurance and Health
An important part of the argument for universal coverage is the assumption that health
insurance improves health. As quoted by Yelowitz and Cannon (2010), Levy and Meltzer (2008)
write,
The central question of how health insurance affects health, for whom it matters, and how
much, remains largely unanswered at the level of detail needed to inform policy
decisions. … Understanding the magnitude of health benefits associated with insurance is
not just an academic exercise …, it is crucial to ensuring that the benefits of a given
amount of public spending on health are maximized (p. 400).

6

Specifically, Yelowitz and Cannon (2010) use Current Population Survey supplements and compare a pretreatment period of 2005-2006 with a post-treatment period of 2008. They conduct a difference-in-differences
analysis with other New England states as controls. Their sample size is 41,873. In contrast, we utilize data from
2001-2010 and have a sample size of 2,879,296 in our main analysis and 340,592 using only New England.

5

This section provides a brief summary of theoretical and empirical research on the topic and
summarizes our contribution to this broader literature.
Grossman (1972) models health as a durable capital stock that is also an input in the
production of healthy time. Health capital depends on the initial endowment of health, past
period health, and past period investments made to preserve it. Medical care and time spent in
health producing activities are the main forms of health investment. Every period people face
uncertainty as to whether they will be affected by a negative health shock, so they buy health
insurance to protect themselves against unexpected medical costs. Because health insurance
reduces the price of care faced by the consumer it increases the demand for medical care (Arrow,
1963; Pauly, 1968). This increase in consumption of care could result in better health, but if the
additional medical care is redundant health outcomes may remain the same or even deteriorate.
This effect is sometimes known as “flat of the curve” medical care, because diminishing returns
in the health production function imply that at some point the health gains associated with more
medical care may be very small (Doyle, 2005).
The majority of empirical investigations into the relationship between health insurance
and health are observational studies that use multivariate regression analysis. A review of these
studies by Hadley (2003) shows that 15 out of the 20 published between 1991 and 2001 found a
positive association between health insurance coverage and recovery from health conditions such
as cancer, trauma, and appendicitis. Health insurance was also associated with better overall
health status and lower mortality risk in all of the studies that examined these outcomes.
However, these relationships cannot be interpreted as causal because the research designs did not
address the potential for unobserved heterogeneity and reverse causality.

6

During the 1970’s the RAND Health insurance experiment randomly assigned families to
health insurance plans with coinsurance rates ranging from 0% to 95%, with all medical
expenses covered over a threshold. Medical care use increased among people assigned to plans
with lower coinsurance rates, but health outcomes only improved among the poor (Manning et
al., 1987). However, this experiment only shows the impact of health insurance along the
intensive margin from less to more generous coverage, not the extensive margin of no coverage
to any coverage. It is also unclear to what extent findings from the 1970s are applicable today.
Some studies have taken advantage of the plausibly exogenous variation provided by
public insurance programs like Medicaid and Medicare in order to address the endogeneity of
coverage. Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b) find that Medicaid expansions decrease infant
mortality and low birth weight, while Dafny and Gruber (2005) show that they also reduce
avoidable hospitalizations among children. Most recently, Finkelstein et al. (2011) exploit a 2008
Oregon lottery in which winners were given the chance to apply for Medicaid to show that
coverage improves self-reported physical and mental health. The randomization allows for clean
identification of the causal effects of Medicaid eligibility, at least among the low-income
uninsured lottery participants.
Evidence on the effect of Medicare on the health of seniors is mixed. Card et al. (2004)
find that obtaining Medicare coverage at age 65 improves the self-assessed health of Hispanics
and people with low levels of education; however, the effect for the whole sample is smaller and
insignificant. Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) show that 10 years after the introduction of
Medicare there was not a statistically significant impact on mortality rates for people older than
65. Card et al. (2009) find more favorable results: a reduction in the 7-day mortality rate among
emergency room patients older than 65 compared to those right below that cutoff.

7

A few studies attempt to estimate the causal effect of insurance on health in contexts
other than public programs, again finding mixed results. Pauly (2005) uses marital status and
firm size as instruments for private insurance coverage and finds a positive but insignificant
effect of insurance on self-reported health and a negative but insignificant effect on the
probability of having a chronic condition. Doyle (2005) shows that uninsured patients receive
less medical care and have higher mortality rates than insured patients after a random health
shock (a car accident).
To summarize, the extant literature suggests that health insurance coverage appears to
improve health in some contexts but not others. The uninsured in the U.S. consist of a number of
groups, including those too sick to obtain coverage, those too healthy to feel insurance is
necessary, and those too poor to afford private coverage but not poor enough to qualify for
public insurance programs. Obtaining universal coverage in the U.S. therefore requires coverage
expansions across a highly heterogeneous group, making it unclear the extent to which these
prior findings are applicable. The Massachusetts health care reform provides a unique
opportunity to examine an intervention that affects a variety of different categories of uninsured.
III. Data
Health summarizes a combination of factors that reflect physical and mental well-being.
Among the usual indicators used to measure health in empirical investigations are mortality
rates, hospitalization rates, and self-assessments of overall health. Our study focuses on selfassessments. At the time this paper was written, state-level mortality information was not
publically available for a long enough time after the reform to construct an adequate posttreatment period. Regardless, examining mortality rates alone would not capture incremental
improvements in health resulting from, for instance, better treatment for chronic but non-life
8

threatening conditions. Hospitalizations are not an appropriate measure of overall health in this
context since, to the extent that hospitalizations are price sensitive, changes in hospitalizations
after the reform might simply be due to the lower price faced by the newly insured rather than
changes in health.
We estimate the effect of the reform on health self-assessments using the BRFSS, a
telephone survey of health and health behaviors conducted by state health departments in
collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The BRFSS, which consists
of repeated annual cross sections of randomly-sampled adults, is well suited for our analysis for
several reasons. First, the dataset contains the necessary variables, including multiple selfreported health measures, demographic characteristics, and state, month, and year identifiers.
Second, the BRFSS spans a long enough time period to examine both post-reform outcomes and
pre-reform trends. Third, the BRFSS contains an unusually large number of observations for
survey data, and a large sample is critical to obtaining meaningful precision when examining the
impact of a state-level program with effects that might be concentrated amongst only a fraction
of the population.
We construct the sample as follows. We begin with ten-year window surrounding the
reform, 2001 to 2010. The treatment group consists of individuals living in Massachusetts, while
the initial control group spans most of the rest of the country. We exclude only California,
Maine, Vermont, and Oregon – states that also had (less extensive) health care reforms during
the sample period and could therefore be considered “treated” to some extent – as well as
Hawaii, the only state not included in the BRFSS in every survey year during the sample period.7

7

Finkelstein et al. (2012) show that the concurrent large-scale Medicaid expansion in Oregon improved selfassessed adult health, while Kolstad and Kowalski (2010) mention the reforms in California, Vermont, and Maine.
Results including the five omitted states in the control group are very similar and are available upon request.

9

Following much of the literature (e.g. Long, 2008; Miller, 2011a; Yelowitz and Cannon, 2010),
we focus on the non-elderly adult population ages 18-64. The reform had little effect on health
insurance coverage for the elderly, as it specifically prevented individuals eligible for Medicare
from purchasing insurance through the Connector (Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts,
2006). Moreover, the pre-treatment trends in many of our health measures for the elderly are
substantially different for Massachusetts and the control states, suggesting that our difference-indifferences identification strategy would not be appropriate for this age group.8 As we will show,
the pre-treatment trends are much more similar for the non-elderly population.
Our main dependent variable is a self-reported health index asking respondents to rate
their overall health as poor (0), fair (1), good (2), very good (3), or excellent (4). This index has
been previously used by other studies analyzing the impact of health insurance on health (Card et
al., 2004; Pauly, 2005; Yelowitz and Cannon, 2010) and has been repeatedly shown to be
correlated with objective measures of health such as mortality (e.g. Idler and Benyamini, 1997;
DeSalvo et al., 2006; Phillips et al., 2010). According to Idler and Benyamini, another advantage
of the index is that it is a global measure of health that captures the full range of diseases and
limitations a person may have.
The primary concern with the self-reported health index is its subjective nature. We will
be able to flexibly control for the sources of reporting heterogeneity identified in the literature,
such as age, income, and gender (Ziebarth, 2010). Nonetheless, the estimated effect of the reform
on self-assessed health could still reflect factors beyond objective health. For instance, improved
access to medical care might increase awareness about medical conditions, causing one to selfreport a lower health status after obtaining insurance coverage, ceteris paribus (Strauss and
8

Miller (2011a) makes the same observation about pre-treatment trends in the context of the reform’s effect on
emergency room utilization.

10

Thomas, 2007). In this case, the reform’s effect on self-assessed health would be smaller than its
effect on objective health. Alternatively, if the peace of mind from having health insurance
influences one’s answers to subjective health-related questions, the reform could lead to larger
improvements in self-assessed health than objective health.
Consequently, we also utilize a number of other health-related dependent variables in an
attempt to verify that the results for the overall self-reported health index are not driven merely
by subjectivity. First, we consider number of days out of the past 30 not in good physical health
and number of days out of the past 30 not in good mental health. These variables are somewhat
less subjective than the overall health index because the respondents are specifically asked to
consider a particular component of health. Even less subjective is the next health measure:
number of days out of the past 30 with health-related functional limitations. Our last four healthrelated dependent variables – an indicator for the presence of activity-limiting joint pain, body
mass index (BMI), minutes per week of physical activity, and an indicator for whether the
individual currently smokes – are quite specific and therefore the least open to subjective
interpretation.9 10
We measure coverage with a binary variable reflecting whether or not the individual has
“any kind of health care coverage, including health insurance, prepaid plans such as HMOs, or
government plans such as Medicare.” The BRFSS does not indicate the source of coverage or
9

BMI=weight in kilograms divided by height in squared meters. Self-reported weight and height are potentially
susceptible to biases. Some researchers utilize an adjustment developed by Cawley (2004) that predicts actual height
and weight based on self-reported height and weight using the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey,
and then applies the prediction equation to other datasets that only include the self-reported measures. However,
studies with BMI as the dependent variable have repeatedly found that applying this adjustment has little influence
on the results, so we do not use it here (e.g. Courtemanche et al., 2011).
10
Minutes per week of physical activity is the sum of minutes of moderate and vigorous physical activity. The
BRFSS gives respondents guidance for how to define moderate and vigorous physical activity, reducing the
subjectivity of these variables. Moderate activities include “brisk walking, bicycling, vacuuming, gardening, or
anything else that causes small increases in breathing or heart rate.” Vigorous activities include “running, aerobics,
heavy yard work, or anything else that causes large ncreases in breathing or heart rate.”

11

provide any information on premiums, deductibles, or copayments. Finally, we utilize as control
variables the BRFSS’ information on age, marital status, race, income, education, marital status,
and current pregnancy status.
We also include four state-level variables as controls in a robustness check. The first is
monthly state unemployment rate, obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Next, monthly
state cigarette excise tax rates come from The Tax Burden on Tobacco (Orzechowski and
Walker, 2010) and are adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index for all urban
consumers from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Finally, we use annual state hospital and
physician data from the Census Bureau to impute monthly estimates of numbers of hospitals and
physicians per 100,000 residents.11
Tables 2 and 3 compare the descriptive statistics for Massachusetts and the 45 control
states (44 states plus the District of Columbia) in the pre-treatment period of January 2001
through March 2006. Prior to the reform, Massachusetts was already healthier than the rest of the
country along most dimensions and had a higher coverage rate. Massachusetts residents averaged
higher income and more education than those in other states, and were more likely to be single
and white. Massachusetts also had a relatively low unemployment rate, high cigarette tax, high
physician density, and low hospital density. These baseline differences illustrate the difficulty in
isolating the causal impact of Massachusetts’ health care reform. A naïve estimator using only a
post-treatment cross section would attribute the entire difference in health between
Massachusetts and other states to the reform, including the part of the difference that was already
present prior to its enactment. Our empirical analysis will therefore rely on a difference-in-

11

Monthly estimates were calculated using the formula:
estimates, and is number of months from
to

, where
.

12

and

are annual

differences estimator that controls for pre-treatment differences in state health as well as a
number of time-varying observable characteristics.
As a precursor to the regression analysis, Figure 1 plots the average values of the health
status index in Massachusetts and the control states every year from 2001 to 2010, along with
their 95% confidence intervals. The graph also shows linear pre-treatment trends for
Massachusetts and the other states, computed by regressing the mean health index on year plus a
constant term. Consistent with the summary statistics from Table 2, Massachusetts residents had
better average self-assessed health than those in the control states even before the reform.
Despite this difference in baseline levels, the pre-treatment trends in both Massachusetts and the
other states were both downward sloping and – critically for the validity of the difference-indifferences approach – close to parallel. The year-to-year fluctuations in the control states in the
pre-treatment period are estimated very precisely and lie almost exactly on top of the trend line,
while the year-to-year fluctuations in Massachusetts are estimated much less precisely and
deviate more substantially. This underscores the importance of utilizing a sufficiently long pretreatment period in the regression analysis. If, for instance, 2005 – a year in which health in
Massachusetts appears to have been below trend – was the only pre-treatment year, a differencein-differences estimate might capture mean reversion in addition to the causal effect.
Over the period after the reform was passed, 2006-2010, health in the control states
remained relatively stable (perhaps dropping slightly) while health in Massachusetts improved.
In 2006, when the subsidies and Medicaid expansions took effect in the early stages of the
reform’s implementation, health increased in both Massachusetts and the control states, but the
gain in Massachusetts was larger. In 2007, health dropped in the control states but increased
slightly in Massachusetts. Health improved slightly in the control states in 2008 while remaining

13

steady in Massachusetts. In 2009, health improved in both groups but by a larger amount in
Massachusetts. Health in 2010 dropped in the control states but held constant in Massachusetts.
To more formally investigate whether the health improvement in Massachsuetts relative to the
control states was a causal response to health care reform, we next turn to regression analysis.
The regression results will broadly support the preliminary findings from Figure 1, although we
will see that in a regression context the health benefits did not emerge until 2007.
IV. Regression Analysis
IVa. Baseline Model
We estimate the impact of Massachusetts health care reform on overall self-assessed
health status using an ordered probit difference-in-differences model.12 Suppose the underlying
relationship between the covariates and a latent variable representing health ( ∗ ) is given by
∗

∗

∗

(1)

where i, s, and t are indices for individual, state, and month/year combination (e.g. January
2001).

is a dummy variable for whether the respondent lives in Massachusetts. Following

Kolstad and Kowalski (2010), we define

as a dummy variable equal to 1 from April

2006 to June 2007, the time period after the law had been passed but before all the key
provisions had been implemented.

is a dummy variable equal to 1 starting in July of 2007,

when the final major component of the reform – the individual mandate – took effect.

12

Given the strong distributional assumptions made by the ordered probit model, we also considered two more
flexible approaches to modeling the impact of the reform on health. The first estimates a series of four probits with
the dependent variables being indicators for fair or better, good or better, very good or better, and excellent health.
The second uses the same dependent variables but estimates linear probability models. The conclusions reached are
the same; the results are shown in Appendix Tables A1 and A2.

14

consists of the age, marital status, race, income, education, and pregnancy variables listed in
Table 3.13

and

∗

We do not observe
0 if
1 if
2 if
3 if
4 if
where
of

through

is the error term.

are state and month fixed effects, while

and instead observe an ordinal health measure

such that

∗

(2)

∗
∗
∗
∗

are constants that represent the cut-off points. An ordered probit regression

on the covariates from (1) computes the following probabilities of being in each of the

five health states:
Pr

0

Φ

∗

∗

(3)

Pr

(4)
Φ
Φ

Pr

where

∗

∗
∗

4

1

Φ

∗
∗

∀ ∈ 2,3,4
∗

(5)

, the cutoff points adjusted for the constant term. The coefficient of interest is

, which captures the difference between the change in Massachusetts from the “before” to the
“after” period and the change in the control states from the “before” to the “after” period – in
other words, the “difference in differences.”
Computing treatment effects in non-linear models has been the source of confusion in the
literature. Ai and Norton (2003) showed that the cross difference in a nonlinear model is
different from the marginal effect on the interaction term, and could even be the opposite sign.
13

The controls are especially important in our context, as the Massachusetts reform could have caused uninsured
individuals to move to the state, changing the underlying demographic composition of the state’s residents and
potentially confounding the estimation of the reform’s causal effect. (The pooled cross-sectional nature of the
BRFSS does not allow us to exclude Massachusetts residents who moved there after the reform.) Indeed, using the
control variables as dependent variables shows that after the reform Massachusetts’ population became older, less
white, and poorer, relative to the control states. Accordingly, excluding the control variables from equation (1)
attenuates the estimated effect of the reform somewhat (although the sign and significance level remains the same).

15

However, Puhani (2008) showed that the cross difference identified by Ai and Norton (2003) is
not the same as the treatment effect, and that when the treatment effect is the parameter of
interest it is appropriate to focus on the coefficient of the interaction term. A similar observation
has been made by Terza (2012). Following Puhani (2008), our “treatment effect on the treated”
is given by
1,

where

and

1

|

1,

1, ,

|

1,

1, ,

(6)

are potential outcomes with and without treatment. The “average treatment

effect on the treated” is the mean of this treatment effect across those individuals living in
Massachusetts in the “after” period (July 2007 through December 2009).
Because of the nonlinearity of the model, the treatment effect depends on the value of the
other covariates. The effects of the reform on the probabilities of being in each of the five health
states among the treated are
,

,

,

,

0

Φ

,

1 Φ
Φ

Φ

,

,

,

(7)
(8)

Φ
Φ
∀ ∈ 2,3,4
,

,

,
,

Φ

,

,

Φ

,

,

,

,

4

(9)
,
,

,

1

,

Φ

Φ
,

where the state subscript has been replaced by

,

,

,

for Massachusetts, and is restricted to the

“after” period.
The key identifying assumption in the difference-in-differences model is that
and

∗

∗

are uncorrelated with the error term. In other words, the estimates

can be interpreted as causal effects of the reform if we assume that in the absence of the reform
changes over time in health would have been the same in Massachusetts and the control states,
16

conditional on the control variables. The similarity of Massachusetts’ pre-treatment trend in
health to that of the other states shown in Figure 1 provides preliminary support for this
assumption. We therefore use all 45 other states as the control group in the baseline regression,
and consider several alternatives in Section IVb.
Our standard errors in the baseline regression are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered
by state. As shown by Bertrand et al. (2004), conventional difference-in-differences methods can
over-reject the null hypothesis because of serial correlation even when standard errors are
clustered. We therefore use more stringent standards for statistical significance than usual: 0.1%,
1%, and 5% significance levels. In Section IVd we will more formally investigate whether
underestimated standard errors could be driving our conclusions.
The first column of Table 4 reports the coefficient estimates for
∗

and

from the ordered probit regression, along with the average treatment effects on the

treated in the after period.14
while

∗

∗

∗

is insignificant and its coefficient estimate is small,

is significant at the 0.1% level and its coefficient estimate is considerably

larger. In other words, the reform’s effect on health did not emerge until it was fully
implemented. The t-statistic for

∗

is 5, meaning that our clustered standard errors

would have to be underestimated by a factor of more than 2.5 for the statistical significance to be
driven by autocorrelation.
The estimated average treatment effects show that the Massachusetts health care reform
decreased the probabilities of being in poor, fair and good health and increased the probabilities
of being in very good and excellent health. The drops in the probabilities of being in poor, fair,

14

Coefficient estimates for the other covariates are available upon request.

17

and good health are 0.2, 0.4, and 0.7 percentage points, respectively, while the increases in the
probabilities of being in very good and excellent health are 0.1 and 1.1 percentage points.
We next conduct two back-of-the-envelope calculations to help assess the economic
significance of these estimates. The first consolidates the five treatment effects into a single
measure that attempts to quantify the overall increase in health. We multiply each of the
treatment effects by the value of the health status index associated with the corresponding
category (0 for poor, 1 for fair, 2 for good, 3 for very good, and 4 for excellent), and then divide
by the sample standard deviation. This result is an overall effect on health of 0.029 standard
deviations, shown in the third-to-last row of Table 4.15 The magnitude of the impact therefore
appears modest across the entire population, but perhaps large amongst the small fraction of the
population who experienced a change in coverage as a result of the reform and is likely
responsible for most of the effect.
The second calculation combines the estimated treatment effects with the information on
the reform’s costs from the introduction to compute the annual fiscal cost for each adult
transitioned from poor, fair, or good health to very good or excellent health. We do this first
considering total government spending (federal and state), and then using only Massachusetts’
share of that spending. The former provides a more relevant projection for national health care
reform, while the latter is more relevant for evaluations of the Massachusetts reform. 1.2% of the
adult population transitioned into very good or excellent health. The adult population in
Massachusetts was 5,138,919 in July 2010 according to the Census, so 1.2% translates to 61,667
individuals. Since the reform cost an estimated $707 million in FY2010, total government

15

This calculation should be interpreted with caution, as it relies on the strong assumption that each incremental
increase in the health index represents the same improvement in health.

18

spending is an estimated $11,465 per year for every adult whose health improves from poor, fair,
or good to very good or excellent. Since Massachusetts splits the costs evenly with the federal
government, the state spends approximately $5,732 annually per adult transitioned into very
good or excellent health. These calculations are far from complete cost-effectiveness analyses, as
they ignore costs to patients and private insurers as well as benefits from consumption
smoothing/risk protection and improvements in children’s health. They do, however, provide
some information about the returns to government spending while underscoring the point that
financing universal coverage at the federal level is likely to be more difficult than in
Massachusetts, as matching money is not available.
IVb. Robustness Checks
This section further examines the validity of the identifying assumption of common
counterfactual health trends between Massachusetts and the rest of the country by considering a
number of alternative control groups and adding state-level covariates. First, we use as the
control group the ten states with the most similar pre-treatment average health status indices to
Massachusetts (“match on pre-treatment levels”). Second, we “match on pre-treatment trends”
by running regressions of health on time (measured in months) plus a constant term for each state
from 2001-2005 and then choosing as the comparison group the ten states with the most similar
slopes to Massachusetts. Next, we use a control group of the ten states with the most similar prereform health insurance coverage rates (“match on pre-treatment coverage”).16 We then consider

16

When matching on pre-treatment levels, the control states are Colorado, Connecticut, District of Columbia,
Maryland, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, Utah, South Dakota and Virginia. When matching on pretreatment trends, the control states are Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Pennsylvania and Washington. When matching on pre-treatment coverage, the control states are
Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Iowa, Maryland, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Virginia and
Wisconsin.

19

a control group consisting of other New England states because of their geographic proximity to
Massachusetts.17
The fifth robustness check constructs a “synthetic control group” for Massachusetts, as
described by Abadie et al. (2010). We first aggregate to the state-by-year level and allow the data
to select the combination of the other 50 states that best matches Massachusetts on health status
and the control variables during the pre-treatment years 2001-2005.18 The resulting control group
is 70.5% Connecticut, 13.7% Washington, D.C., 0.3% New Hampshire, and 15.5% Washington
state. Following Fitzpatrick’s (2008) application of this method to individual data, we then
multiply the weights for the individual-level observations by these shares, leaving Massachusetts
fully weighted and dropping the states that received a zero weight.19
The next regression uses the original control group of 45 states but excludes the year
2005. Recall from Figure 1 that in 2005 health in Massachusetts was below the trend line, raising
the question of whether the improvement in health from 2005 to 2006 could be due to a
temporary negative shock in 2005 rather than the reform in 2006. The long pre-treatment period
mitigates this concern by tempering 2005’s influence, but dropping 2005 addresses it directly.20
Finally, we return to the full sample but control for the potential time-varying state-level
confounders unemployment rate, cigarette tax rate, physician density, and hospital density, along
17

Recall that the New England states Vermont and Maine were excluded from the main control group because they
had their own (less intensive) health care reforms during the sample period. We include them in the New England
control group, but we have verified in an unreported regression that the results are similar if we exclude them and
just use Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire.
18
We do this using the Stata module “synth” (Abadie et al., 2011). For health status, we include average health
during all five pre-treatment years, as well as average health in the first and last pre-treatment years 2001 and 2005.
This accounts for both pre-treatment levels (the overall average) and trends (the first and last pre-treatment years).
19
In the “matching on pre-treatment levels,” “matching on pre-treatment trends,” New England, and synthetic
control regressions, the number of states is 11 or fewer. Angrist and Pischke (2008) note that standard errors
clustered by state are unreliable when the number of states is small. As they recommend, we instead cluster standard
errors at the state-by-year level in these four regressions.
20
Other unreported robustness checks experimented with the use of shorter pre-treatment periods beginning in 2002,
2003, or 2004. The results remained similar.

20

with linear state-specific time trends to allow for differential trends in health along unobservable
dimensions.21 Controlling for unemployment rate and cigarette tax could be especially important
given the differential impacts of the recession across states and the large cigarette tax increase
passed in Massachusetts in 2009.
We present the results of these robustness checks in Columns 2 through 8 of Table 4. The
coefficient of the interaction term

∗

remains insignificant in almost all
∗

specifications, while the interaction term

remains highly significant in all

specifications. The magnitude of the coefficient estimate for

∗

ranges from 0.026 to

0.053, so the baseline estimate is toward the conservative end of that range. The treatment effects
are also generally similar across specifications. The effect on: P(Poor) ranges from -0.001 to 0.003, P(Fair) ranges from -0.003 to -0.006, P(Good) ranges from -0.005 to -0.010, P(Very
Good) ranges from 0.001 to 0.002, and P(Excellent) ranges from 0.008 to 0.017.
IVc. Testing for Differential Pre-Treatment Trends and Delayed Effects
This section simultaneously addresses two possible issues with the estimates from Table
4. First, the difference-in-differences approach assumes common counterfactual health trends
between Massachusetts and the rest of the country. The robustness of the estimates to different
constructions of the control group is consistent with this assumption, but conceivably health
trends in Massachusetts could be so unique that no appropriate comparison group of states exists.
Second, the preceding regressions do not differentiate between the short- and long-run health
effects of the reform following full implementation. Since health is a capital stock accumulated
21

We relegate the state-level control variables to a robustness check rather than using them in the main analysis
because of concerns that some of them – in particular physician density and hospital density –could be endogenous
to health care reform. Moreover, the four state-level controls are all individually and jointly insignificant, so the
state fixed effects appear to sufficiently capture their influence on health, at least conditional on the individual
controls.

21

through repeated investments, the improvements in health resulting from the reform could
increase over time. Alternatively, the long-term uninsured might experience a pent-up demand
for medical services after obtaining coverage, in which case the entire improvement in health
could be reached quickly or even be temporary.
We address these issues by re-estimating equation (1) with a broader set of interaction
terms. First, we split the “before” and “after” periods into halves, resulting in five periods called
“early before,” “late before,” “during,” “early after,” and “late after.” 22 We then include
interactions of the Massachusetts dummy with indicators for each one of these periods, except
“early before,” which is considered the reference period. A second regression interacts
Massachusetts with a full set of year dummies. These models test the common trends assumption
by testing for differential trends between Massachusetts and other states in the pre-treatment
period. If the treatment and control groups were trending similarly before the reform, then they
likely would have continued to trend similarly from 2006-2010 if the reform had not occurred.
The models also distinguish between short- and long-run effects by including multiple
interactions from the post-reform period.
Table 5 displays the coefficient estimates for the interaction terms. The regression
splitting the before and after periods into halves shows that health trends in Massachusetts and
other states were similar across the “early before,” “late before,” and “during” periods, with a
sizeable gap emerging in the “early after” period that grew somewhat in the “late after” period.
The difference between the coefficient estimates for

∗

and

∗

is

not significant, though, so the evidence that the effect strengthened over time is not conclusive.

22

Specifically, “early before” consists of months 1-31 of the pre-treatment period while “late before” consists of
months 32-63. “Early after” consists of the first 21 months of the after period and “late after” the last 21.

22

Turning to the regression with one-year splits, there is again little evidence of differential
pre-treatment trends, with the one exception being the temporary negative health shock in
Massachusetts in 2005 that we observed earlier in Figure 1. (Recall that the regression excluding
2005 from Table 4 provides evidence that this shock is not meaningfully influencing our
conclusions.) A positive interaction effect first emerges in 2007 – the first year in which the
reform was fully implemented – and the magnitude of the effect remains roughly similar through
2010. In sum, the results from Table 5 do not provide clear evidence of differential pre-treatment
trends between Massachusetts and the control states, or the effects being either delayed or
temporary.
IVd. Tests Related to Inference
This section conducts tests to help rule out the possibility that the statistical significance
observed in the baseline regression is merely an artifact of underestimated standard errors. First,
following Bertrand et al.’s (2004) suggestion, we compress all the available data into a statelevel panel with three time periods – “before”, “during”, and “after” – and regress state average
health index on

∗

,

∗

, and state and time period fixed effects. Next, we

compress the data into only two cross-sectional units – Massachusetts and other states – and ten
years, defining 2006 and 2007 as the “during” period and 2008 to 2010 as the “after” period. We
then regress average health index on

∗

year fixed effects.23 As shown in Table 6,

,
∗

23

∗

, a Massachusetts dummy, and

remains statistically significant in both

The small sample sizes preclude the inclusion of the full set of control variables. In lieu of these, we include in
both regressions a single control variable that summarizes the influence of all the controls at once. This variable,
which we call “predicted health status,” is computed by regressing the health index on the controls in individuallevel regressions using the pre-treatment data, then using the coefficient estimates to predict the health index for the
whole sample, then aggregating to the appropriate level.

23

regressions despite the small sample, and the effect sizes in standard deviations (of the
individual-level health index) are similar to those from Table 4.
In the spirit of Abadie et al. (2010), we also consider a different approach to inference
and ask how likely it would be to estimate similarly large health improvements simply by
picking any state at random. We re-estimate the baseline ordered probit regression with each of
the 45 control states as the “treated” unit, considering the p-value for Massachusetts to be the
proportion of these states that exhibited as large a health improvement as that estimated for
Massachusetts (i.e. the probability a health improvement as large as the one seen in
Massachusetts would be observed in a random draw). Since Abaide et al. (2010) specifically
recommended this method for use with the synthetic control approach, we also repeat the
analysis but using a synthetic control group for each state rather than the full control group. In
the full sample regressions, four states – Florida, New Jersey, New York, and Tennessee – had
larger health improvements in the after period than Massachusetts, for a p-value of 0.089. Using
synthetic controls, only two states – Florida and Tennessee – had larger gains than
Massachusetts, for a p-value of 0.044.24
IVe. Other Health Outcomes
This section moves beyond the overall health index and explores the effect of the reform
on a variety of additional health outcomes: number of days out of the past 30 not in good
physical health, not in good mental health, and with health-related functional limitations;
activity-limiting joint pain; BMI; minutes per week of physical activity; and smoking status.
These variables were chosen because they satisfy two conditions: 1) they are strongly and

24

We do not report the full set of results for all 45 states due to space considerations; they are available upon
request.

24

significantly correlated with the overall health index in the expected direction (as shown in
Appendix Table A3), and 2) they do not rely on a doctor’s diagnosis, since a diagnosis requires
medical access which is endogenous to the reform.25
Analyzing health outcomes beyond the overall self-assessed health index serves three
purposes. First, verifying that we also observe improvements in health using more specific (and
therefore less subjective) questions increases our confidence that the reform did in fact improve
objective – and not merely subjective – health. Second, examining additional outcomes sheds
light on the mechanisms through which the effect on overall health occurred. For instance,
obtaining health insurance can improve physical (or mental) health through increased utilization
of medical services, mental health through lower stress from reduced financial risk, or health
behaviors through expanded access to advice and information. Third, including the health
behavior-related variables BMI and smoking tests a separate prediction of economic theory:
insurance coverage reduces financial vulnerability to health shocks, which could cause people to
take more health risks, a phenomenon known as “ex ante moral hazard” (e.g. Dave and Kaestner,
2009; Bhattacharya et al., 2011).
Days not in good physical and mental health, days with health-related limitations, and
minutes of exercise per week are non-negative count variables with variances higher than the
means. We therefore estimate negative binomial models for these outcomes. The conditional
expectation is given by
|

,

(11)

25

The first condition excludes, for instance, alcoholic drinks per month, which is only weakly correlated with health
and in the opposite of the expected direction. The second condition excludes BRFSS questions that ask whether a
respondent has ever been diagnosed with a particular chronic condition, such as diabetes and asthma.

25

where

is the number of days or minutes,

is the over-dispersion coefficient, and

is

defined by
exp

∗

∗

(12)

The treatment effect on the treated is defined as
,

,

exp

,

exp

,

,

(13)

,

while the average treatment effect on the treated is the mean of among Massachusetts residents
in the “after” period.
For the binary outcome variables (activity-limiting joint pain and smoking status), we
estimate probit models of the form
1

Pr

(14)
∗

Φ

∗

with the treatment effect on the treated being
,

,

Φ

Φ

. 26

(15)

Body mass index is continuous, so we estimate a linear regression in which the treatment effect
is simply the coefficient estimate for

∗

.

Some of the health-related questions were not asked in Massachusetts in certain years,
necessitating restrictions to the sample. Activity-limiting joint pain and the two measures of
exercise are only available in odd-numbered survey years, meaning that the “during” period
spans only six months (January 2007 to June 2007). We therefore combine those six months with
the rest of 2007 and 2009 and classify the two years as the “after” period, dropping the

∗

interaction from those regressions. Additionally, the physical health, mental health, and
health limitations variables are not available in 2002.
26

We include cigarette tax as an additional covariate in the smoking regression.

26

Table 7 presents the results. We use the full control group because, as shown in Appendix
Figures A1-A7, the pre-treatment trends for these other health outcomes are similar for the full
control group and Massachusetts. 27 Health care reform in Massachusetts is associated with
reductions in the number of days not in good physical health, not in good mental health, and with
health-related functional limitations, as well as a lower probability of having activity-limiting
joint pain. The magnitudes of these reductions range from 0.013 to 0.041 standard deviations,
roughly similar to the size of the effect for the overall health status index. It therefore seems
unlikely that the observed effect on the health index is driven purely by the subjectivity of the
question. Moreover, these results suggest that the reform improved health more broadly than
merely by reducing stress from lower financial risk.
Turning to the health-behavior related variables, the reform is associated with a 0.040
standard deviation reduction in BMI, but no statistically detectable effect on exercise or
smoking. The drop in BMI suggests that expanded access to medical care improves at least some
weight-related behaviors, perhaps through information or accountability. Moreover, the lack of
an effect on exercise suggests that dietary changes are responsible for the weight loss, although
the BRFSS does not contain sufficient information during our sample period to test this directly.
The non-effect on smoking is consistent with evidence that smoking habits respond only
gradually to external factors (e.g. Courtemanche, 2009), but could also reflect the health
consequences of smoking already being widely-known even without physician access.
Importantly, none of the regressions provide any evidence of ex-ante moral hazard causing
individuals to take more health risks after obtaining insurance.

27

Specifically, the pre-treatment trend lines for Massachusetts and the control states are very similar for physical
health, health limitations, joint pain, BMI, exercise, and smoking. The pre-treatment trends are somewhat different
for mental health, but by an amount that could easily be attributed to sampling error.

27

The final column of Table 7 presents the results using as the dependent variable a
“cardinalized overall health status index” equal to the predicted outcome from a regression of the
health index on the most plausibly objective health outcomes: functional limitations, joint pain,
BMI, exercise, and smoking (

0.15).28 This approach is advocated by Ziebarth et al. (2010)

and others as a way to handle reporting heterogeneity in self-assessed health. The impact of
∗

remains positive and significant, and the effect size in standard deviations is similar

to those from Table 4. This provides further evidence that our conclusions are not merely driven
by subjectivity.
IVf. Heterogeneity
We next return to the actual overall health status index and examine heterogeneity in the
effect of Massachusetts health care reform on the bases of gender, age, race, and income. Kolstad
and Kowalski (2010) found the largest coverage expansions among men, young adults,
minorities, and those with low incomes. However, different effects on coverage do not
necessarily translate to different effects on health, as the impacts of coverage on health could
also be heterogeneous. We consider the following subsamples: women; men; ages 18-34, 35-44,
45-54, and 55-64; non-Hispanic whites; those of another race/ethnicity; and household incomes
below $25,000, between $25,000 and $75,000, and above $75,000.29 We choose these income
splits in order to loosely align with the provisions of the reform, which specify that health
insurance be free up to 150% FPL ($23,050 for a family of four) and subsidized up to 300%

28

We also considered using all seven alternate health outcomes to make the prediction. The results were similar.
We also ran regressions further dividing the category for those of another race/ethnicity into blacks, Hispanics,
and others, but the sample sizes became too small for meaningful differences to emerge.
29

28

($69,150 for a family of four).30 We estimate the baseline ordered probit model with the full
control group, as the pre-treatment trends for Massachusetts and the control states (shown in
Appendix Figures A8-A19) are similar for these subsamples.31
Table 8 reports the results. The impact on health is positive and significant for both
women and men but stronger for women. Stratifying by age, the effect is largest among the nearelderly aged 55-64, then about equal among those 18-34 and 45-54, and smallest (but still
positive and significant) among those 35-44. The reform improved health across both racial
groups, but the effect was largest for non-whites. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests
that the reform reduced health disparities between non-whites and whites by 5.3%.32 Stratifying
by income, the reform had by far the largest effect among those with incomes below $25,000, the
group eligible for the most generous subsidies. We observe moderate health improvements
among the middle income group, and smaller and statistically insignificant improvements for
those with high incomes.
IVg. Instrumental Variables
We close the empirical analysis by using

∗

and

∗

as instruments

to estimate the impact of having insurance coverage on health. This instrumental variables
approach requires stricter assumptions than the reduced-form model, as the reform must only

30

2012 federal poverty lines are available at coverageforall.org/pdf/FHCE_FedPovertyLevel.pdf, accessed 6/26/12.
Since the BRFSS only reports income categories and lacks comprehensive information about household size, lining
up the categories to exactly match 150% and 300% of the poverty line is not possible.
31 Specifically, the pre‐treatment trend lines are almost identical for the subsamples of women, men, ages 35‐
44, ages 45‐54, ages 55‐64, and those with low incomes. The pre‐treatment trend lines look slightly different
for the race groups and those with middle or high incomes, but the differences are small enough that they
could be due merely to sampling error.
32 In Massachusetts in the “before” period, the mean health status indices of non-whites and whites were 2.559 and
2.898, respectively, for a difference of -0.339. The treatment effects imply changes in the health status indices of
non-whites and whites of 0.054 and 0.036, for a difference of 0.018. We therefore estimate that the reform reduced
racial health disparities by 5.3%.

29

impact health along the extensive margin of insurance coverage, conditional on the controls. This
assumption would be violated if the reform also influenced health through the intensive margin
of coverage, for instance by causing some individuals to switch from high-deductible
catastrophic coverage to more comprehensive coverage available through the Connector. This
assumption would also be violated if the reform affected the health of those who did not switch
insurance plans through system-wide changes to health care delivery or peer effects. Despite
these caveats, the instrumental variables analysis is useful because it estimates the magnitude of
the impact of insurance on health that would be necessary for the extensive margin to be the only
channel through which the reform influenced health. If the magnitude is implausibly large, then
other mechanisms must play a role as well.
The first stage predicts insurance coverage using the following linear probability model:
∗
where

∗

(15)

is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the person reported having any health insurance

coverage. Because of the non-linearity of the second stage, we utilize a two-stage residual
inclusion (2SRI) approach in which the residual from the first-stage regression is included as an
additional regressor in the second stage. Terza et al. (2008) show that in non-linear contexts
2SRI gives consistent coefficient estimates, while traditional two stage least squares does not.
The second stage is modeled as an ordered probit and the probabilities of being in each of the
five health states are given by,
Pr

0

Pr

Φ

(16)

Φ

Φ

(17)

, ∀ ∈ 2,3,4
Pr

4

1

Φ

(18)

30

where

is the first-stage residual. The effect of health insurance on the probability of being in

health state is
∆

Pr

|

1

Pr

|

0

(19)

The asymptotic standard errors of these probabilities and the standard errors for the second stage
estimates were calculated following Terza (2011).33 Equation (19) represents the “local average
treatment effect” of insurance among those who obtained coverage as a result of the reform, and
is subject to the usual caveat regarding generalizability.
Table 9 reports the coefficient estimates of interest from the first and second stage
regressions for the full sample, along with the estimated impacts of insurance on the health state
probabilities. The first stage estimates an increase in the coverage rate of 2.1 percentage points in
the “during” period and 5.6 percentage points in the “after” period. The F statistic from a test of
the joint significance of

∗

and

∗

is large, suggesting the instruments are

sufficiently strong. Turning to the second stage, obtaining insurance leads to a positive and
statistically significant improvement in health. The first-stage residual is significant and
negatively associated with health, providing evidence that an OLS estimator would suffer from a
downward bias. Insurance is estimated to reduce the probabilities of being in poor, fair, and good
health by 5.8, 9.2, and 8.5 percentage points, while increasing the probabilities of being in very
good and excellent health by 8.1 and 15.3 percentage points. The overall effect of insurance on
the health status index, encompassing changes in all five probabilities, is 0.594 of the sample
standard deviation.
These effects are strikingly large, but assessing their plausibility requires a comparison to
other estimates from the literature. Finkelstein et al. (2011) employ the cleanest research design
33

Mata code is available upon request.

31

to date among studies of the impact of insurance on self-assessed health: a randomized
intervention in Oregon granting Medicaid eligibility to a subset of the uninsured. They estimate
that Medicaid enrollment increases the probability of being in good, very good, or excellent
health by 13.3 percentage points. The sum of our estimated effects on the probabilities of being
in those three health states is a similar 14.9 percentage points. The results from the two papers
are not directly comparable given the differences in interventions and populations, but this
similarity suggests that it is at least conceivable that the reform’s entire effect on the selfassessed health of the non-elderly could have occurred through the extensive margin of coverage.
Future research should more directly investigate the roles of other potential channels, in
particular the intensive margin of coverage.
We also conduct instrumental variables analyses for the gender, race, age, and income
subgroups, allowing us to assess whether the heterogeneity in the reform’s effect on health
observed in Section IVf comes from heterogeneity in the effect on coverage or the effect of
coverage. Table 10 reports the results. The coverage expansions are larger for men than women,
but women have greater health gains from coverage, explaining the greater net effect of the
reform for women. Among the age subsamples, those under 35 years old have the largest gains in
coverage, but also the smallest health improvements from obtaining coverage. 55-64 year olds
have the smallest effect of the reform on coverage but the largest effect of coverage on health.
Stratifying by race shows that coverage rates increase the most for non-whites but that the health
effects of coverage are the largest for whites. Finally, the coverage expansions are by far the
largest for the low-income group, second largest for the middle-income group, and relatively
small for those with high incomes. However, the effect of coverage on health is the strongest for
the high income group.

32

V. Conclusion
This paper examined the effect of health care reform in Massachusetts on self-assessed
health using data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). An ordered
probit difference-in-differences analysis showed that the reform increased the probability of
individuals reporting excellent or very good health while reducing their probability of reporting
good, fair, or poor health. These results were robust to alternative constructions of the control
group and the addition of state-level covariates. We did not find evidence that the estimates were
meaningfully impacted by differential pre-treatment trends, or that the short- and longer-run
effects were statistically different. Next, we examined a number of more specific health
outcomes and found improvements in physical health, mental health, functional limitations, joint
disorders, and body mass index. Evaluating heterogeneity revealed that those with low incomes,
minorities, near-elderly adults, and women experienced the largest gains in health as a result of
the reform. Finally, we used the reform as an instrument for health insurance coverage and
estimated a large positive impact of coverage on health.
Perhaps the clearest limitation of our analysis is that all our health outcomes were selfreported. Our finding of similar results across a range of health outcomes with varying degrees of
subjectivity increases our confidence that our findings largely represent “real” changes in
physical/mental health. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that some of the observed
improvement in health could merely be due to a “warm glow” from acquiring health insurance.
To underscore this point, recall that our estimated effects of insurance on self-assessed health are
a similar magnitude to those of Finkelstein et al. (2011), and they found that a sizeable portion of
the reported health improvements following the Oregon experiment occurred prior to measurable
changes in overall health care utilization. Obtaining insurance coverage can reduce stress, which

33

can directly improve numerous aspects of health even without any additional medical care being
utilized, but Finkelstein et al. (2011) do raise the question of what exactly the estimated
improvements in self-assessed health are capturing.
We argue that Finkelstein et al.’s (2011) finding regarding timing does not automatically
apply to our context for several reasons. First, their data only tracked individuals for a year after
the intervention, while we have 4½ years of data after first of the newly-insured in Massachusetts
obtained coverage and 3½ years after all major facets of the reform took effect. If a “warm glow”
from acquiring insurance was driving the effect, we would have expected the reported health
benefits from the reform to diminish over time, but as Table 5 showed this was not the case.
Second, other studies have documented changes in health care utilization in Massachusetts either
before or around the same time as we observed health improvements (Kowalski and Kolstand,
2010; Miller, 2011a). Next, the newly insured in the Oregon experiment were winners of a
random lottery, which could lead to a stronger “warm glow” than simply acquiring health
insurance from a statewide intervention like the reform in Massachusetts. Accordingly, we
consistently find that the effects on health were statistically zero in the “during” period, which
includes nine months after those with incomes below 100% FPL became eligible for free
coverage. We therefore do not observe the immediate spike in self-assessed health seen in the
Oregon experiment. Nonetheless, as the necessary data become available it will be important to
evaluate the impact of the Massachusetts reform on unambiguously objective measures of health
such as mortality.
Another natural question is the degree to which our results from Massachusetts can serve
as projections for the Affordable Care Act. The general strategies for obtaining nearly universal
coverage in both the Massachusetts and federal laws involved the same three-pronged approach

34

of non-group insurance market reforms, mandates, and subsidies, suggesting that the health
effects should be broadly similar. However, the federal legislation included additional costcutting measures such as Medicare cuts that could potentially mitigate the gains in health from
the coverage expansions. On the other hand, baseline uninsured rates were unusually low in
Massachusetts, so the coverage expansions – and corresponding health improvements – from the
Affordable Care Act could potentially be greater. Of course, larger coverage expansions may
mean higher costs, and costs should be weighed against benefits when evaluating the welfare
implications of reform.
References
Abadie A., Diamond A., and Hainmueller J. (2010). Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative
Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 105(490), 493-505.
Abadie A., Diamond A., and Hainmueller J. (2011). SYNTH: Stata Module to Implement
Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies. Software item, available
http://econpapers.repec.org/software/bocbocode/s457334.htm.
Ai C. and Norton E. (2003). Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models. Economics Letters,
80(1), 123-129.
Angrist J. and Pischke J. (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Arrow K. (1963). Uncertainty and the Demand for Medical Care. American Economic Review,
53(5), 941-73.
Bertrand M., Duflo E., and Mullainathan S. (2004). How Much Should We Trust Difference-inDifferences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-275.
Bhattacharya J., Bundorf M.K., Pace N., and Sood N. (2011). Does Health Insurance Make You
Fat? In Grossman M. and Mocan N. (eds.), Economic Aspects of Obesity, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 35-64.
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts (2006). Massachusetts Health Care Reform Bill
Summary. Available at http://tinyurl.com/bn5yepz.

35

Card D., Dobkin C., and Maestas N. (2009). Does Medicare Saves Lives? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124(2), 597-636,
Card D., Dobkin C., and Maestas N. (2004). The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance Coverage
on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper #10365.
Cawley J. (2004). The Impact of Obesity on Wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39(2): 451474.
Cogan J., Hubbard R., and Kessler D. (2010). The Effect of Massachusetts’ Health Reform on
Employer-Sponsored Insurance Premiums. Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 13(2),
Article 5.
Courtemanche C. (2009). Rising Cigarette Prices and Rising Obesity: Coincidence or
Unintended Consequence? Journal of Health Economics, 28(4), 781-798.
Courtemanche C., Heutel G., and McAlvanah P. (2011). Impatience, Incentives, and Obesity.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #17483.
Currie, J. and Gruber, J. (1996a). Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 431-466.
Currie, J. and Gruber, J. (1996b). Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1263–
1296.
Dafny L. and Gruber J. (2005). Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations: Access and
Efficiency Effects. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 109-129.
Dave D. and Kaestner R. (2009). Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard: Evidence from
Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 9, 367-390.
DeSalvo, K. B., Bloser, N., Reynolds, K., He, J., and Muntner, P. (2006). Mortality prediction
with a single general self-rated health question. A meta-analysis. Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 21(3), 267–275.
Doyle J. (2005). Health Insurance, Treatment and Outcomes: Using Auto Accidents as Health
Shocks. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2), 256-270.
Finkelstein A. and McKnight R. (2008). What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of Medicare
on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending. Journal of Public Economics, 92, 16441669.

36

Finkelstein A., Taubman S., Wright B., Bernstein M., Gruber J., Newhouse J., Allen H., Baicker
K., and The Oregon Health Study Group (2011). The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Fitzpatrick M. (2008). Starting School at Four: The Effect of Universal Pre-Kindergarten on
Children’s Academic Achievement. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 8(1),
Article 46.
Grossman M. (1972). The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation,
Columbia University Press: New York, NY.
Gruber J. (2008a). Incremental Universalism for the United States: The States Move First?
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(4), 51-68.
Gruber J. (2008b). Massachusetts Health Care Reform: The View From One Year Out. Risk
Management and Insurance Review, 11(1), 51-63.
Gruber J. (2010). Health Care Reform is a “Three-Legged Stool”: The Costs of Partially
Repealing the Affordable Care Act. Center for American Progress. Available
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2010/08/pdf/repealing_reform.pdf.
Gruber J. (2011a). The impact of the Affordable care Act: How reasonable are the projections?
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #17168.
Gruber J. (2011b). Massachusetts Points the Way to Successful Health Care Reform. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 30(1), 184-192.
Hadley J. (2003). Sicker and Poorer—The Consequences of Being Uninsured: A Review of the
Research on the Relationship between Health Insurance, Medical Care Use, Health, Work,
and Income. Medical Care Research and Review, 60(2), 3-75.
Harrington S. (2010). U.S. Health Care Reform: The Patient Protection and Affordable Act.
Journal of Risk and Insurance, 77(3), 703-708.
Idler E. and Benyamini Y. (1997). Self-Rated Health and Mortality: A Review of Twenty-Seven
Community Studies. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 38 (1), 21-37.
Johnson-Lans S. (2005). A Health Economics Primer. Boston, MA: Addison Wesley/Pearson.
Kolstad J. and Kowalski A. (2010). The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital and
Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper #16012.
Kolstad J. and Kowalski A. (2012). Mandate-Based Health Reform and the Labor Market:
Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper #17933.
37

Kirk A. (2000). Riding the Bull: Experience with Individual Market Reform in Washington,
Kentucky, and Massachusetts. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 25(1), 133-173.
Levy H. and Meltzer D. (2008). The Impact of Health Insurance on Health. Annual Review of
Public Health, 29, 399–409.
Long, S. (2008). On the Road to Universal Coverage: Impacts of Reform in Massachusetts at
One Year. Health Affairs, 27(4), w270-84.
Long, S. and Stockely K. (2011). The Impacts of State Health Reform Initiatives on Adults in
New York and Massachusetts. Health Services Research, 46(1,II), 365-428.
Long S., Stockely K. and Yemane A. (2009). Another Look at the Impacts of Health Reform in
Massachusetts: Evidence Using New Data and a Stronger Model. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), 508-511.
Manning W., Newhouse J., Duan N., Keeler E., Leibowitz A., and Marquis M. (1987). Health
Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.
American Economic Review, 77(3), 251-77.
Massachusetts Division of Health Care, Finance, and Policy (2010). Health Care in
Massachusetts: Key Indicators. Available http://archives.lib.state.ma.us/handle/2452/69933.
Massachusetts Governor’s Budget FY2010 (2009). Health Care. Retrieved from
http://www.mass.gov/bb/h1/fy10h1/prnt10/exec10/pbuddevhc.htm.
Massachusetts Health Insurance Connector Authority (2008). Report to the Massachusetts
Legislature Implementation of the Health Care Reform Law, Chapter 58 2006-2008.
Available http://tinyurl.com/74osvco.
McDonough J., Rosman B., Phelps F., and Shannon M. (2006) The Third Wave of
Massachusetts Health Care Access Reform. Health Affairs, 25(6), w420-31.
Miller S. (2011a). The Effect of Insurance on Outpatient Emergency Room Visits: An Analysis
of the 2006 Massachusetts Health Reform. Working paper, University of Illinois.
Miller S. (2011b). The Impact of the Massachusetts Health Care Reform on Health Care Use
Among Children. Forthcoming, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.
Orzechowski W., Walker R. (2010). The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation,
Volume 45. Arlington, VA: Orzechowski and Walker.
Patel K., McDonough J. (2010). From Massachusetts to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue: Aboard the
Health Reform Express. Health Affairs, 29(6), 1106-1110.

38

Pauly M. (1968). The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment. American Economic Review,
58(3), 531-36.
Pauly M. (2005). Effects of Insurance Coverage on Use of Care and Health Outcomes for Nonpoor Young Women. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95(2), 219-223.
Phillips A., Der G., and Carroll D. (2010). Self-reported health, self-reported fitness, and allcause mortality: Prospective cohort study. British Journal of Health Psychology, 15(2), 337346.
Puhani P. (2008). The Treatment Effect, the Cross Difference, and the Interaction Term in
Nonlinear “Difference-in-Differences” Models. IZA Discussion Paper Series, 3478.
Raymond A. (2009). Massachusetts Health Reform: The Myth of Uncontrolled Costs.
Massachusetts Taxpayer Foundation. Retrieved from
http://www.masstaxpayers.org/files/Health%20care-NT.pdf
Strauss J., Thomas D. (2007). Health over the life course. Handbook of Development
Economics, Volume 4, Elsevier.
Terza J., Basu A., and Rathouz P. (2008). Two-Stage Residual Inclusion Estimation: Addressing
Endogeneity in Health Econometric Modeling. Journal of Health Economics, 27, 531–543.
Terza, J.V. (2011). Correct Standard Errors for Multi-Stage Causal Effect Estimation in the
Context of Empirical Health Policy Analysis: A Practitioner's Guide. Unpublished
Manuscript, University of North Carolina at Greensboro.
Terza, J.V. (2012). Correct Standard Errors for Multi-Stage Regression-Based Estimators:
A Practitioner’s Guide with Illustrations. Unpublished Manuscript, University of North
Carolina at Greensboro.
Weissman J. and Bigby J. (2009). Massachusetts Health Care Reform — Near-Universal
Coverage at What Cost? New England Journal of Medicine, 361(21), 2012-2015.
Yelowitz A. and Cannon M. (2010). The Massachusetts Health Plan Much Pain, Little Gain.
Policy Analysis, 657.
Ziebarth N. (2010). Measurement of Health, Health Inequality, and Reporting Heterogeneity.
Social Science and Medicine, 71, 116-124.

39

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

Figure 1 – Changes in Health Status Index 2001-2010

2001

2003

2005
year

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

40

2007

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

Table 1 – Similarities and Differences between the Massachusetts Reform and the National Reform (ACA)
Domain
Massachusetts reform
Modification of existing insurance markets
- No pre-existing condition exclusions (since 1996).
- Community rated premiums that can only vary by age and
smoking status (in place since 1996).
- Minimum standards for policies, including essential
benefits and maximum out of pocket expenditures.
- Creation of a state health insurance exchange where
insurance companies compete to offer three regulated
levels of coverage to small employers and individuals.
- Young adults must be allowed coverage on their parents’
plans for up to two years after they are no longer
dependents or until their 26th birthday.
Mandates
- Individuals are required to purchase coverage if affordable,
(based on income and family size) or pay a penalty of no
more than 50% of the insurance premium of the lowestcost insurance exchange plan for which they are eligible.
- Employers with more than 10 full time employees (FTE)
are required to offer policies with minimum standard or
pay a penalty of up to $295 annually per FTE.
Medicaid expansions and subsidies
- Medicaid expansions for children with household incomes
up to 300% of the poverty line (FPL), for long-term
unemployed up to 100% FPL, and for people with HIV up
to 200% FPL.
- Free coverage for all adults below 150% FPL. Sliding scale
of subsidies for adults up to 300% FPL.
Financing
- Redirection of federal funding to safety net providers.
- Redirection of the state uncompensated care pool, a
mechanism through which hospitals were able to bill the
state the cost of treating low-income patients.
- Individual and employer penalties.
- One-time assessment to health care providers and insurers.
- Since 2009, a $1 per pack cigarette tax.

National reform (ACA)
-

-

-

Employers with 50 employees or more are required to offer
policies with minimum standard or pay penalties that range
from $2,000-$3,000 per FTE.

-

Medicaid expansions to all individuals with incomes below
133% FPL.
Sliding scale of tax credits for people up to 400% FPL.
Tax credits for employers with 25 or fewer employees and
average annual wages less than $50,000 for offering
coverage.
Reduction of Medicare reimbursements.
Increase in the Medicare payroll tax and extension of this
tax to capital income for singles (families) with incomes
more than $200,000 ($250,000).
Individual and employer penalties.
Taxes on insurers, pharmaceutical companies, and medical
device manufactures.
Excise taxes on high-cost insurance plans (“Cadillac tax”).

-

-

-

Sources: Gruber (2011a, 2008b) and Harrington (2010).

41

No pre-existing condition exclusions.
Community rated premiums that can only vary by age and
smoking status.
Minimum standards for policies, including essential
benefits and maximum out of pocket expenditures.
States must create a health insurance exchange where
insurance companies compete to offer four regulated levels
of coverage to small employers and individuals. States are
able to join multistate exchanges.
Young adults must be allowed coverage on their parents’
plans until their 26th birthday.
Individuals are required to purchase coverage if it costs no
more than 8% of income, or pay a penalty of the greater of
2.5 percent of taxable income or $695.

Table 2 – Pre-Treatment Means of Health Variables
Variable

Any health insurance coverage
Overall health; 0 (poor) to 4 (excellent)
Poor health
Fair health
Good health
Very good health
Excellent health
Days not in good physical health (of last 30)++
Days not in good mental health (of last 30)++
Days with health limitations (of last 30)++
Activity-limiting joint problems+
Body mass index
Minutes of exercise per day+
Currently smokes cigarettes

MA
(n=29,868)

Other States
(n=894,027)

Difference

0.898
2.840
0.022
0.072
0.244
0.367
0.294
2.884
3.552
1.790
0.106
26.305
97.268
0.212

0.826
2.656
0.032
0.095
0.288
0.352
0.232
3.087
3.639
1.946
0.116
27.992
93.201
0.256

0.072***
0.184***
-0.011***
-0.023***
-0.044***
0.015***
0.062***
-0.203***
-0.087
-0.156***
-0.010**
-0.767***
4.068***
-0.045***

Notes: *** indicates difference between Massachusetts and other states is significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level;
* 5% level. Observations are weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights. + indicates variable from only oddnumbered survey years. ++ indicates variable from all years except 2002. Standard errors are available on request.

42

Table 3 – Pre-Treatment Means of Control Variables
Variable

Massachusetts
(n=29,868)

Other States
(n=894,027)

Difference

0.135
0.099
0.127
0.125
0.137
0.118
0.105
0.087
0.066
0.502
0.575
0.828
0.037
0.128
0.007
0.033
0.029
0.046
0.062
0.097
0.147
0.200
0.386
0.063
0.234
0.247
0.456
0.013
4.984
1.485
436.259
1.208

0.141
0.103
0.123
0.121
0.132
0.118
0.108
0.086
0.067
0.496
0.609
0.722
0.112
0.152
0.014
0.046
0.044
0.070
0.089
0.134
0.180
0.190
0.248
0.094
0.299
0.280
0.326
0.014
5.334
0.774
256.672
1.791

-0.006
-0.004
0.002
0.004
0.005*
0.000
-0.003
0.001
0.000
0.006
-0.034***
0.107***
-0.075***
-0.024***
-0.007***
-0.013***
-0.014***
-0.024***
-0.027***
-0.027***
-0.033***
0.010***
0.138***
-0.031***
-0.065***
-0.033***
0.130***
-0.001
-0.350***
0.711***
179.587***
-0.583***

Age 18 to 24
Age 25 to 29
Age 30 to 34
Age 35 to 39
Age 40 to 44
Age 45 to 49
Age 50 to 54
Age 55 to 59
Age 60 to 64
Female
Married
Race is non-Hispanic white
Race is non-Hispanic black
Race is Hispanic
Race is neither black nor white nor Hispanic
Income less than $10,000
Income $10,000 to $15,000
Income $15,000 to $20,000
Income $20,000 to $25,000
Income $25,000 to $35,000
Income $35,000 to $50,000
Income $50,000 to $75,000
Income $75,000 or more
Less than a high school degree
High school degree but no college
Some college but not four-year degree
College graduate
Currently pregnant
State unemployment rate
State cigarette tax (2010 $)
State physician density (per 10,000 residents)
State hospital density (per 10,000 residents)

Notes: *** indicates difference between Massachusetts and other states is significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level;
* 5% level. Observations are weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights. Standard errors are available on request.

43

Table 4 – Difference-in-Differences Ordered Probit Regressions

Full Sample

Coefficient Estimates of Interest
0.005
MA*During
(0.008)

MA*After

Match on
Pre-Tx.
Level

Dependent Variable: Overall Health
Match on
Match on
New
Pre-Tx.
Pre-Tx.
England
Trend
Coverage

P(Very Good)
P(Excellent)
Overall Effect
in Std. Dev.
# Control States
Observations

Add State
Controls/
Trends

0.001

0.014

0.007

0.006

0.008

-0.004

0.022

(0.023)

(0.021)

(0.011)

(0.008)

(0.003)

(0.010)*

0.035

0.051

0.045

0.046

0.052

0.053

0.026

0.049

(0.007)***

(0.011)***

(0.015)***

(0.011)***

(0.008)***

(0.009)***

(0.008)***

(0.010)***

(0.0003)***

P(Good)

Drop 2005

(0.021)

Average Treatment Effects on Treated (After Period)
-0.002
-0.002
-0.002
P(Poor)
P(Fair)

Synthetic
Control
Group

(0.0005)***

(0.0007)***

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

-0.001

-0.003

(0.0005)***

(0.0004)***

(0.0004)***

(0.0003)***

(0.0006)***

-0.004

-0.005

-0.005

-0.005

-0.006

-0.006

-0.003

-0.006

(0.0007)***

(0.001)***

(0.002)***

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.0007)***

(0.001)***

-0.007

-0.010

-0.008

-0.009

-0.010

-0.010

-0.005

-0.008

(0.001)***

(0.002)***

(0.003)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.001)***

(0.002)***

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.002

(0.0002)***

(0.0004)***

(0.0004)**

(0.0004)***

(0.0003)***

(0.0003)***

(0.0002)***

(0.0006)***

0.011

0.016

0.014

0.014

0.016

0.017

0.008

0.015

(0.002)***

(0.003)***

(0.005)***

(0.003)***

(0.003)***

(0.003)***

(0.002)***

(0.003)***

0.029

0.042

0.038

0.036

0.041

0.045

0.022

0.041

45
1,979,383

10
486,449

10
675,076

10
453,695

5
260,893

4
299,668

45
1,771,837

50
2,879,296

Notes: Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. In columns 2-6, standard errors are clustered at the state*year level
rather than state because of the small number of states. *** indicates statistically significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level. All regressions include
the individual-level control variables, state fixed effects, and fixed effects for each month in each year. Observations are weighted using the BRFSS sampling
weights.

44

Table 5 – Testing for Differential Pre-Treatment Trends and Delayed Effects

MA*Late Before
MA*During
MA*Early After
MA*Late After

Dependent Variable: Overall Health
Split Before and After Periods
-0.008
(0.005)

0.002

1-Year Splits
---

(0.008)

0.027

--

(0.007)***

0.037
(0.008)***

--

MA*2002

--

-0.008

MA*2003

--

MA*2004

--

MA*2005

--

MA*2006

--

MA*2007

--

MA*2008

--

MA*2009

--

MA*2010

--

Observations

(0.008)

-0.001
(0.010)

0.007
(0.008)

-0.047
(0.009)***

-0.021
(0.011)

0.030
(0.009)***

0.020
(0.010)*

0.035
(0.013)***

0.029
(0.010)**

1,979,383

1,979,383

Notes: Coefficient estimates are shown; treatment effects are available upon request. Standard errors,
heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at the 0.1%
level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level. All regressions include the individual-level control variables, state fixed effects, and
fixed effects for each month in each year. The full control group is used. Observations are weighted using the
BRFSS sampling weights.

45

Table 6 – Regressions with Aggregated Data
Dependent Variable: Average Health Status
State-Level with Three
Time Periods
MA*During
MA*After
Effect in Standard Deviations (After Period)
Observations

0.009

Annual with Two
Cross-Sectional Units
(MA and not MA)
0.027

(0.006)

(0.026)

0.039

0.053

(0.006)***

(0.018)**

0.039

0.053

138

20

Notes: The coefficient estimates are equal to the treatment effects because the model is linear. Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors (clustered by state in the first column) are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant
at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level. The first regression includes state fixed effects and dummies for the
during and after periods; the second regression includes year fixed effects and a dummy for MA. Both regressions
also control for “predicted health,” which is based on regressing health on the control variables in an individuallevel regression. The control group consists of all 45 states from the full control group in the first regression, and
one cross-sectional unit collapsing all individuals from these 45 states in the second regression. Observations are
weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights when aggregating.

46

Table 7 – Regression Results for Other Health Outcomes
Dependent
Variable:

MA*During
MA*After
ATE on Treated
Effect in Std.
Deviations
Observations

Days not in
Good
Physical
Health
-0.065

Days not in
Good
Mental
Health
-0.018

Days with
Health
Limitations

(0.014)***

(0.015)

(0.018)

ActivityLimiting
Joint Pain

-0.029

--

BMI

-0.084

Minutes of
Vigorous
Exercise

(0.021)***

--

Smoker

-0.004
(0.008)

Cardinalized Overall
Health

--

-0.098

-0.059

-0.076

-0.060

-0.220

-0.013

0.001

0.024

(0.011)***

(0.012)***

(0.014)***

(0.010)***

(0.023)***

(0.013)

(0.009)

(0.011)*

-0.281

-0.208

-0.142

-0.009

-0.220

-1.152

0.000

0.024

(0.033)***

(0.042)***

(0.027)***

(0.002)***

(0.023)***+

(1.169)

(0.002)

(0.011)*+

-0.041

-0.027

-0.013

-0.019

-0.040

-0.020

0.000

0.047

1,813,024

1,811,980

1,821,481

920,878

1,912,757

863,751

1,979,503

790,899

Notes: + indicates the treatment effect and coefficient estimate are equal because the model is linear. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by
state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level. All regressions include the individual-level control
variables, state fixed effects, and fixed effects for each month in each year. MA*During is not included for joint pain, exercise, and cadrinalized health, since
these variables are only available in odd-numbered survey years. The full control group is used in all regressions. Observations are weighted using the BRFSS
sampling weights.

47

Table 8 – Heterogeneity in the Effect on Health by Gender, Age, Race, and Income
Dependent Variable: Overall Health
Gender
Women
MA*After

Race

Age
Men

18-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

White
NonHispanic

Income
Other

<$25K

$25K$75K

>$75K

0.047

0.023

0.030

0.018

0.031

0.050

0.036

0.054

0.069

0.024

0.015

(0.007)***

(0.006)***

(0.010)**

(0.008)**

(0.007)***

(0.007)***

(0.006)***

(0.014)***

(0.011)***

(0.007)***

(0.008)

Average Treatment Effects on Treated
-0.002
-0.001
P(Poor)
(0.000)***
(0.000)***

-0.0007

-0.0006

-0.002

-0.004

-0.001

-0.003

-0.009

-0.001

-0.0002

(0.000)**

(0.000)**

(0.000)***

(0.001)***

(0.000)***

(0.001)***

(0.002)***

(0.000)***

(0.000)*

P(Fair)

-0.005

-0.003

-0.003

-0.002

-0.003

-0.006

-0.003

-0.008

-0.011

-0.003

-0.001

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.011)**

(0.001)**

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.001)***

(0.0005)

P(Good)

-0.009

-0.005

-0.006

-0.004

-0.006

-0.008

-0.007

-0.008

-0.003

-0.005

-0.003

(0.001)***

(0.002)**

(0.002)**

(0.002)**

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.002)***

(0.000)***

(0.001)***

(0.002)

P(V. Good)

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.00003

0.0008

0.004

0.002

0.004

0.009

0.002

-0.001

(0.000)***

(0.000)***

(-0.004)

(-0.000)

(0.000)***

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.001)***

(0.002)***

(0.001)***

(0.0005)*

P(Excel.)

0.015

0.007

0.009

0.006

0.010

0.014

0.012

0.015

0.014

0.007

0.006

(0.002)***

(0.002)**

(0.003)*

(0.003)**

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.004)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.003)

0.039

0.024

0.026

0.014

0.026

0.042

0.032

0.044

0.058

0.022

0.014

Overall Eff.
in Std. Dev.
Observations

1,186,329 793,054
443,359
467,050
558,475
563,405 1,564,481 414,902
478,276
945,561
555,546
Notes: Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; *
5 % level. All regressions include MA*During, the individual-level control variables, state fixed effects, and fixed effects for each month in each year. The full
control group is used in all regressions. Observations are weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights.

48

Table 9 – Instrumental Variables
First Stage: Any Insurance Coverage
Coefficient Estimates
0.021
MA*During

(0.002)***

MA*After

0.056
(0.003)***

1st Stage F Statistic
179.41
Second Stage: Overall Health
Coefficient Estimates
0.655
Insurance

(0.154)***

1st Stage Residual

-0.634
(0.124)***

Local Average Treatment Effects
P(Poor)
P(Fair)
P(Good)
P(Very Good)
P(Excellent)

-0.058
(0.012)***

-0.092
(0.016)***

-0.085
(0.015)***

0.081
(0.014)***

0.153
(0.029)***

Overall Effect in Standard Deviations
Observations

0.594
1,976,564

Notes: A linear probability model is estimated in the first stage so the coefficient
estimate equals the treatment effect. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust
and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at
the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level. All regressions include the individuallevel control variables, state fixed effects, and fixed effects for each month in
each year. The full control group is used. Observations are weighted using the
BRFSS sampling weights.

49

Table 10 – Instrumental Variables: Stratified by Gender, Age, Race, and Income
Gender
Women

Age
35-44

Race

Men

18-34

45-54

55-64

White

Other

First Stage Coefficient Estimates: Any Insurance Coverage
0.030
0.020
0.012
0.020
0.016
0.035

<$25K

Income
$25K$75K

>$75K

MA*During

0.023

0.019

(0.002)***

(0.003)***

MA*After

0.044

0.068

0.085

0.050

0.045

0.041

0.042

0.092

0.145

0.070

0.015

(0.002)***

(0.004)***

(0.005)***

(0.003)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.006)***

(0.008)***

(0.003)***

(0.002)***

F Statistic

169.15

163.52

137.16

123.80

520.33

237.28

228.37

126.35

169.24

321.62

26.61

(0.005)***

(0.003)***

(0.002)***

(0.002)***

(0.001)***

(0.006)**

0.073

0.016

0.007

(0.006)***

(0.004)***

(0.002)**

Second Stage: Overall Health
Coefficient Estimates
1.059
Insurance

(0.171)***

First Stage
Residual

0.392

0.370

0.379

0.722

1.231

0.861

0.619

0.073

0.016

0.007

(0.119)***

(0.122)**

(0.172)*

(0.152)***

(0.174)***

(0.140)***

(0.148)***

(0.006)***

(0.004)***

(0.002)**

-1.024

-0.375

-0.227

-0.378

-0.820

-1.361

-0.859

-0.555

-0.496

-0.258

-1.010

(0.170)***

(0.123)**

(-0.125)

(0.175)*

(0.149)***

(0.176)***

(0.141)***

(0.148)***

(0.084)***

(0.019)**

(0.512)**

Local Average Treatment Effects
-0.028
-0.125
P(Poor)
(0.020)***

P(Fair)
P(Good)
P(V. Good)
P(Excel.)
Overall Eff.
in Std. Dev.
Observations

(0.010)**

-0.014

-0.023

-0.085

-0.247

-0.087

-0.058

-0.071

-0.019

-0.082

(0.004)***

(0.009)*

(0.017)***

(0.026)***

(0.015)***

(0.018)***

(0.012)***

(0.005)***

(0.021)***

-0.148

-0.052

-0.054

-0.049

-0.101

-0.139

-0.110

-0.105

-0.070

-0.045

-0.145

(0.019)***

(0.016)**

(0.015)***

(0.021)*

(0.019)***

(0.018)***

(0.015)***

(0.023)***

(0.011)***

(0.013)***

(0.042)***

-0.088

-0.062

-0.087

-0.065

-0.068

-0.015

-0.108

-0.054

-0.008

-0.059

-0.190

(0.017)***

(0.017)***

(0.026)***

(0.031)*

(0.018)***

(0.018)

(0.016)***

(0.010)*

(0.005)

(0.019)**

(0.010)***

0.145

0.042

0.035

0.037

0.105

0.190

0.112

0.078

0.061

0.040

0.144

(0.014)***

(0.013)**

(0.009)***

(0.014)**

(0.017)***

(0.014)***

(0.013)***

(0.018)***

(0.009)***

(0.010)***

(0.014)***

0.215

0.100

0.120

0.100

0.149

0.181

0.193

0.138

0.087

0.083

0.273

(0.040)***

(0.035)**

(0.037)**

(0.048)*

(0.036)***

(0.041)***

(0.033)***

(0.030)***

(0.016)***

(0.027)**

(0.166)

0.961

0.352

0.389

0.337

0.647

1.074

0.804

0.533

0.393

0.302

1.159

791,392

441,873

466,669

557,974

510,048

1,562,540

414,024

476,970

944,457

555,137

1,185,172
See notes for Table 9.

50

Appendix

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

Figure A1 – Changes in Days not in Good Physical Health 2001-2010

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

Figure A2 – Changes in Days not in Good Mental Health 2001-2010

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

51

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

Figure A3 – Changes in Days with Health Limitations 2001-2010

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

.08

.09

.1

.11

.12

Figure A4 – Changes in Activity-Limiting Joint Pain 2001-2010

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

52

26

26.5

27

27.5

28

Figure A5 – Changes in BMI 2001-2010

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

Figure A6 – Changes in Minutes of Exercise 2001-2010

53

.15

.2

.25

.3

Figure A7 – Changes in Smoking Rate 2001-2010

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

Figure A8 – Changes in Health Status Index for Women

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

54

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

3

Figure A9 – Changes in Health Status Index for Men

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

2.75

2.8

2.85

2.9

2.95

3

Figure A10 – Changes in Health Status Index for Ages 18-34

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

55

2.7

2.8

2.9

3

Figure A11 – Changes in Health Status Index for Ages 35-44

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

Figure A12 – Changes in Health Status Index for Ages 45-54

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

56

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

Figure A13 – Changes in Health Status Index for Ages 55-64

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

2.7

2.8

2.9

3

Figure A14 – Changes in Health Status Index for Non-Hispanic Whites

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

57

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

Figure A15 – Changes in Health Status Index for those of a Race/Ethnicity Other than
Non-Hispanic White

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

2

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

Figure A16 – Changes in Health Status Index for those with Household Incomes Below
$25,000

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

58

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

Figure A17 – Changes in Health Status Index for those with Household Incomes Between
$25,000 and $75,000

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

2.95

3

3.05

3.1

3.15

3.2

Figure A18 – Changes in Health Status Index for those with Household Incomes Above
$75,000

2001

2003

2005
year

2007

Massachusetts
95% Confidence Intervals

2009

Other States
Pre-Treatment Trends

59

Table A1 – Estimating Effect on Health Using Series of Probits
Dependent
P(Fair or Better)
Variable:
Coefficient Estimates
0.040
MA*During
(0.010)***

MA*After

P(Good or
Better)

P(Excellent)

0.030

0.028

0.001

(0.007)***

(0.009)***

(0.007)

0.070

0.062

0.056

0.018

(0.006)***

(0.009)***

(0.008)***

(0.007)**

Average Treatment Effect on Treated (After Period)
0.010
0.004
MA*After
Effect in Std.
Deviations
Observations

P(Very Good or
Better)

0.018

0.006

(0.0004)***

(0.001)***

(0.003)***

(0.002)**

0.018

0.027

0.037

0.014

1,979,383

1,979,383

1,979,383

1,979,383

Notes: Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically
significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level. All regressions include the individual-level control variables,
state fixed effects, and fixed effects for each month in each year. The full control group is used Observations are
weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights.

Table A2 – Estimating Effect on Health Using Series of Linear Probability Models
Dependent
P(Good or
P(Fair or Better)
Variable:
Better)
Coefficient Estimates = Average Treatment Effects
0.010
0.005
MA*During
(0.0007)

(0.002)*

P(Very Good or
Better)

P(Excellent)

0.003

-0.001

(0.003)

(0.002)

0.004

0.011

0.016

0.004

(0.0004)***

(0.002)***

(0.003)***

(0.002)

Effect in Std.
Deviations

0.024

0.033

0.032

0.009

Observations

1,979,383

1,979,383

1,979,383

1,979,383

MA*After

Notes: Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically
significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level. All regressions include the individual-level control variables,
state fixed effects, and fixed effects for each month in each year. The full control group is used. Observations are
weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights.

60

Table A3 – Correlations Between Overall Health and Other Health Outcomes

Days not in Good Physical Health
Days not in Good Mental Health
Days with Health Limitations
Activity-Limiting Joint Pain
BMI
Minutes of Exercise
Smoker

Correlation with Overall Health
-0.461***
-0.283***
-0.387***
-0.318***
-0.257***
0.098***
-0.160***

*** indicates statistically significant at the 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5 % level.
Observations are weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights

61

