                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              STATUS, MARRIAGE, AND MANAGERS' ATTITUDES TO RISK

                                           Nikolai Roussanov
                                            Pavel G. Savor

                                         Working Paper 17904
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17904


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2012




We thank Andy Abel, Malcolm Baker, Nick Barberis, Effi Benmelech, Terry Burnham, Alex Edmans,
Simon Gervais, Itay Goldstein, Todd Gormley, Wayne Guay, Luigi Guiso, Erik Hurst, Michael Lemmon,
Ulrike Malmendier, Gregor Matvos, David Musto, Terry Odean, Andy Postlewaite, Michael Roberts,
Paola Sapienza, Jose Scheinkman, Antoinette Schoar, Amit Seru, Stephanie Sikes, Todd Sinai, Jeremy
Stein, Luke Taylor, Alessandra Voena, and numerous seminar participants at the University of Pennsylvania
(Wharton), the University of Southern California (Marshall), the University of California - Berkeley
(Haas), Yale Behavioral Science Conference, 2012 Conference on Power, Status, and Influence (PSI)
at Northwestern (Kellogg), and 2013 AFA Meeting for useful comments. We gratefully acknowledge
support from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research (in particular Terker Family Fellowship
and Iwanowski Family Fellowship), Wharton Sports Business Initiative, Wharton Entrepreneurship
and Family Business Research Centre at CERT, and from Cynthia and Bennett Golub. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Nikolai Roussanov and Pavel G. Savor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Status, Marriage, and Managers' Attitudes To Risk
Nikolai Roussanov and Pavel G. Savor
NBER Working Paper No. 17904
March 2012, Revised February 2013
JEL No. D92,G02,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

Status concerns can drive risk-taking behavior by affecting the payoff to a marginal dollar of wealth.
If status concerns arise endogenously due to competition in the marriage market, then unmarried individuals
should take greater risks. We test this hypothesis by studying corporate CEOs. We find that single
CEOs are associated with firms exhibiting higher stock return volatility, pursue more aggressive investment
policies, and are not affected by increases in idiosyncratic risk. These effects are weaker for older
CEOs. Our results also hold when we use variation in divorce laws across states to instrument for CEO
marital status.


Nikolai Roussanov
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu

Pavel G. Savor
Finance Department, Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
psavor@wharton.upenn.edu
   Do managers’ personal traits matter? A burgeoning recent literature provides ample
evidence that individual CEO characteristics impact corporate policies (e.g., see Bertrand and
Schoar (2003), Malmendier and Tate (2005)).1 One of the key dimensions of heterogeneity is
diﬀerence in risk attitudes. Such heterogeneity can have important real consequences insofar
as it drives corporate investment and R&D activities. But are the diﬀerences in risk attitudes
permanent, or do they vary over an individual’s life-cycle in a predictable way? In this paper,
we investigate the role of CEOs’ marital status on corporate risk-taking via its eﬀect on the
strength of relative wealth concerns.
   Relative wealth concerns impact ﬁnancial decisions by altering individuals’ attitudes to-
wards risk. We focus on CEOs, whose preferences are likely to be reﬂected in corporate
investment and ﬁnancial policies, to the extent that CEO wealth is tied to their ﬁrms’ ﬁnan-
cial performance through incentive pay or changes in the value of their human capital. CEO
decisions involve large ﬁnancial stakes and have potentially broad-ranging impact on other
agents.2 If status concerns inﬂuence such decisions, this would represent strong evidence
that they are an important factor aﬀecting risk-taking. Furthermore, if status is particu-
larly important for wealthier individuals, as argued by Becker, Murphy, and Werning (2005)
and Roussanov (2010a), focusing on a group of individuals who disproportionately represent
the upper end of the wealth distribution should help detect the impact of such concerns on
ﬁnancial decisions.
   Following Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite (2001), we develop a model in which concern
for relative position arises endogenously from competition for mates in the marriage mar-
ket. Standard arguments lead to positively assortative matching in marriage markets (e.g.,
    1
      Benmelech and Frydman (2012), Malmendier, Tate, and Yan (2011), and Schoar and Zuo (2011) trace
the impact of the CEOs’ earlier life experiences on ﬁrm policies and performance. Kaplan, Klebanov, and
Sorensen (2008) examine the role of particular types of managerial skills of the prospective CEOs, whereas
Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira (2005) and Morse, Nanda, and Seru (2011) focus on the concentration of
decision-making power in the hands of the CEOs. Bennedsen, Perez-Gonzalez, and Wolfenzon (2006) and
Bennedsen, Nielsen, Perez-Gonzalez, and Wolfenzon (2007) use Scandinavian data to identify exogenous
shocks to CEO appointment and termination based on life events. Graham, Harvey, and Puri (2011) directly
measure behavioral traits of CEOs and link them to ﬁrm actions.
    2
      Following Malmendier and Tate (2005), a number of authors have shown that managers exhibiting over-
conﬁdent behavior engage in more risk-taking - e.g., see Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2007). Theoreti-
cally, overconﬁdent managerial behavior may be optimal from the ﬁrm’s standpoint, as explored by Gervais
and Goldstein (2007), Gervais, Heaton, and Odean (2011), and Goel and Thakor (2008). Empirically, Hirsh-
leifer, Low, and Teoh (2012) show that managers who exhibit overconﬁdent behavior are more successful in
pursuing innovation.


                                                    2
Becker (1973)). In particular, higher wealth individuals are likely to be matched with mates
who are highly desirable, in terms of their wealth or other relevant characteristics.3 As long
as the status payoﬀ – i.e., the improvement in the potential quality of the marital match
– raises the beneﬁt of an extra dollar of wealth (beyond its pure consumption value), the
matching environment creates an incentive for agents to take more idiosyncratic risk than
they would in the absence of the status contest. Since changing mates over time is costly,
married individuals will exhibit weaker concern for relative wealth position, all else equal.
Thus, our model predicts that single individuals, who are presumably expecting to compete
for mates in the future, should have a greater tolerance for risk than married ones, and con-
sequently undertake riskier investments. More speciﬁcally, single individuals should assume
more idiosyncratic (as opposed to systematic) risk, as such risk makes it more likely they will
rank above their peers, and consequently ﬁnd higher quality mates. Moreover, since wealth
and spouse quality are complements in our model, it implies that competition for mates is
particularly intense at the top of the wealth distribution, making it particularly suitable for
understanding the risk-taking behavior of wealthy individuals such as corporate CEOs.
      We test this prediction empirically using a standard sample of U.S. public ﬁrms, aug-
mented with a new data set on the marital status of CEOs that we compile from a variety
of public sources. We ﬁnd that companies run by CEOs classiﬁed as single in our data set
exhibit higher levels of stock return volatility and pursue more aggressive investment poli-
cies than otherwise comparable ﬁrms, consistent with the hypothesis of greater risk-taking
by single managers. These eﬀects are both economically and statistically quite meaningful.
A ﬁrm run by a single CEO, controlling for a variety of personal and ﬁrm characteristics,
exhibits stock return volatility that is 3% higher, and invests 10% more on average.
      As predicted by the model, the diﬀerence in volatilities represents varying exposures to
idiosyncratic rather than systematic risk. The investment policies vary with marital status
for capital expenditures, as well as R&D spending and acquisitions, which are commonly
associated with risk-taking. The eﬀect of marital status is weaker for older managers, which
is consistent with our theory, as they are less likely to be competing in the marriage market.
  3
    Charles, Hurst, and Killewald (2011) present evidence of positive marital sorting based on parental
wealth. Chiappori, Oreﬃce, and Quintana-Domeque (2012) estimate a model of marital matching in which
both income/education and physical attributes of a spouse enter into individual’s preferences.


                                                  3
Importantly, we control for ﬁrm characteristics in our analysis, so that our ﬁndings do not
simply reﬂect the tendency of single CEOs to be matched with riskier ﬁrms. If we omit
ﬁrm controls, the relationship between marital status and risk-taking becomes signiﬁcantly
stronger, suggesting that single CEOs indeed are more likely to run relatively risky ﬁrms.
Moreover, we demonstrate that single CEOs impact ﬁrm investment decisions by exploiting
within-ﬁrm variation in idiosyncratic return volatility over time. We show that while married
CEOs reduce investment in response to an increase in idiosyncratic risk (consistent with
Panousi and Papanikolaou (2012)), those CEOs who are single do not, conﬁrming that they
are less averse to (idiosyncratic) risk. The latter result is based on within-ﬁrm variation
in idiosyncratic volatility, and therefore cannot be attributed to unobserved heterogeneity
driving diﬀerences in investment rates across ﬁrms.
   These results support the hypothesis that single CEOs assume more risk than married
ones, and are consistent with our model of CEO status-seeking that is motivated by the
desire to ﬁnd a suitable marriage partner. However, it is also possible that single managers
exhibit diﬀerent risk-taking behavior from married managers even absent status concerns.
Individuals who are single at a given age may be inherently more risk-tolerant than those
who are married by the same age. It is important to emphasize here that, at least in the
simplest portfolio allocation models, more risk-tolerant individuals assume more systematic
rather than more idiosyncratic risk, as the latter is not priced in equilibrium and thus is
not associated with higher expected returns. Our ﬁnding that single CEOs are associated
with ﬁrms taking on more idiosyncratic risk is therefore not immediately consistent with
the innate heterogeneity hypothesis, unless ﬁrms have access to idiosyncratic investment
technologies that earn positive abnormal returns due to market incompleteness (and CEOs
are able to perfectly hedge their aggregate risk exposures, as in Acharya and Bisin (2009)). To
further distinguish our explanation from the alternative of innate heterogeneity, we employ
an instrumental variable approach.
   Our instrument exploits the variation in divorce laws across diﬀerent states in the U.S.,
which is very plausibly exogenous to the CEO-ﬁrm match and to ﬁrms’ investment policies.
Our basic assumption is that divorce costs should inﬂuence an individual’s propensity to
get married. One aspect of these costs, which should be of particular concern for wealthy


                                              4
individuals, is the division of marital property. We therefore distinguish between states
where this division is determined by the community property standard and those where it is
determined by the equitable distribution standard. The former mandates equal division of
assets acquired during marriage between the two divorcing spouses, whereas the latter allows
the division to be determined by a judge based on a range of factors, including the relative
contributions of the spouses. It is commonly understood that community property is more
advantageous for the poorer spouse (e.g., Voena (2011)). Since a CEO should rarely be in this
position, he or she should ﬁnd divorce costlier in community property states. Consequently,
all else equal, a CEO working in such a state should be less likely to be married at a given point
in time, waiting for a higher quality match. Indeed, this hypothesis is strongly conﬁrmed by
the data.
   We also provide evidence that a similar pattern holds in the broader U.S. population, but
only for wealthier individuals, exactly as our hypothesis implies. This evidence helps validate
our instrumental variables approach, as it indicates that the observed eﬀect of community
property regime on marital status is unlikely to just reﬂect other diﬀerences across states,
such as income distribution, culture, or religion. Crucially, when we use the state divorce
law as an instrument for marital status, all our ﬁndings continue to hold (and are actually
stronger), suggesting the relation between marital status and risk-taking is not simply driven
by innate diﬀerences between CEOs who are likely to be single single or married.
   In addition to status concerns, our results are also consistent with the hypothesis that
marriage changes CEO preferences (i.e., it is not the case that married CEOs are innately
diﬀerent than single ones, but that marriage itself changes them). Changing marital status
can aﬀect an individual’s preferences in a number of ways. Preferences of a married CEO may
partially reﬂect those of their spouse or the need to support a larger family. Alternatively, it
may be the case that marriage directly leads to less tolerance of risk: there is evidence that
married males exhibit lower testosterone (e.g. Burnham, Chapman, Gray, McIntyre, Lipson,
and Ellison (2003)), while high testosterone levels (in both men and women) are often associ-
ated with risk-taking behaviors (e.g., Burnham (2007), Sapienza, Zingales, and Maestripieri
(2009)), and even appear to predict empire-building behavior among entrepreneurs (Guiso
and Rustichini (2011)). While this evidence is consistent with the idea that mating-induced


                                                5
status concerns and the associated competitive risk-taking behavior are responses to evo-
lutionary pressures, it may not be directly linked to the marriage market competition in
the contemporary human society. Some of our previously discussed tests, based on the dis-
tinction between systematic and idiosyncratic volatility, can potentially distinguish between
these theories, but we cannot ﬁnd conclusive evidence favoring one over the other. We show
that marital status impacts behavior, but under the status concern interpretation this occurs
because marriage is a proxy for how much an individual cares about status, whereas under
the marriage-induces-change interpretation the eﬀect of marriage is more direct.
   One of the important questions in the literature that studies the impact of managerial
characteristics on ﬁrm outcomes is whether managers can alter their ﬁrms’ policies to better
suit their personal objectives, or whether the observed diﬀerences in the behavior of ﬁrms run
by diﬀerent managers simply reﬂect the matching of executives and ﬁrms along the relevant
(but diﬃcult to observe for an econometrician) characteristics (e.g., more risk-tolerant CEOs
work for riskier ﬁrms). While we cannot completely rule out the latter mechanism as an
explanation for some of our results, we ﬁnd it reasonably unlikely, as marital status is not a
permanent characteristic of a CEO. Moreover, even if CEOs were always optimally matched
to ﬁrms, so that their preferences are fully in line with shareholder interests, our ﬁndings
would still show that riskier ﬁrms prefer single CEOs, who are more willing to engage in risky
projects.
   Apart from understanding manager and ﬁrm behavior as such, we are interested in shed-
ding light on the role of status concerns for wealthy individuals, who are likely to be marginal
investors in ﬁnancial markets. Status concerns have been proposed as explanations for gam-
bling behavior (Robson (1992)), local bias in portfolios (Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite
(2001) and DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2004)), and other forms of under-diversiﬁcation,
such as entrepreneurial risk-taking (Roussanov (2010a)). Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the impor-
tance of such concerns by highlighting how they impact even high-stakes decisions. Models
of status diﬀer in their predictions as to whether status considerations lead to greater tol-
erance for idiosyncratic or aggregate risk. In particular, models that feature “keeping up
with the Joneses,” as in Abel (1990), exhibit conformist, or herding, behavior (e.g., Gollier
(2004), DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2004)). In contrast, the prediction that competition


                                               6
for status leads to greater idiosyncratic risk-taking (“getting ahead of the Joneses”), whether
resulting from marital sorting or not, is driven by the feature that the marginal beneﬁt of an
extra dollar of wealth is increasing in relative wealth (e.g., Gregory (1980), Becker, Murphy,
and Werning (2005)). Therefore, analyzing the diﬀerences in attitudes towards idiosyncratic
risk by varying the strength of status concerns can shed light on which class of reduced-form
relative wealth preferences is empirically relevant, potentially yielding implications for asset
pricing and risk sharing.
       There is a large literature in evolutionary psychology that links status, mating, and risk-
taking behavior, especially among males. Overwhelming evidence exists that wealth and
socioeconomic status are positively related to men’s reproductive success.4 Both experimen-
tal and survey evidence indicate that mating concerns induce signaling of wealth through
conspicuous consumption and ﬁnancial risk-taking (e.g. see Griskevicius, Sundie, Miller, Ty-
bur, Cialdini, and Kenrick (2007)). This literature also documents greater risk-taking by
subjects confronted with situations suggestive of mating or competing for mates (Wilson and
Daly (2004) and Baker and Maner (2008)). In the economics literature, Barber and Odean
(2000) show that single men display more overconﬁdent trading behavior then single women
(or married couples). Household survey data also appears to indicate that for males a change
in marital status from single to married is associated with a decrease in the portfolio share
invested in stocks and similar risky assets (Love (2010)).
       Postlewaite (1998) advocates modeling status concerns as arising endogenously due to
non-market interactions (such as marriage and other settings where allocations depend on
matching) rather than being hard-wired into preferences. While we pursue the same modeling
approach here, one can also interpret our results as consistent with the view that both risk-
taking and marriage market behavior are determined biologically, and that the link between
the two is shaped by evolutionary forces. Evidence in the recent literature indicates that
status concerns stemming from marriage market competition are also important for other
dimensions of individual consumption and investment decisions. In particular, variation in
sex ratios, which determine the intensity of competition among males and females, appears to
   4
    See Hopcroft (2006), Nettle and Pollet (2008), and Pollet and Nettle (2009), and extensive references
therein.



                                                   7
induce variation in the propensity to invest in human and physical capital. Charles and Luoh
(2010) exploit the diﬀerences in male incarceration rates in the U.S. to identify the eﬀect of
marriage market competition on female schooling and labor supply, while Wei and Zhang
(2011a) and Wei and Zhang (2011b) use variation in gender imbalances (i.e., the relative
number of males to females in the population) across provinces of China to argue that they
result in higher savings, greater investment rates, and more economic growth, consistent with
the predictions of endogenous status models. Du and Wei (2010) and Du and Wei (2011)
use a quantitative model to show that the unbalanced sex ratios in China could also drive
its current account surpluses and real exchange rates. These papers focus on how marriage
market competition induces individuals to increase their future expected wealth due to the
fear of ending up in the lower end of the wealth distribution, and thus being at risk of failing
to obtain a suitable marital match. In contrast, our paper is more concerned with how
individuals, especially those already in the upper tail of the wealth distribution, attempt to
increase the probability of outperforming their peers by assuming more risk. Importantly,
such individuals may take on more idiosyncratic risk even if their expected wealth does not
increase as a result.
    The paper proceeds as follows: Section 1 develops a model of marriage market matching
and risk-taking; Section 2 describes our data; Section 3 presents our results using a direct
measure of marital status; Section 4 introduces an instrument for CEO marital status; and
Section 5 concludes.



1     Model
In this section we present a model of matching in the marriage market and investment in order
to highlight the interaction between matching-induced status concerns and risk-taking. The
model builds on Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite (1992) and Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite
(2001), who show that competition for mates can induce a concern for relative position even
if it does not directly enter individuals’ preferences. In our model, such relative wealth
concerns can lead to a greater tolerance for risk (e.g., Robson (1992), Becker, Murphy, and
Werning (2005)), and especially idiosyncratic risk, as emphasized by Roussanov (2010a).


                                               8
The intuition is that competition for mates is akin to an arms race: insofar as potential
spouses prefer wealthier suitors, what matters for attaining a spouse of a higher “quality” is
how much wealth one has relative to competitors (as long as the notion of spouse quality is
the same for everyone). If attaining a higher quality spouse raises one’s marginal utility of
wealth, then the desire to “get ahead of the Joneses” overcomes risk aversion and leads to
greater risk-taking than if matching concerns were absent.


1.1       Environment

There is a continuum of agents of two types: set M (indexed by i) of males and set F (indexed
by j) of females, each of measure one.5 Each agent derives utility from a market good c and
a non-market good s:
                                          u(c, s) = s log (1 + c)

       Females are endowed with fj units of the non-market good, distributed according to c.d.f.
H on (0, ∞). At the beginning of the period, each male is endowed with W0 > 0 units of a
capital good. This good can be converted into the market good at the end of the period by
investing it in a combination of two linear technologies: riskless storage at rate Rf and agent-
speciﬁc risky investment that earns a stochastic rate of return Ri . The market “wealth” of
each male at the end of the period is then

                                             (                  )
                                     W i = Wo Rf + θi (Ri − Rf ) ,                                         (1)


where θi is the share of initial wealth invested in the risky technology by (male) agent i,
subject to the constraint that W i > 0 (this constraint ensures that c > 0 and, consequently,
utility is always increasing in the non-market good). Risky returns Ri are distributed inde-
pendently and identically across agents with a c.d.f. Φ on A = [Rmin , ∞).6 Let the percentile
rank of male i in the resulting equilibrium distribution of end-of-period wealth be denoted
   5
     We use these labels just for convenience. There is nothing in our model (or in our empirical tests) that
requires the two groups to have biological characteristics of their respective sexes.
   6
     The assumption of independence is not critical; what is important is that the agent-speciﬁc investment
opportunities contain some purely idiosyncratic risk so that they are not perfectly correlated across managers.




                                                      9
G (W i ).7
    A male and a female jointly consume each good, having matched; i.e., if a male i matches
with a female j, each of them receives utility u(W i , fj ) at the end of the period. A sub-
set MM having total measure λM ∈ (0, 1) of males, and a set FM of the same measure of
females, drawn randomly and independently from their respective distributions, are perma-
nently matched at the beginning of the period. This is meant to capture the idea that people
may ﬁnd their marriage partners early in life, before their investment payoﬀs are realized.
Since all males are ex ante identical while the females are not, they are matched randomly.
The remaining subsets MU of males and FU of females enter the matching market at the end
of the period, after W i are realized. The relevant equilibrium concept is a stable matching,
as introduced by Gale and Shapley (1962), which requires that, given a matching, no male
and female would prefer to leave their current matches and pair with each other (see Roth
and Sotomayor (1990) for details). Since utility is increasing in both arguments for both
males and females, and the two goods are complements, the only stable matching is posi-
tively assortative (in W and f , respectively), so that the matched male i and female j have
the same percentile rank in the respective distributions:

                                            ( )
                                           G W i = H (fj ) .


Therefore, the equilibrium allocations depend only on the relative status of the males after the
realization of uncertainty about the investment projects. The equilibrium matching function
produces a pairing
                                                 s i = fj

such that
                                            ( ( ))    ( )
                                   si = H −1 G W i = S W i .

    Thus, at the beginning of the period, each unmatched male solves

                                        [ ( )     (       )]
                                    maxE S W i log 1 + W i ,                                           (2)
                                      θ

  7
    The assumption that only males have access to an investment technology is meant to simplify exposition.
One could instead consider a symmetric setting where both “males” and “females” face the same problem.


                                                    10
where W i is subject to the resource constraint (1) above, and taking the equilibrium status
function S (W i ) as given. Each exogenously matched male solves

                                             [      (       )]
                                         maxE si log 1 + W i ,                             (3)
                                           θ



subject to the same resource constraint (1), where si is the endowment of the female that
the male i was randomly matched with at the beginning of the period.


1.2    Equilibrium

We focus on a symmetric equilibrium: a solution θi to the problem (2) such that θi = θ̄ for
all i ∈ MU . Since the decisions of matched males solving (3) are neither inﬂuenced by nor
have an impact on the decisions of other males, they can be omitted from the description of
the equilibrium: there is an θM such that θi = θM is satisﬁed trivially for all i ∈ MM .
   In the symmetric equilibrium, the status matching given by the equilibrium distribution
of end-of-period wealth is a function of one’s own choice θi and the choice of all other agents
θ̄ (taken by agent i as given). In this symmetric equilibrium, the wealth distribution inherits
the properties of the probability distribution of risky asset returns, since
                                                         (         (      ) )
                               [       ]                     W/Wo − 1 − θ̄ Rf
                    G (W ) = Pr W i ≤ W = Φ                                   .
                                                                   θ̄

   Assume that the status function S (W i ) is continuously diﬀerentiable. Then the ﬁrst-order
condition for the individual investment problem faced by the unmarried male is
                         [         (                                 )]
                              ix       S (W i )      (     i
                                                             ) ′ ( i)
                        E R                     + log 1 + W S W         = 0,
                                       1 + Wi

where Rix = Ri − Rf .
   For those males whose marriage matches are assigned permanently at time 0, there is no
interaction between investment and matching concerns, and therefore si is orthogonal to W i .
Then the ﬁrst-order condition for the problem (3) of a married male is the standard Euler
equation:


                                                    11
                                                 [          ]
                                                 Rix
                                             E       i
                                                                = 0,                                   (4)
                                               1 + WM
       i
where WM is the end-of-period value of the wealth portfolio optimally chosen by agent i ∈ MM
(married at the beginning of the period).
     For the males who are active in the matching market at the end of the period, we can
write (1.2) as
                      [        ( )]
                        S (W i )
                          ix
                                        [ ix     (         i
                                                             ) ′ ( i )]
           0 = E R                  + E  R   log   1 + W       S W
                        1 + Wi
                   (                  )      [         ]
                       Rix       ( i)            Rix          [ ( i )]
             = Cov          , S   W     + E              E     S W
                     1 + Wi                    1 + Wi
                     (        (       )    ( ))          [         (    )] [ ( )]
               +Cov Rix log 1 + W i , S ′ W i + E Rix log 1 + W i E S ′ W i ,


so that

                                            (                )                                        
      [           ]
           R ix
                        1              Cov        Rix
                                                        (W i ) + Cov (Rix log (1 + W i ) , S ′ (W i ))
                                                       ,S
 E              =−                              1+W i                                                 .
          1+W i    E [S (W i )]                            ix          i       ′   i
                                                      +E [R log (1 + W )] E [S (W )]
                                                                                                        (5)
Suppose the status function is linear:


                                               ( )
                                         si = S W i = αW i ,                                           (6)


so that S ′ (W i ) = α is a (positive) constant and Cov (Rix log (1 + W i ) , S ′ (W i )) = 0. Then
(5) implies
  [      ]                 [     (               )                               ]
    Rix            1                 Rix    ( i)      [ ix  (       )] [ ′ ( i )]
E          =−                Cov          ,S W                    i
                                                   + E R log 1 + W E S W           .
  1 + Wi      E [S (W i )]         1 + Wi

     Consequently, for single males this Euler equation implies an inequality
                                                  [         ]
                                                 Rix
                                             E                  <0                                     (7)
                                               1 + WUi

that must satisﬁed by the optimal wealth portfolios WUi for all i ∈ MU (unmarried at the

                                                       12
beginning of period). By comparison with the Euler equation (4), this inequality states that
the expected excess return on the idiosyncratic risky project, risk-adjusted using the stochas-
tic discount factor of a married investor evaluated at the optimal wealth of a single investor,
is negative. That is, the single investor’s optimal portfolio exhibits a higher allocation to the
idiosyncratic asset than that optimally chosen by the married agent. In other word, agents
who are active in the marriage market invest more in the idiosyncratic risky project than
those who are married at the beginning of period.
   What is the mechanism behind this result? If the idiosyncratic project enjoys a high
return, this not only raises the wealth (and therefore consumption) of the agent, but also
increases the equilibrium quality of his match, since the wealth of other agents is unaﬀected,
and so it is easier for him to beat the competition. Thus, S(W i ) increases, which in turn
raises the marginal utility of consumption. Since wealth becomes relatively more valuable in
the high Ri state, this idiosyncratic asset is less risky from the perspective of an agent who
is active in the marriage market than it is from the perspective of an exogenously-matched
agent, who does not care about relative position. If the risky asset realization was common
to all agents, however, this eﬀect would not arise. Since all males are ex ante identical, a
higher return on the common asset does not alter their relative positions and hence has no
impact on status and, consequently, match quality.


1.3    Special cases and extensions

The model prediction above was derived under the simplifying assumption (6), which states
that the reduced form equilibrium status/matching function is linear in male agent’s wealth.
Under what conditions is the status function linear? The following simple examples provide
suﬃcient conditions:

  1. female good is distributed uniformly on [fmin , fmax ] and the equilibrium distribution of
      wealth is uniform (which is the case if Rix is uniformly distributed on [Rmin , Rmax ]);

  2. the distribution of the female non-market good coincides with the equilibrium distri-
      bution of male wealth, H (x) = G (x) for all x; this situation is relevant also if the



                                               13
     problem is completely symmetric, i.e. the females face an investment problem identical
     to that faced by the males.

   What if S is not linear? Then the sign of Cov (Rix log (1 + W i ) , G′ (W i )) is ambiguous
and depends on the shape of the status/matching function S, which, in turn, depends on the
equilibrium distribution of wealth G. In particular, if S is convex, the latter covariance is
negative and the same conclusion as above holds. However, if S is concave, the conclusion is
ambiguous and potentially depends on the speciﬁc parameterization of the model.
   The feature of the model that yields the prediction of greater risk-taking by single man-
agers under a broad set of conditions is the complementarity between the male and the female
good (i.e., the fact that ucs > 0). This feature is intuitive: a higher quality spouse raises
one’s own marginal utility of consumption. For example, a spouse with a higher level of
“sophistication” may inﬂuence one’s tastes in a direction that demands purchase of more
expensive consumption goods.
   The complementarity assumption is not crucial. For example, Cole, Mailath, and Postle-
waite (2001) consider a setting in which utility is separable in the market and non-market
good, and show that if the status/matching payoﬀ is convex in market wealth, the same
result as here obtains (agents take more idiosyncratic risk than in the absence of matching).
However, if utility is suﬃciently concave over the non-market good, the opposite prediction
obtains - the agents “herd” towards common projects (Roussanov (2010b) describes in detail
the conditions under which these predictions hold).
   A model can be easily generalized to accommodate other margins that have an eﬀect on
wealth accumulation, such as a choice of eﬀort vs. leisure or intertemporal consumption-
saving decisions. Since the status payoﬀ that comes from the marriage market competition
provides an additional beneﬁt of wealth, the key prediction of the model carries over under
fairly general conditions: unmarried individuals invest more than married ones. This is
because the relative position concerns induced by matching are a form of an arms race:
single individuals competing for mates are lead to accumulate more resources than they
would for consumption purposes alone. However, unlike other models of relative wealth
concerns based on marriage market interactions, such as Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite
(1992) and Wei and Zhang (2011a), our emphasis is not on pure wealth accumulation, but

                                             14
rather on the risk-taking that leads to extreme outcomes and increased wealth dispersion.
While CEOs do not necessarily compete with one another for mates, they do not compete
with an average person. Rather, they likely compete with other wealthy and highly visible
individuals, such as top entrepreneurs, entertainers, and asset managers, who dominate the
highest wealth percentiles (Kaplan and Rauh (2010)). Indeed, our model emphasizes that
that the payoﬀ to the relative position is the highest in the right tail of the distribution (due
to the complementarity between wealth and spouse quality), leading to increased risk-taking.


1.4    Discussion of Implications

We show that under a set of plausible conditions individuals who expect to compete in the
market for mates exhibit greater risk-taking than those who do not, including those who are
already matched. We aim to test this prediction of the model by analyzing diﬀerences in
risk-taking between single and married managers. The intuition is that for single individu-
als marriage market competition is more acute than for those already married (even if the
matches are not expected to be permanent, as long as divorce and re-matching are costly).
The model is deliberately simple in that it compares people who make investment deci-
sions before competing in the marriage market to those who invest after being exogenously
matched. The way to interpret this assumption is that the probability of being married at a
given point in time depends on luck (e.g., in meeting a suitable partner) as well as relative
wealth.



2     Data

2.1    CEO Characteristics

We collect the names, biographical information, and compensation of all CEOs covered by
ExecuComp in the 1993-2008 period. We then research their marital and family status using
a variety of public sources, such as the Marquis Who’s Is Who in Finance and Industry,
the SEC insider ﬁlings, and various media mentions. The ultimate goal of this eﬀort is to
establish whether a particular CEO was married or single during his tenure. Unfortunately,


                                               15
we can obtain the actual marriage dates only for a small minority of CEOs, which means
that for the bulk of our sample we have to rely on an indirect approach. More speciﬁcally, for
those CEOs for whom we can ﬁnd no dates, we start with the assumption that they are single,
and then change their status if we ﬁnd information indicating the opposite.8 Any CEO who
is ever mentioned as being married but the exact dates of marriage are not available is coded
as married throughout his or her tenure. This means that some CEOs who were divorced or
whose spouses were deceased will be wrongly counted as married. However, there also exists
an oﬀsetting bias. Since we require evidence to classify a CEO as married, those CEOs who
are not prominent enough to warrant mention in our sources (or those who are very private
with regards to their personal information) will appear in the data as single even if they are
actually married. While we perform a comprehensive search for all CEOs, it is inevitable
that we miss some. Furthermore, some CEOs may be involved in marriage-like relationships
but not formally married, and their status for our purposes should be classiﬁed as married
but will not be.
       The net eﬀect of these biases cannot be determined with much certainty, but we are
hopeful our data is not too unrepresentative. Table 1 shows that in terms of CEO-year
observations married CEOs account for 84% of our sample. If we just consider each individual
CEO, single ones make up 20% of our sample. According to the U.S. Census data, 70% of
men in the 35-59 age range were married in 2000. This group represents most of the CEOs in
our sample, so it would appear that we overestimate the number of currently married CEOs.9
But CEOs are also much wealthier than typical Americans, and wealth may be positively
correlated with the probability of being married.
       In order to conﬁrm that the proportion of single CEOs in our data is reasonable, we use
data from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) for the year 2001, which is roughly in
the middle of our sample period. The SCF oversamples wealthy households, and therefore is
more likely than the Census to accurately capture the demographic to which the CEOs in our
   8
      Our information sources report that a CEO is married reasonably frequently, but almost never directly
report that one is single, so that we cannot start with the assumption that a CEO is married unless we ﬁnd
evidence to the contrary.
    9
      At the same time, we may be underestimating the proportion of CEOs who were married at any point
in time (though not necessarily during their tenure). In the Census data, of the men falling in the 1950-1954
birth cohort, 89% had been married at some point before reaching the age of 50.



                                                     16
sample belong. It also does not apply systematic top-coding to income and wealth variables,
unlike most other commonly used survey datasets, and therefore provides reliable evidence
on the ﬁnancial position of the wealthiest households (see Kennickell and Lane (2006)).10 We
estimate a logistic regression predicting that the head of household in the SCF is single using
the following speciﬁcation:
                           (                                                  )
                                                                         Age2
            Pr (Single) = Φ α + β × W ealth + γ × Income + δ × Age + ζ ×        ,                       (8)
                                                                         100

where Single is a dummy variable that equals one if the head is unmarried, Age is the head’s
age, Income is the annual household income, and W ealth is a measure of household wealth.
We use two wealth measures: one is the total household net worth (total assets minus total
liabilities), and the other is the value of holdings concentrated in the single largest risky asset.
The latter wealth variable (see Roussanov (2010b) for details on its construction) is meant
to mimic our proxy for CEO wealth, which is based on holdings of own-company stock and
options. We do not use SCF population weights, which are supposed to address the issue of
oversampling of wealthy households, as we are interested in capturing the relation precisely
for such households rather than the U.S. population as a whole.
       Table 2 presents the regression results, together with the implied probability of being
single computed for the median CEO in our sample. This probability is calculated based on
the median CEO wealth of $13.8 million, median annual CEO compensation of $2.2 million,
and median CEO age of 55 years. The implied probabilities for various speciﬁcations fall in
the 11 to 20% range, which is not too far from the proportion of CEOs we classify as single
in our sample. Consequently, we conclude that our measure of marital status is reasonably
accurate, at least in the sense that we do not greatly overestimate or underestimate the
number of unmarried CEOs.
       While there is a number of CEOs who are divorced in our sample, we do not explicitly
consider divorced CEOs ‘single’, as it is not obvious from the perspective of our model that
we should. Divorce is not an exogenous shock that simply changes an individual’s marital
  10
     The SCF does explicitly drop all households/individuals listed in the Forbes 400 list of the wealthiest
people. Since this list covers only a subset of the CEOs in our sample, the overlap between the two groups
is likely suﬃciently large to make reliable inferences.



                                                    17
status. It is actually a result of a decision by one (or both) spouses that takes into account the
value of re-entering the marriage market. In particular, the CEO’s decision prior to divorce
may take into account the matching considerations arising from a potential re-marriage. For
example, if a CEO’s wealth has increased enough since marriage, the prospect of improving
the marital match may increase risk-taking prior (and potentially leading) to divorce. On
the other hand, even if divorce is costly, if a CEO’s wealth falls enough, the spouse may
prefer to terminate the marriage and seek a better match in the re-marriage market, which
will reduce the CEO’s risk tolerance after marrying.
       If we wrongly characterized marital status of some CEOs, this would not constitute a
problem for our analysis, as long as this eﬀect was uncorrelated with anything else. The
problem is that this may not be true for CEOs who are married, with no public information
documenting their status. Such CEOs are likely to be less prominent than their peers and
could potentially be associated with younger, riskier ﬁrms. This eﬀect may explain risk-taking
attitudes of managers we classify as ‘single’, without any actual eﬀect of marital status. For
example, Malmendier and Tate (2009) ﬁnd that “superstar” CEOs exhibit diﬀerent behaviors
than their less prominent counterparts. This may represent a serious problem for our analysis,
which we address in several ways.11
       First, in our regressions we use as controls observable measures that are likely to be
correlated with both the degree of prominence of a company and its riskiness, such as ﬁrm
size, market-to-book ratio, and age. Second, we explicitly control for the eﬀect of prominence
on our classiﬁcation of CEOs as married or single by constructing measures of frequency of
CEO and company media mentions. Speciﬁcally, we use Factiva Dow Jones database to
count the number of news stories mentioning the CEO and/or the company associated with
each of the observations during our sample period. We use these measures to control for the
eﬀect of prominence on risk-taking in our analysis. While these controls do appear to capture
some variation in ﬁrm risk, their inclusion does not aﬀect our results.
  11
    Such “superstar status” itself could be viewed as a type of status payoﬀ that could induce risk-taking.
Shemesh (2010) presents some evidence that achieving this status leads CEOs to reduce subsequent risk-
taking.




                                                    18
2.2       Other Control Variables

We augment our CEO data set with data from COMPUSTAT and CRSP, which we use to
construct measures of corporate risk-taking and the necessary control variables. The various
variables we use are deﬁned below (all numbers except ratios are in millions).12
       Total investment (Investment) is capital expenditures (CapEx) plus acquisitions minus
asset sales (N et Acquisitions) plus R&D expenditure (R&D) plus advertising expenditure
(Advert.), scaled by net property, plant & equipment (P P &E). This is a more comprehensive
measure than used in most of the literature, but we believe R&D and advertising expenditures
should be counted as investment for our purposes, as they do reﬂect a ﬁrm’s risk-taking
(Guay (1999) uses R&D expenditure as a proxy for CEO risk-taking). We also consider
the individual components of investment separately (scaled by P P &E). Total volatility is
computed as the annualized volatility of a ﬁrm’s monthly stock returns over the previous
year. Idiosyncratic volatility is calculated as the annual volatility of the residuals of the
ﬁrm’s stock returns regressed on the CRSP value-weighted stock market portfolio return.
       Firm size (log A) is the log of its total assets. Book equity (BE) equals stockholders’
equity; if that item is missing in COMPUSTAT, then it is common equity plus preferred
equity; and if those items are unavailable as well, then it is total assets minus total liabilities.
Market-to-book ratio (M/B) is the ratio of the market value of assets relative to their book
value, where the market value of assets is the total value of assets minus book value of equity
plus market value of equity. Cash ﬂow (CF ) equals earnings before extraordinary items plus
depreciation & amortization, scaled by net P P &E. Book leverage (Leverage) equals the
sum of long-term and current debt divided by the sum of long-term debt, current debt, and
book equity. Firm age is computed with respect to the ﬁrst year it appears in COMPUSTAT.
All ﬁrm-related variables (except size and book equity) are winsorized at the 1% and 99%
levels.
       We also use information available in ExecuComp on the relevant characteristics of man-
agers. CEO wealth (log wealth) is the log of CEO’s total holdings of own company stock and
options, which we use as a proxy for total CEO wealth. Age and T enure are the CEO’s age
  12
    We include in our sample all ﬁrms for which we have the necessary data. Our results continue to hold if
we exclude ﬁnancial ﬁrms.



                                                    19
and his tenure with the ﬁrm, as of the current year. The Factiva-based measures of CEO
and ﬁrm prominence are each deﬁned as the logarithm of the total number of their media
mentions during our sample period. For CEOs, we only count news stories that are explicitly
related to the ﬁrm they run, in order to avoid greatly exaggerating the prominence of CEOs
with common names.



3     CEO Marital Status and Risk-Taking

3.1    Overview

Table 1 presents the main summary statistics for our data, grouping ﬁrms based on the
marital status of their CEOs. It conﬁrms that our classiﬁcation produces intuitive results:
married CEOs are on average somewhat older and, consistent with the theory that relates
marital market competition with wealth, richer (insofar as we can proxy their wealth with the
value of their holdings of the company’s stock and options). This ﬁrst look at the data also
supports our main hypothesis: ﬁrms managed by CEOs whom we classify as single display
markedly diﬀerent characteristics. Such ﬁrms have higher investment and experience greater
return volatility, both of which measures should be related to the amount of risk associated
with a ﬁrm. The diﬀerences are highly signiﬁcant, both economically and statistically. Return
volatility of single CEO ﬁrms is 24% higher, and a t-test for the diﬀerence produces a t-
statistic of about 14 (untabulated). Investment is 69% higher for such ﬁrms relative to those
run by married CEOs, with a t-statistic of 13 for the diﬀerence.
    These diﬀerences appear to be quite dramatic, but single CEO-run ﬁrms are also on
average smaller, younger, and potentially faster-growing, as indicated by their higher market-
to-book ratios. Since both small and growth ﬁrms tend to invest more and have more volatile
returns, it is important to control for these characteristics. We therefore run a variety of
regression speciﬁcations with investment and return volatility as independent variables:


           RiskT aking = α + β × Single + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × (Single × Ỹ ),              (9)


where RiskT aking is our measure of risk-taking, Single is a dummy variable equaling one if


                                             20
the CEO is unmarried and zero otherwise, X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics, and Y is a set of
CEO characteristics (the speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions are given above), and Ỹ are the same
characteristics that have been demeaned. All our regressions also include industry (based on
the Fama-French 49-industry classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects. We compute t-statistics
using clustered standard errors (by ﬁrm).


3.2     Single CEOs Run Riskier Firms: Examining Return Volatility

Tables 3 and 4 present regression results for the total (annualized) volatility of ﬁrm stock
returns and for the idiosyncratic component of volatility, respectively. The coeﬃcient of most
interest is the dummy variable Single.
   Do ﬁrms led by single CEOs experience greater return volatility, controlling for ﬁrm
characteristics? Results reported in Table 3 show that ﬁrms run by single CEOs do exhibit
more volatile returns. This diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant (t-stat=2.3 in columns 4
and 5, which feature the most comprehensive sets of control variables) and economically
meaningful, with the coeﬃcient magnitude suggesting about a 3% diﬀerence.13 In column
1, we control for various ﬁrm characteristics that may be related to stock return volatility.
Importantly, all these ﬁrm-level control variables have the expected eﬀect: ﬁrms with low
cash ﬂows, ﬁrms with high market-to-book ratios, small ﬁrms, ﬁrms with high leverage, and
young ﬁrms have more volatile stock returns.
   Since married and single CEOs also have diﬀerent personal characteristics, in column 2
we add controls for CEO characteristics, such as age and tenure, and the interactions between
those characteristics and the single status dummy variable (characteristics variables in the
interaction terms are always demeaned). Both age and tenure are signiﬁcantly negatively
related to ﬁrm risk. Older CEOs tend to be more conservative, which is also consistent with
the relevance of positional concerns declining with age, since the value of marriage is likely
to decline if there are fewer years over which one can enjoy its beneﬁts.14 Furthermore,
people who remain single at an older age are more likely to be those who do not value the
  13
     Computed as 0.012 (Single coeﬃcient magnitude) divided by 0.370 (mean return volatility for ﬁrms run
by married CEOs).
  14
     Levi, Li, and Zhang (2010) document more aggressive deal-making behavior among younger CEOs, and
argue that it is driven by their higher testosterone levels.


                                                   21
beneﬁts of marriage highly, and therefore for whom matching concerns are less relevant. Such
considerations imply that we need to control for these CEO characteristics, as they are also
correlated with the probability of being married. For example, older CEOs may invest more
cautiously and are more likely to be married, which would confound the eﬀect of marital
status if appropriate controls are not included.
       Introducing manager age and tenure in column 2 reduces the coeﬃcient on Single from
0.012 to 0.008 and the t-statistic from 2.64 to 1.76 relative to the speciﬁcation in column 1,
which only includes ﬁrm-level controls. This is due to the fact that both CEO age and CEO
tenure have a negative eﬀect on volatility.
       In column 3, we add our controls for CEO and ﬁrm prominence. The coeﬃcient on CEO
prominence is large and signiﬁcant (t-stat=3.12), which is consistent with previous work
(e.g., Malmendier and Tate (2009)). Our main ﬁnding that single CEOs invest more remains
unaltered. In fact, it turns out that the eﬀect of prominence, if anything, works against us,
since it is the CEOs of riskier ﬁrms who appear to have higher rates of media mentions,
and are therefore less likely to be mistakenly classiﬁed as single. Consequently, the Single
coeﬃcient actually becomes larger, with a higher statistical signiﬁcance (t-statistics are above
2 in all of the speciﬁcations where this control variable is included).
       Our model predicts that the relative wealth concerns induced by marriage market compe-
tition make single managers less averse to idiosyncratic risk, since common shocks that aﬀect
everyone equally do not change relative ranking. Indeed, our empirical ﬁndings hold – and
are actually stronger – for idiosyncratic volatility, consistent with the model’s predictions.
These ﬁndings are presented in Table 4. In fact, all of the eﬀect of marital status on volatil-
ity is driven by idiosyncratic volatility.15 Alternative mechanisms generating diﬀerences in
risk aversion between single and married CEOs, such as life-cycle changes in consumption
commitments and preference aggregation within a family, are unlikely to drive our ﬁndings,
unless managers are able to perfectly hedge all of the aggregate risk exposure inherent in
their compensation.
       In columns 4 and 5 of Tables 3 and 4, we add as a control institutional holdings of company
  15
   Unreported regression results for total volatility controlling for its idiosyncratic component are available
upon request.



                                                      22
stock, obtained from Thomson Reuters database of 13f ﬁlings. We use institutional holdings
as a proxy for the quality of a ﬁrm’s corporate governance, under the assumption that ﬁrms
with higher institutional ownership will be more responsive to shareholders. We introduce
this variable to test whether greater shareholder control attenuates the eﬀect of marital
status, perhaps by making it harder for single CEOs to undertake overly risky investments.
Firms with greater institutional ownership are indeed less risky (the coeﬃcient is negative and
statistically signiﬁcant). Moreover, the interaction with the Single variable is negative and
statistically signiﬁcant, indicating that better governed ﬁrms may moderate the tendency of
single managers to increase risk. This eﬀect is particularly strong for idiosyncratic volatility,
albeit it is slightly weaker in speciﬁcations listed in column 5 of each table that features
joint industry × year ﬁxed eﬀects (rather than the separate industry and year ﬁxed eﬀects
employed elsewhere).
   Controlling for ﬁrm characteristics helps isolate the potential eﬀect of manager’s pref-
erences on ﬁrm performance, but it understates the explanatory power of our model with
respect to the managers’ individual behavior. In particular, insofar as potential managers
choose to work for ﬁrms that match their risk preferences, single managers are likely to choose
to work for companies exhibiting greater exposure to (idiosyncratic) risk than married man-
agers. When we exclude controls for ﬁrm characteristics (column 6), the results become much
stronger: return volatility of ﬁrms run by single CEOs is 16% higher, and the t-statistic for
the diﬀerence is 7.83. This is not surprising from the perspective of our model, as single CEOs
are more likely to be matched with riskier ﬁrms if they are less averse to (idiosyncratic) risk.
But they also undertake more risks even when we control for this tendency (as results in
columns 1-5 show).


3.3    Where Does Risk Come From: Evidence on Firm Investment

What drives diﬀerences in riskiness between ﬁrms run by single and married CEOs? Our
hypothesis implies that besides opting to work for inherently riskier ﬁrms, single CEOs may
steer their companies towards projects with greater idiosyncratic risk, as well as generally
pursue more aggressive investment policies. In order to test this prediction we examine the
eﬀect of marital status on investment. Tables 5, 6, and 7 present regression results for vari-

                                               23
ous forms of ﬁrm investment (total investment, net acquisitions, and R&D plus advertising
expenditure, respectively).
       Column 1 of Table 5 shows that the Single coeﬃcient is positive and statistically signiﬁ-
cant (t-stat=2.35). Its magnitude suggests an economically very meaningful eﬀect of marital
status: single CEOs invest 0.09 more than their married counterparts (relative to the sample
mean of 1.00). In this speciﬁcation, we control just for diﬀerent ﬁrm characteristics that are
known to be correlated with investment. The coeﬃcients on these controls are all the same
as documented in previous work. Firms with high cash ﬂows, growth ﬁrms, small ﬁrms, and
ﬁrms with high past investment tend to invest more.16 These are well-known correlations,
and the fact they hold in our sample reassures us that it similar to those used in other studies.
       The inclusion of CEO age and tenure reduces the Single coeﬃcient somewhat, but it
remains statistically signiﬁcant (t-stat=1.71). And its magnitude still indicates a large eﬀect:
a ﬁrm with a single 45-year old CEO with a tenure of ﬁve years will have investment that
is on average 0.26 higher than that of the same ﬁrm with a married CEO, while the sample
mean for ﬁrms with married CEOs is 0.90. In other words, investment of such ﬁrms is 29%
higher, which is a very substantial economic diﬀerence.
       Interestingly, the interaction coeﬃcient between Single and Age is negative, which means
that the impact of marital status on investment is less important for older CEOs. This is
consistent with the basic motivation underlying our study. If single CEOs indeed choose to
invest more because they are less risk-averse due to their competing in the marriage market,
we would expect this tendency to be less pronounced for older CEOs, as presumably the
beneﬁts of a prospective future marriage are lower later in one’s life. Further, given some
underlying heterogeneity in the individual desire to get married, as more people are likely
to be married in older age groups, those who remain single are likely to be those who are
less interested in marriage and therefore for whom the matching-induced status motive is
inoperative.
       Moreover, this negative interaction between the eﬀects of age and marital status also sug-
gests that the driving force behind our results may not be purely a selection eﬀect, whereby
  16
    Our results do not change if we use investment during the previous CEO’s tenure as a control instead of
lagged investment.



                                                    24
CEOs who prefer to stay single are fundamentally diﬀerent (e.g., in terms of their risk atti-
tudes) from those who marry. If that were the case, then the eﬀect of marital status would
be less likely to decrease with age. In fact, it would likely increase, as at older ages the single
group would be predominantly populated by people with particularly strong “aversion” to
marriage.
      Our results do not change if we add controls for ﬁrm region, or if we use a diﬀerent industry
classiﬁcation scheme.17 They also are stronger if we focus just on R&D and advertising
expenditures (Table 7), which arguably capture ﬁrm risk-taking more accurately, as they are
commonly perceived as representing especially risky activities. The results are somewhat
weaker for Net Acquisitions (Table 6), likely due to the fact that a lot of smaller ﬁrms do not
make any acquisitions, but even there the eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant in a speciﬁcation
with the most comprehensive set of controls (including industry × year ﬁxed eﬀects) in
column 5.
      Does institutional ownership mitigate the aggressive investment policy of single CEOs?
The institutional holdings coeﬃcient is positive and signiﬁcant for total investment and
acquisitions (and essentially zero for R&D and advertising). However, the coeﬃcient on
the interaction term between holdings and Single is not signiﬁcant, and our ﬁndings on the
eﬀect of Single on investment remain the same as before once these controls are included,
(and are even boosted by the inclusion of industry × year ﬁxed eﬀects in column 5).
      As mentioned before, we are not taking a stand in this paper on whether CEOs alter ﬁrm
decisions to meet their own objectives or are just matched to ﬁrms along all their relevant
characteristics. In order to explore how much of a role CEO-ﬁrm matching plays, in the
last column we omit any ﬁrm characteristics from our regressions. Consequently, we are
comparing single and married CEOs just controlling for their personal characteristics. Under
that speciﬁcation, the Single coeﬃcient for Total Investment grows dramatically to 0.45 (from
0.09), with a t-statistic of 5.23, and even the coeﬃcient for Net Acquisitions is statistically
signiﬁcant with a t-statistic of 2.59 (Table 6). Similarly to the return volatility results in
the previous section, these ﬁndings suggest that riskier ﬁrms are strongly associated with
single CEOs, perhaps because these CEOs are more willing to accept risks. However, even
 17
      Those results are available upon request.



                                                  25
if we control for this selection eﬀect (in columns 1-5), single CEOs still assume greater risks
than married ones. Results in column 5 are probably the most conservative estimate of the
diﬀerence between married and single CEOs, to the extent that our (potentially imperfect)
controls capture all of the relevant ﬁrm characteristics, whereas those in column 6 represent
the most aggressive estimate.
   It is not surprising that ﬁrms that invest more are also riskier. Unfortunately, we do not
have enough observations of CEO marital status changes (or changes between married and
single CEOs) to establish whether ﬁrm risk and investment also change when they occur.
However, we can exploit the impact of within-ﬁrm variation in risk on investment to explore
futher the role of CEO marital status. Panousi and Papanikolaou (2012) ﬁnd that an increase
in idiosyncratic volatility decreases corporate investment, which is consistent with the eﬀect
of managerial risk aversion, since CEOs cannot hedge purely idiosyncratic (ﬁrm-speciﬁc)
risk. Our model predicts that single CEOs have higher tolerance for idiosyncratic risk. As a
consequence, we should expect to see a much weaker eﬀect of lagged idiosyncratic volatility
of the ﬁrm’s stock returns on investment among ﬁrms whose heads are single. To test this
hypothesis, we estimate the following regression speciﬁcation:


  Investmentt = α + β × Single + γ × IdV olt−1 + δ × (Single × IdV ˜olt−1 ) + ζ × X,        (10)


where IdV olt−1 is lagged idiosyncratic volatility of the ﬁrm’s stock returns and X is a set of
ﬁrm and CEO characteristics used as controls. Importantly, the latter includes ﬁrm as well
as year ﬁxed eﬀects, as we are interested in within-ﬁrm eﬀect of risk on investment. Results
are reported in Table 8. Consistent with the evidence in Panousi and Papanikolaou (2012),
we document a robustly negative and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of IdV olt−1 on total ﬁrm
investment, with coeﬃcients of -0.175 without any controls other than ﬁxed eﬀects and around
-0.330 when various combinations of controls are added, and t-statistics ranging between -3
and -6. Furthermore, while there is no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of Single itself on within-
ﬁrm variation in investment, there is a strongly positive eﬀect of the interaction between
Single and the idiosyncratic volatility measure on investment. This eﬀect is essentially of
the same magnitude as the eﬀect of volatility itself, with coeﬃcients ranging between 0.216


                                               26
and 0.319 and t-statistics between 2.2 and 3.3. Therefore, for ﬁrms run by single CEOs, the
total eﬀect of these coeﬃcients is eﬀectively zero, implying that single managers are much
less aﬀected by changes in idiosyncratic risk than married ones, which is consistent with the
predictions of our model. While married CEOs strongly decrease investment in response to
increases in idiosyncratic volatility, single ones do not alter their investment patterns. As in
our previous tests, single managers are much less averse to idiosyncratic risk.


3.4       Discussion

Our results support the hypothesis that single CEOs assume more idiosyncratic risk than
married ones. This is consistent with our model of CEO status-seeking that is motivated by
the desire to ﬁnd a suitable marriage partner and the resulting competition in the marriage
market.
       Of course, it is possible that single managers exhibit diﬀerent risk-taking behavior from
married managers even absent status concerns. People who are single at a given age may
be inherently more risk-tolerant than those who are married by the same age. It would
be possible to distinguish this scenario from our theory by exploiting changes in managers’
marital status over time. Unfortunately, this would require a signiﬁcant number of CEOs
to experience marital status changes during their tenure, and for us to be able to document
such a transition. Moreover, we would need to have precise dates of these marital transitions,
which are diﬃcult to obtain.18 Thus, we cannot convincingly distinguish our hypothesis from
the alternative one that single and married CEOs are simply diﬀerent using within-manager
variation. Instead, in order to rule out the hypothesis of innate heterogeneity, we employ an
instrumental variables approach described in the following section.
       Another possibility is that marriage changes the utility of wealth by introducing spousal
preferences into the CEO’s objective function. For example, a CEO who has to support
a spouse and children may have a higher required level of consumption expenditure and
therefore income. This would make married CEOs eﬀectively more risk-averse than single
ones for reasons that have nothing to do with status. However, it seems likely that most, if
  18
    We are able to ﬁnd 76 CEOs in our sample who became married during their tenure, but for many of
those the marital status change occurred right after they became CEO or shortly before them stepping down
(thus not allowing a proper comparison of managerial decisions before and after marriage).


                                                   27
not all, CEOs are wealthy enough for such concerns to be of second-order importance. At
the same time, the impact of status concerns should be particularly pronounced in the upper
tail of the wealth distribution.
    It is also worth pointing out that both the innate heterogeneity and intra-family prefer-
ence aggregation theories, at least in their simplest forms, do not predict that single CEOs
will assume more idiosyncratic (rather than systematic) risk. In contrast, status concerns
imply that it is exactly idiosyncratic risk that is of interest to single CEOs, as it aﬀects the
probability of outperforming their peers. In unreported results, we ﬁnd evidence of portfo-
lio under-diversiﬁcation at the household level using the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances,
where single individuals have a greater share of their wealth invested in an average individual
stock than married couples, while there is less evidence of great risk taking as such. This
result also suggests that the eﬀect of marital status on risk attitudes is not simply driven by
pure diﬀerences in risk aversion, either inherent or induced by life-cycle considerations (such
as consumption commitments), and is more likely to be driven by relative wealth concerns
due to competition in the marriage market.



4     Instrumental Variables Approach: Divorce Costs

4.1    Community Property vs. Equitable Division

While some of the variation in CEOs’ marital status is likely driven by their luck in ﬁnding
a suitable marriage partner, some variation is likely due to the perceived costs of getting
married. In particular, a nontrivial fraction of marriages, including those of CEOs, end
in divorce. Since divorce is costly, this possibility should have an eﬀect on an individual’s
propensity to enter into a marriage in the ﬁrst place. For a wealthy person, a major concern
is the division of property upon dissolution of a marriage. In the U.S., the division of marital
assets upon divorce is regulated at the state level. Consequently, we can exploit the variation
in the divorce laws across states of CEOs’ residences, as it is plausibly exogenous both to the
match between a ﬁrm and a CEO and to the ﬁrms’ investment policies.
    The most salient aspect of heterogeneity in the laws guiding the division of marital prop-
erty is the distinction between community property and equitable division. The former man-

                                              28
dates equal division of all assets acquired during marriage between the two spouses upon
divorce, whereas the latter follows the common law practice allowing the division to be de-
termined by a judge based on a range of factors, including the relative contributions of the
spouses. It is commonly understood that community property is more advantageous for
the poorer spouse (see Voena (2011)). Since CEOs are typically substantially wealthier than
their spouses, equal division of assets mandated by community property laws makes marriage
costlier for them (insofar as there is a positive probability of its dissolution).
       There are nine states in the U.S. that have adopted the community property system:
Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and Wis-
consin.19 While community property legislation was adopted by these states at diﬀerent
points in time, it was in place in all of them throughout the period covered by our sample.
Thus, there is little concern that political economy considerations could create an endogeneity
problem, since it is highly unlikely that the passage of laws regulating divorce is systemat-
ically related to ﬁrms’ investment opportunities and risk decades later. It is interesting to
note that the use of the community property standard is not obviously related to (current)
state characteristics. It is present in both rich and poor states, in large and small ones, as
well as those whose populations’ political preferences tend to be either predominantly liberal
or predominantly conservative.
       Although we do not directly observe the state of CEO residence, we can use the state in
which the ﬁrm is headquartered as a reasonably good proxy for which type of jurisdiction is
more relevant for the CEO.20 While the number of community property jurisdictions is small,
it includes some of the most populous states in the U.S., and thus represents approximately
36% of our sample of CEOs.
       A potential issue is that prospective CEOs who are married may choose to reside in certain
states because their divorce laws are more friendly to wealthy individuals. The market for
CEOs in states where divorce is more costly would then have a relatively greater supply
of potential CEOs who are single. If these CEOs are also more innately risk-tolerant on
  19
     Puerto Rico is also a community property jurisdiction.
  20
     Although a number of CEOs of companies headquartered in New York City reside in Connecticut or New
Jersey, both of these are also equitable distribution states, and so there is no error due to misclassiﬁcation
for these CEOs.



                                                     29
average, this could represent a problem for our instrument. However, given that the labor
market for CEOs of public companies is likely nation-wide, this would require divorce laws
to be a signiﬁcant factor in determining where potential CEOs seek employment, which we
believe is not plausible. What our instrument relies on is the assumption that a state’s legal
regime can inﬂuence a single CEO’s decision whether to get married at a given point in time.
More speciﬁcally, a CEO who is currently single and resides in a community property state
is more likely to postpone marriage, holding all else equal.
       Prenuptial agreements may limit the extent to which community property statutes im-
pose a cost on wealthy individuals who marry less wealthy spouses. However, even among
the wealthy their adoption is by no means universal. Moreover, enforcement of premarital
agreement by the courts may not have been uniform over our sample period.21 To the extent
that such agreements decrease the impact of state laws on the cost of divorce, and therefore
on the probability of a single CEO getting married, this would only attenuate our ﬁrst-stage
estimates of the eﬀect of community property states on CEO marital status, and consequently
weaken the statistical power of the instrument in the second stage. Mismeasurement of the
relevant jurisdiction would have a similar eﬀect, weakening our results.
       As a way of validating our instrumental variable approach externally to address some of
these concerns, we analyze data from the entire U.S. population collected by the U.S. Census
Bureau. The idea behind our instrument is that wealthier individuals are deterred from mar-
riage (i.e., are more likely to be single, ceteris paribus), if they reside in a community property
state. Thus, we test whether an additional interaction between measures of wealth/income
and community property residence is positive, using the data from the 2000 U.S. Census 5%
sample from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS). Census does not collect
data on wealth, therefore we can only use data on personal income of the head of household.
Since current income is a noisy measure of lifetime income, especially for younger people, we
also use data on occupation of the head of household in order to identify individuals who
are likely to accumulate substantial wealth over time. In particular, we identify individuals
with occupation codes “Lawyers” and “Surgeons and physicians.” Finally, as an additional
  21
    A recent example of a prenuptial agreement not upheld by the legal system in a community prop-
erty jurisdiction is the high-proﬁle divorce between Frank and Jamie McCourt (http://www.avvo.com/legal-
guides/ugc/judge-tosses-out-prenup-dodgers-ownership-still-undecided).


                                                  30
measure that is closest to our focus on corporate CEOs, we separately identify individuals
with occupation code “Chief executives.”22 We use two measures of single marital status: a
narrow measure that includes only people reporting to have never been married, and a broad
measure that includes those who never married as well as those who report their current mar-
ital status as either divorced or widowed. All of the regressions controlling for a quadratic in
age to capture life-cycle eﬀects.
   Table 9 presents the results of these tests. The general regression speciﬁcation is

                                                    Age2              g            g
Single = α+β ×Comm+γ ×Income+δ ×Age+ζ ×                  +η ×Occ+χ× Income×Comm+κ× Occ×Comm,
                                                    100
                                                                                         (11)

where Comm is the dummy variable equal to one if the household’s state of residence is a
community property state. Single is a dummy variable equal to one if the head of household
has never been married (speciﬁcation 1) or has never been married, is divorced, or is widowed
(speciﬁcations 2-4). Income is in millions. Occ is a dummy variable for whether the head of
household is either a lawyer or a surgeon/physician by occupation (speciﬁcation 3) or a chief
                                                       g and Occ
executive (speciﬁcation 4). The interacted variables Income  g are demeaned using

population weights. Consistent with our results using SCF data in Table 2, higher income
individuals are less likely to be single, as are older individuals (albeit the eﬀect of age is
nonlinear).
       In accordance with our hypothesis that higher-income individuals are less likely to be mar-
ried if they reside in a community property jurisdiction, the interaction of income with the
community property dummy is positive and highly statistically signiﬁcant (with t-statistics
around 10), regardless of which deﬁnition of single status is used. This occurs despite the
fact that the eﬀect of community property itself is actually negative (and signiﬁcant, with
t-statistics between 4 and 6). The eﬀect of the community property regime on marriage rates
in the general population can depend on a number of factors, such as the diﬀerence in income
distribution or religious composition between the equitable distribution and community prop-
erty states. However, this does not have an eﬀect on the validity of our instrument. What
matters is whether community property standard has a diﬀerential impact on the decisions
  22
    This category is likely to include CEOs of privately held ﬁrms as well as, potentially, heads of nonproﬁt
organizations. The number of public-company CEOs in this sample is likely to be small, given the small
number of publicly listed companies relative to the total number of ﬁrms in the U.S.


                                                     31
of wealthy individuals, and whether it makes it less likely for such individuals to get married.
   Similarly to the results above, the interaction of a dummy for high-income occupations
(doctors and lawyers) with the community property dummy is also positive and statistically
signiﬁcant (speciﬁcation 3). The interaction of a CEO dummy with the community property
dummy is also positive but not quite statistically signiﬁcant, likely due to the fact that
many individuals reporting “Chief executive” as their occupation are not actually suﬃciently
wealthy to be concerned about property division in divorce. We conclude that the eﬀect of
residing in a community property state on marital status is concentrated among the wealthier
individuals, which validates the use of community property jurisdiction as a useful instrument
for CEO single status, as well as alleviates concerns that this variable might be exclusively
capturing unobserved heterogeneity across states.
   The fact that residing in a community property state reduces the incentive for a wealthy
person to get married by increasing the cost of potential divorce in no way suggests that the
marriage market competition motive becomes inoperative. It merely implies that, holding all
else equal, such a person will wait for a higher-quality match compared to a person residing
in an equitable distribution jurisdiction. Therefore, at a given age and level of wealth, a
community-property CEO is more likely to be single and, consequently, more willing to take
on idiosyncratic risk in the hope of achieving high status.


4.2    Instrumental Variable Results

In the ﬁrst stage, we regress the (potentially) endogenous variable Single on the instrumental
variable, Community, which equals one if the ﬁrm is headquartered in one of the community
property states and zero otherwise, as well as all of the control variables that we use. Our
speciﬁcation is as follows:


                      Single = α + β × Community + γ × X + δ × Y,                          (12)


where X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics and Y is a set of CEO characteristics. We also include
industry and year ﬁxed eﬀects, which we do not tabulate.
   Table 10 reports the estimated coeﬃcients. In accordance with our hypothesis, Community


                                              32
has a highly signiﬁcant eﬀect on the probability of a CEO being single, controlling for all of
the ﬁrm and CEO characteristics (including, in particular, CEO age and wealth, which both
have predictably negative eﬀects). Thus, variation in divorce laws represents a useful instru-
ment for CEO marital status, and in fact a rather strong one, as suggested by t-statistics
between 3.25 and 4.41 (calculated using robust standard errors clustered at state level). A
CEO residing in a community property state is 4.9% more likely to be single relative to the
unconditional probability of 16.2%.
   We then repeat the regressions for return volatility and for ﬁrm investment (given by Eq.
(9)) using a two-stage least squares approach, where we substitute the ﬁtted value from the
ﬁrst stage regression described above, SingleP red, for the endogenous variable Single. We
report the results for our two main dependent variables: idiosyncratic stock return volatility
and total ﬁrm investment.
   Table 11 presents the second stage regression results for idiosyncratic volatility of ﬁrms’
stock returns. The eﬀect of the instrumented variable, SingleP red, is always strongly sig-
niﬁcant, regardless of speciﬁcation, with t-statistics of 2.5 and above. Table 12 reports the
second stage results for total investment, following the same speciﬁcations as in Table 5.
Again, the eﬀect of the instrumented variable, SingleP red, is strong and statistically signiﬁ-
cant, with t-statistics between 1.88 and 2.99. In both cases, the inclusion of controls does not
have much eﬀect on the coeﬃcient, except when all of the ﬁrm-level controls are dropped.
   Overall, these results conﬁrm the eﬀect of marital status on ﬁrm risk-taking that is consis-
tent with our model. The instrumental variable approach helps rule out innate heterogeneity
among CEOs that is correlated with marital status as an explanation of our results. It also
potentially strengthens our results by reducing the eﬀect of measurement error that arises
from our classiﬁcation of CEOs into “single” and “married.”


4.3    State-level Variation

One potential source of concern regarding our instrumental variable approach is the possibility
that our instrument is systematically correlated with variation in ﬁrm investment opportu-
nities across states. Most of the ﬁrms in our sample are fairly large companies operating at
the national level, so that the economic activity in the state where their headquarters are

                                              33
located is unlikely to drive their investment opportunities. Nevertheless, as we do not have
data on the geographic composition of ﬁrms’ investment, we cannot rule out this possibility
directly. Instead, we attempt to control for state-level variation in investment opportunities
using state-level macroeconomic variables.23
       We use the following variables to capture state-level economic activity: the annual growth
rate in nonfarm payroll employment (P ayroll) and the in-state Coincident Economic Activity
Index constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (CEAI), as well as the
logarithm of real per capital income (LogIncomeState). Column (6) of Table 10 shows that
adding these variables as controls in the ﬁrst-stage regression does not have an eﬀect, with
none of the three coeﬃcients being signiﬁcant.
       Column (6) in Tables 12 and 11 present the second-stage results for investment and
idiosyncratic volatility, respectively, using the full set of controls, including the state-level
ones. Our results are not altered by the inclusion of these controls. The only statistically
signiﬁcant state-level coeﬃcient is that of LogIncomeState on investment, indicating that
ﬁrms headquartered in states with higher per capita income on average invest more. At
the same time, the eﬀect of the state-level economic activity index, while not statistically
signiﬁcant, is negative. Overall, we conclude that our instrumental variable results are not
likely to be due to diﬀerences in economic conditions across states.



5        Conclusion
There is substantial evidence in economics that interpersonal comparisons are important
for individual subjective well-being (e.g., Luttmer (2005), Dynan and Ravina (2007)) and
that such comparisons aﬀect consumption choices (Charles, Hurst, and Roussanov (2009)).
Less is known empirically about the impact of relative wealth concerns on attitudes towards
risk. In this paper, we consider the implications of models in which status concerns arise
endogenously as a result of competition in markets where allocations are not mediated by
prices, such as the marriage market. In our model, complementarity between wealth and
spouse quality induces single individuals to take on (idiosyncratic) risk in hopes of securing a
  23
    The OLS results reported in Section 3 are robust to the inclusion of state ﬁxed eﬀects. Clearly, we cannot
include these in the IV estimation due to the cross-sectional nature of our instrument.


                                                     34
desirable mate. In particular, the model predicts that single individuals take more risk than
married ones.
   We use risk-taking by corporate CEOs as a setting for testing the model’s predictions.
CEOs represent the upper tail of the wealth distribution (Kaplan and Rauh (2010)), where
status concerns are likely to be most acute. Moreover, their management decisions have
signiﬁcant economic impact. We ﬁnd that single CEOs invest more aggressively (in capital
expenditures, R&D, advertising, and acquisitions) and that their companies exhibit higher
stock return volatility (controlling for a variety of personal and ﬁrm characteristics). These
eﬀects are not only statistically signiﬁcant, but also economically important. Our results
are strengthened when we adopt an instrumental variable approach, based on variation in
divorce laws across U.S. states. This variation is likely exogenous to ﬁrm investment and
return volatility, but has a strong eﬀect on the probability of a CEO being married, holding
all else equal, and consequently on the measures of ﬁrm risk-taking.
   In sum, our evidence supports the view that status concerns are important for ﬁnancial
decisions, and lead individuals to assume more risk. These ﬁndings have potentially rich im-
plications in both corporate ﬁnance and asset pricing. In corporate ﬁnance, status concerns
may help mitigate the potential underinvestment in risky projects and ineﬃciently high corre-
lation with common shocks that are the consequences of risk aversion and moral hazard (since
common shocks are more easily observable and can also be hedged by agents - Holmstrom
(1982), Acharya and Bisin (2009)). This mitigating eﬀect of status may play a signiﬁcant
role in various models of CEO compensation and, more generally, corporate governance.
It may also help explain the mixed evidence in support of the hypothesis by Shleifer and
Vishny (1986) that concentrated ownership leads to ineﬃcient over-diversiﬁcation of tightly-
held ﬁrms (e.g., Anderson and Reeb (2003) ﬁnd the opposite result for family-controlled
ﬁrms). In asset pricing, it may help reconcile the high investor risk aversion implied by the
large risk premia on publicly traded assets with evidence of poor diversiﬁcation of individ-
ual households’ portfolios as well as with large amounts of idiosyncratic risk taken on by
entrepreneurs.




                                             35
References
Abel, Andrew B., 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses,
  American Economic Review 80, 38–42.

Acharya, Viral V., and Alberto Bisin, 2009, Managerial hedging, equity ownership, and ﬁrm
  value, RAND Journal of Economics 40, 47–77.

Adams, Renée B., Heitor Almeida, and Daniel Ferreira, 2005, Powerful CEOs and their
  impact on corporate performance, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1403–1432.

Anderson, Donald, and David Reeb, 2003, Founding-family ownership, corporate diversiﬁca-
  tion, and ﬁrm leverage, Journal of Law and Economics 46, 653–684.

Baker, Michael D., and Jon K. Maner, 2008, Risk-taking as a situationally sensitive male
  mating strategy, Evolution and Human Behavior 29, 391–395.

Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Boys will be boys: Gender, overconﬁdence, and
  common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261–292.

Becker, Gary S, 1973, A theory of marriage: Part I, Journal of Political Economy 81, 813–46.

Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Ivan Werning, 2005, The equilibrium distribution of
  income and the market for status, Journal of Political Economy 113, 231–248.

Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2007, Managerial overconﬁ-
  dence and corporate policies, Working Paper 13711 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Benmelech, Efraim, and Carola Frydman, 2012, Military CEOs, Working Paper.

Bennedsen, Morten, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfen-
  zon, 2007, Inside the family ﬁrm: The role of families in succession decisions and perfor-
  mance, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 647–691.

Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2006, Do CEOs Mat-
  ter?, working paper.



                                            36
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The eﬀect of man-
  agers on ﬁrm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.

Burnham, T.C, J.Flynn Chapman, P.B Gray, M.H McIntyre, S.F Lipson, and P.T Ellison,
  2003, Men in committed, romantic relationships have lower testosterone, Hormones and
  Behavior 44, 119 – 122.

Burnham, Terence C, 2007, High-testosterone men reject low ultimatum game oﬀers., Proc
  Biol Sci 274, 2327–30.

Charles, Kerwin Koﬁ, Erik Hurst, and Alexandra Killewald, 2011, Marital sorting and
  parental wealth, NBER Working Paper 16748 National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Charles, Kerwin Koﬁ, Erik Hurst, and Nikolai Roussanov, 2009, Conspicuous consumption
  and race, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 425–467.

Charles, Kerwin Koﬁ, and Ming Ching Luoh, 2010, Male incarceration, the marriage market,
  and female outcomes, Review of Economics and Statistics 92, 614–627.

Chiappori, Pierre-Andr, Sonia Oreﬃce, and Climent Quintana-Domeque, 2012, Fatter at-
  traction: Anthropometric and socioeconomic matching on the marriage market, Journal
  of Political Economy 120, pp. 659–695.

Cole, Harold, George Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1992, Social norms, savings behavior
  and growth, Journal of Political Economy 100, 1092–1126.

         , 2001, Investment and concern for relative position, Review of Economic Design 6,
  241–261.

DeMarzo, Peter, Ron Kaniel, and Ilan Kremer, 2004, Diversiﬁcation as a public good: Com-
  munity eﬀects in portfolio choice, Journal of Finance 59, 1677–1715.

Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, A Sexually Unbalanced Model of Current Account
  Imbalances, NBER working paper.



                                             37
         , 2011, Sex Ratios and Exchange Rates, NBER working paper.

Dynan, Karen E., and Enrichetta Ravina, 2007, Increasing income inequality, external habits,
  and self-reported happiness, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97, 226–
  231.

Gale, D., and L. S. Shapley, 1962, College admissions and the stability of marriage, The
  American Mathematical Monthly 69, pp. 9–15.

Gervais, Simon, and Itay Goldstein, 2007, The positive eﬀects of biased self-perceptions in
  ﬁrms, Review of Finance 11, 453–496.

Gervais, Simon, J. B. Heaton, and Terrance Odean, 2011, Overconﬁdence, compensation
  contracts, and capital budgeting, Journal of Finance 66, 1735–1777.

Goel, Anand M., and Anjan V. Thakor, 2008, Overconﬁdence, CEO selection, and corporate
  governance, Journal of Finance 63, 2737–2784.

Gollier, Christian, 2004, Misery loves company: Equilibrium portfolios with heterogeneous
  consumption externalities, International Economic Review 45, 1169–1192.

Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2011, Managerial attitudes and
  corporate actions, Duke University Working Paper.

Gregory, Nathaniel, 1980, Relative wealth and risk taking: a short note on the Friedman-
  Savage utility function., Journal of Political Economy 88, 12261230.

Griskevicius, Vladas, Jill M. Sundie, Geoﬀrey F. Miller, Joshua M. Tybur, Robert B. Cialdini,
  and Douglas T. Kenrick, 2007, Blatant benevolence and conspicuous consumption: When
  romantic motives elicit costly displays, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology pp.
  85–102.

Guay, Wayne, 1999, The sensitivity of CEO wealth to equity risk: an analysis of the magni-
  tude and determinants., Journal of Financial Economics 53, 4371.

Guiso, Luigi, and Aldo Rustichini, 2011, Understanding the size and proﬁtability of ﬁrms:
  The role of a biological factor, Discussion paper.

                                             38
Hirshleifer, David, Angie Low, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2012, Are overconﬁdent CEOs better
  innovators?, Journal of Finance 67, 1457–1498.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1982, Moral hazard in teams, Bell Journal of Economics 13, 324–340.

Hopcroft, R, 2006, Sex, status, and reproductive success in the contemporary United States,
  Evolution and Human Behavior 27, 104–120.

Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen, 2008, Which CEO Character-
  istics and Abilities Matter?, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh, 2010, Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes
  to the Rise in the Highest Incomes?, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1004–1050.

Kennickell, Arthur, and Julia Lane, 2006, Measuring the impact of data protection techniques
  on data utility: Evidence from the survey of consumer ﬁnances, in Josep Domingo-Ferrer,
  and Luisa Franconi, ed.: Privacy in Statistical Databases, vol. 4302 of Lecture Notes in
  Computer Science . pp. 291–303 (Springer Berlin / Heidelberg).

Levi, Maurice, Kai Li, and Feng Zhang, 2010, Deal or No Deal: Hormones and the Mergers
  and Acquisitions Game, Management Science 56, 1462–1483.

Love, David A., 2010, The Eﬀects of Marital Status and Children on Savings and Portfolio
  Choice, Review of Financial Studies 23, 385–432.

Luttmer, Erzo, F. P., 2005, Neighbors as negatives: Relative earnings and well-being, Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 120, 963–1002.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoﬀrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconﬁdence and corporate investment,
  Journal of Finance 60, 2661–2700.

       , 2009, Superstar CEOs, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1593–1638.

       , and Jon Yan, 2011, Overconﬁdence and early-life experiences: The eﬀect of man-
  agerial traits on corporate ﬁnancial policies, The Journal of Finance 66, 1687–1733.




                                            39
Morse, Adair, Vikram Nanda, and Amit Seru, 2011, Are incentive contracts rigged by pow-
  erful ceos?, Journal of Finance 66, 1779–1821.

Nettle, D, and T V Pollet, 2008, Natural selection on male wealth in humans, The American
  Naturalist 172, 658–666.

Panousi, Vasia, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2012, Investment, idiosyncratic risk, and owner-
  ship, Journal of Finance 67, 1113–1148.

Pollet, Thomas V., and Daniel Nettle, 2009, Partner wealth predicts self-reported orgasm
  frequency in a sample of Chinese women, Evolution and Human Behavior 30, 146 – 151.

Postlewaite, Andrew, 1998, The social basis of interdependent preferences, European Eco-
  nomic Review 42, 779–800.

Robson, Arthur J., 1992, Status, the distribution of wealth, private and social attitudes to
  risk, Econometrica 60, 837–857.

Roth, Alvin E., and Marilda A. Oliveira Sotomayor, 1990, Two-Sided Matching: a Study in
  Game-Theoretic Modeling and Analysis (Cambridge University Press).

Roussanov, Nikolai, 2010a, Diversiﬁcation and its discontents:        Idiosyncratic and en-
  trepreneurial risk in the quest for social status, Journal of Finance 65, 1755–1788.

       , 2010b, Internet appendix to “Diversiﬁcation and its discontents: Idiosyncratic and
  entrepreneurial risk in the quest for social status”, Journal of Finance 65, 1755–1788.

Sapienza, Paola, Luigi Zingales, and Dario Maestripieri, 2009, Gender diﬀerences in ﬁnancial
  risk aversion and career choices are aﬀected by testosterone, Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences.

Schoar, Antoinette, and Luo Zuo, 2011, Shaped by booms and busts: How the economy
  impacts ceo careers and management style, Working Paper 17590 National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Shemesh, Joshua, 2010, CEO Social Status and Risk Taking, Working Paper.


                                             40
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny, 1986, Large shareholders and corporate control,
  Journal of Political Economy 94, 461–88.

Voena, Alessandra, 2011, Yours, mine and ours: Do divorce laws aﬀect the intertemporal
  behavior of married couples?, Discussion Paper 10-022 Stanford Instititute for Economic
  Policy Research.

Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011a, The competitive saving motive: Evidence from
  rising sex ratios and savings rates in China, Journal of Political Economy 119, pp. 511–564.

       , 2011b, Sex Ratios, Entrepreneurship, and Economic Growth in the People’s Republic
  of China, NBER working paper.

Wilson, Margo, and Martin Daly, 2004, Do pretty women inspire men to discount the future?,
  Proceedings: Biological Sciences 271, pp. S177–S179.




                                             41
                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                Panel A. Risk-taking measures
                         Investment         CapEx          R&D          Advertising         Net Acq.            Vol.          Id. vol.
                                                                    Married CEOs
        Mean                      0.90        0.27          0.25               0.08             0.24            0.37             0.34
        Median                    0.36        0.19          0.00               0.00             0.00            0.31             0.28
        1st. Perct.              -0.02        0.01          0.00               0.00            -0.31            0.00             0.09
        99th Perct.              11.25        1.69          4.50               1.63             6.31            3.72             1.12
        N                       21,876      21,876        21,876            21,876            21,876          20,433           20,418
                                                                     Single CEOs
        Mean                      1.52        0.32          0.58               0.12             0.38            0.45             0.42
        Median                    0.48        0.22          0.00               0.00             0.00            0.37             0.34
        1st. Perct.               0.00        0.00          0.00               0.00            -0.29            0.07             0.11
        99th Perct.              19.85        2.04          8.86               3.94             9.51            9.51             1.41
        N                        4,224       4,224         4,224              4,224            4,224           3,786            3,785

                                                     Panel B. Control variables
                       Assets        M/B             CF      Leverage        Firm Age          CEO Age            Tenure           Wealth
                                                                    Married CEOs
    Mean               12,517        1.94        0.54               0.36           25.6                55.0             5.1              166
    Median              1,615        1.46        0.39               0.35           22.0                55.0             4.0               16
    1st. Perct.           47         0.79       -5.30               0.00              3.0              38.0             0.0                0
    99th Perct.       208,335        8.85        8.38               1.27           57.0                77.0            24.0          1,853
    N                  21,856      21,876      21,876          21,876           21,876            20,885          21,876            16,531
                                                                     Single CEOs
    Mean                2,076        2.14        0.31               0.30           18.5                52.6             4.5               36
    Median               595         1.56        0.37               0.25           13.0                53.0             3.0                8
    1st. Perct.           26         0.69      -12.20               0.00              3.0              36.0             0.0                0
    99th Perct.        24,563       10.82       17.42               1.57           57.0                70.0             22               360
    N                   4220        4,224       4,224              4,224          4,224            3,960           4,224             2,969



Panel A reports the summary statistics for various measures of ﬁrm risk-taking. Investment (Investment)
and its components (CapEx, R&D, Advertising, and N etAcquisitions) are relative to P P &E. Volatility is
the (annualized) standard deviation of monthly stock returns over the previous year. Idiosyncratic volatility
is the standard deviation of residuals from the regression of stock returns on the market return.
Panel B reports the summary statistics for our main control variables. Firm assets (A) and CEO wealth
(W ealth) are expressed in millions. Market-to-book ratio (M/B) is the ratio of the market value of assets to
their book value. Cash ﬂow (CF ) equals earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation & amortiza-
tion, scaled by net P P &E. Book leverage (Leverage) equals the sum of long-term and current debt divided
by the sum of long-term debt, current debt, and book equity. Firm age (F irm Age) is computed with respect
to the ﬁrst year it appears in COMPUSTAT (expressed in years, as are CEO age and tenure).




                                                                   42
                            Table 2: CEO Marital Status: A Diagnostic


                                             1            2          3           4           5
            Intercept                      2.455       1.452       2.396       2.391      1.410
                                          (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
            N et W orth                    -0.032                             -0.018
                                          (0.000)                             (0.000)
            Largest Asset                              -0.018                             -0.011
                                                      (0.000)                             (0.001)
            Income                                                 -0.488     -0.279      -0.080
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
            Age                            -0.130      -0.121      -0.125     -0.126      -0.118
                                          (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
            Age2 /100                      0.125       0.113       0.119       0.121      0.111
                                          (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
            Pr(Single|M edianCEO)          0.203       0.117       0.122       0.149      0.113



This table presents the results of logit regressions of marital status on measures of wealth, income, and age:
                                  (                                                        )
                                                                                      Age2
                 Pr (Single) = Φ α + β × W ealth + γ × Income + δ × Age + ζ ×                ,
                                                                                      100

where Φ is the logistic c.d.f. Data is from the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances. Speciﬁcations (1) and (4)
use N et W orth as a measure of wealth in the SCF, while speciﬁcations (2) and (5) use the value of the single
largest risky asset holding (Largest Asset) as a proxy for wealth. We also show the implied probability of
a median CEO being single based on these estimates. The implied probabilities are computed based on the
median CEO wealth of $13.8 million (using CEO’s holdings of company stock and options), median CEO
income of $2.2 million, and median CEO age of 55 years.




                                                     43
                  Table 3: Regression Results for Total Stock Return Volatility


                                  1            2               3          4           5          6
     CFt                       -0.006       -0.005          -0.005     -0.005      -0.006
                              (-6.430)     (-5.694)        (-5.753)   (-5.781)   (-6.810)
     Mt−1 /Bt−1                0.006         0.005           0.004      0.004      0.000
                              (3.938)      (3.200)         (3.016)    (3.074)     (0.210)
     logAt−1                   -0.022       -0.022          -0.024     -0.023      -0.022
                             (-10.978)    (-10.546)        (-9.768)   (-9.892)   (-9.120)
     Leveraget                 0.077         0.071           0.072      0.072      0.097
                              (8.708)      (7.975)         (7.977)    (8.002)    (10.130)
     V olt−1                   0.408         0.405           0.404      0.401      0.387
                              (9.523)      (8.891)         (8.850)    (8.659)     (7.930)
     F irmAge                  -0.001       -0.001          -0.001     -0.001      -0.001
                              (-6.678)     (-6.428)        (-6.384)   (-6.436)   (-7.320)
     Single                    0.012         0.008           0.009      0.011      0.012        0.067
                              (2.640)      (1.761)         (2.054)    (2.303)     (2.320)      (7.827)
     Age                                    -0.001          -0.001     -0.001      -0.001       -0.004
                                           (-4.114)        (-3.781)   (-3.842)   (-3.470)     (-11.458)
     Age × Single                           -0.001          -0.001     -0.001      -0.001       -0.002
                                           (-1.460)        (-1.452)   (-1.530)   (-1.520)      (-1.188)
     T enure                                -0.001          -0.001     -0.001      -0.001       -0.001
                                           (-1.877)        (-1.992)   (-2.300)   (-2.340)      (-1.021)
     T enure × Single                        0.001           0.000      0.001      0.002        -0.000
                                           (0.693)         (0.610)    (0.843)     (1.800)      (-0.198)
     CEOP rominence                                          0.003      0.003      0.003        -0.007
                                                           (3.115)    (3.152)     (2.750)      (-4.556)
     F irmP rominence                                       -0.001     -0.001      -0.001
                                                           (-0.962)   (-0.972)   (-1.190)
     Inst                                                              -0.034      -0.045
                                                                      (-3.789)   (-4.710)
     Inst × Single                                                     -0.061      -0.054
                                                                      (-1.951)   (-1.610)
     R2                       0.481         0.482           0.482       0.484      0.512       0.196


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

                  V ol = α + β × Single + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × (Single × Ỹ ),

where V ol is the annualized standard deviation of monthly stock returns over the previous year, Single is a
dummy variable equaling one if the CEO is unmarried and zero otherwise, X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics,
and Y is a set of CEO characteristics (the speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions are given in Section 2), demeaned when
used in interaction terms: Ỹ = Y − ÊY . All speciﬁcations also include industry (based on the Fama-French
49-industry classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported), with the exception of speciﬁcation (5), which
includes industry×year ﬁxed eﬀects. T-statistics are in parentheses, and are computed using robust standard
errors clustered by ﬁrm.


                                                      44
                 Table 4: Regression Results for Idiosyncratic Return Volatility


                                1            2             3            4             5           6
    CFt                      -0.005       -0.004        -0.004       -0.004        -0.004
                            (-5.488)     (-4.816)      (-4.885)     (-4.858)      (-4.200)
    Mt−1 /Bt−1                0.001        0.000         0.000        0.000        -0.002
                            (0.890)      (0.233)       (0.011)      (0.049)       (-1.680)
    logAt−1                  -0.027       -0.027        -0.028       -0.027        -0.027
                           (-12.689)    (-12.330)     (-11.506)    (-11.719)     (-11.850)
    Leveraget                 0.082        0.078         0.078        0.079         0.085
                            (9.644)      (8.988)       (9.010)      (9.104)       (9.690)
    IdV olt−1                 0.346        0.341         0.340        0.335         0.327
                            (8.197)      (7.637)       (7.608)      (7.357)       (7.260)
    F irmAge                 -0.001       -0.001        -0.001       -0.001        -0.001
                            (-6.853)     (-6.627)      (-6.572)     (-6.702)      (-7.200)
    Single                    0.012        0.008         0.010        0.012         0.012        0.063
                            (2.667)      (1.927)       (2.236)      (2.551)       (2.520)      (8.085)
    Age                                   -0.001        -0.001       -0.001        -0.001       -0.004
                                         (-3.927)      (-3.551)     (-3.654)      (-3.710)    (-11.370)
    Age × Single                          -0.001        -0.001       -0.001        -0.001       -0.001
                                         (-1.278)      (-1.271)     (-1.371)      (-1.310)     (-0.960)
    T enure                               -0.000        -0.000       -0.001        -0.001       -0.000
                                         (-1.609)      (-1.733)     (-2.169)      (-2.070)     (-0.819)
    T enure × Single                       0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000       -0.001
                                         (0.131)       (0.038)      (0.352)       (0.230)      (-0.464)
    CEOP rominence                                       0.003        0.003         0.003       -0.008
                                                       (3.298)      (3.365)       (2.890)      (-6.177)
    F irmP rominence                                    -0.001       -0.001        -0.001
                                                       (-0.913)     (-0.934)      (-0.640)
    Inst                                                             -0.047        -0.050
                                                                    (-5.269)      (-5.590)
    Inst × Single                                                    -0.076        -0.064
                                                                    (-2.253)      (-1.930)
    R2                       0.443        0.442          0.443        0.445         0.482       0.189


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

                 IdV ol = α + β × Single + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × (Single × Ỹ ),

where IdV ol is the annualized standard deviation of residuals from the regression of ﬁrm monthly stock
returns on the market return, Single is a dummy variable equaling one if the CEO is unmarried and zero
otherwise, X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics, and Y is a set of CEO characteristics (the speciﬁc variable
deﬁnitions are given in Section 2), demeaned when used in interaction terms: Ỹ = Y − ÊY . All speciﬁ-
cations also include industry (based on the Fama-French 49-industry classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects
(unreported), with the exception of speciﬁcation (5), which includes industry×year ﬁxed eﬀects. T-statistics
are in parentheses, and are computed using robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm.


                                                    45
                        Table 5: Regression Results for Total Investment


                                1            2             3            4             5          6
    CFt                       0.091        0.096         0.095        0.095         0.094
                            (5.551)      (5.941)       (5.882)      (5.878)       (5.710)
    Mt−1 /Bt−1                0.118        0.114         0.108        0.108         0.109
                            (7.894)      (7.676)       (7.363)      (7.349)       (7.340)
    logAt−1                  -0.128       -0.131        -0.151       -0.154        -0.145
                           (-11.844)    (-11.847)     (-11.335)    (-11.745)     (-11.170)
    Leveraget                 0.195        0.188         0.198        0.198         0.205
                            (3.525)      (3.328)       (3.498)      (3.506)       (3.660)
    Investmentt−1             0.484        0.476         0.475        0.475         0.477
                           (18.104)     (19.099)      (19.043)     (18.980)      (18.940)
    F irmAge                 -0.002       -0.002        -0.002       -0.002        -0.002
                            (-3.071)     (-2.418)      (-2.350)     (-2.273)      (-2.720)
    Single                    0.093        0.069         0.090        0.087         0.105       0.453
                            (2.349)      (1.712)       (2.249)      (2.181)       (2.650)     (5.234)
    Age                                   -0.004        -0.003       -0.003        -0.004      -0.029
                                         (-2.782)      (-2.114)     (-2.072)      (-2.700)    (-9.768)
    Age × Single                          -0.019        -0.019       -0.019        -0.017      -0.042
                                         (-2.613)      (-2.631)     (-2.638)      (-2.440)    (-2.928)
    T enure                               -0.009        -0.009       -0.009        -0.007      -0.007
                                         (-3.727)      (-3.920)     (-3.875)      (-3.410)    (-1.262)
    T enure × Single                       0.017         0.016        0.016         0.015       0.039
                                         (1.440)       (1.372)      (1.389)       (1.320)     (1.474)
    CEOP rominence                                       0.035        0.035         0.032      -0.002
                                                       (3.832)      (3.842)       (3.550)     (-0.186)
    F irmP rominence                                     0.004        0.004         0.004
                                                       (0.405)      (0.416)       (0.350)
    Inst                                                              0.133         0.121
                                                                    (1.849)       (1.680)
    Inst × Single                                                     0.022         0.019
                                                                    (0.103)       (0.090)
    R2                       0.445        0.444          0.445        0.445         0.463      0.043


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

              Investment = α + β × Single + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × (Single × Ỹ ),

where Investment is capital expenditures plus acquisitions minus asset sales plus R&D expenditure plus
advertising expenditure (scaled by net property, plant & equipment), Single is a dummy variable equaling
one if the CEO is unmarried and zero otherwise, X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics, and Y is a set of CEO
characteristics (the speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions are given in Section 2), demeaned when used in interaction
terms: Ỹ = Y − ÊY . All speciﬁcations also include industry (based on the Fama-French 49-industry
classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported), with the exception of speciﬁcation (5), which includes
industry×year ﬁxed eﬀects. T-statistics are in parentheses, and are computed using robust standard errors
clustered by ﬁrm.

                                                    46
                         Table 6: Regression Results for Net Acquisitions


                                   1           2            3            4            5          6
      CF                        0.069        0.070        0.070        0.069        0.071
                              (10.620)    (10.215)     (10.194)     (10.145)     (10.130)
      Mt−1 /Bt−1                0.015        0.016        0.015        0.015        0.016
                               (2.370)     (2.344)      (2.167)      (2.177)      (2.280)
      logAt−1                   -0.046      -0.047       -0.050       -0.053       -0.049
                              (-8.394)    (-8.566)     (-8.133)     (-8.570)     (-7.820)
      Leverage                  0.242        0.250        0.251        0.252        0.266
                               (7.438)     (7.409)      (7.405)      (7.424)      (7.760)
      N etAcqt−1                0.239        0.237        0.237        0.236        0.230
                              (13.332)    (13.135)     (13.147)     (13.069)     (13.130)
      F irmAge                  -0.001      -0.001       -0.001       -0.001       -0.001
                              (-3.109)    (-2.718)     (-2.683)     (-2.530)     (-2.790)
      Single                    0.035        0.035        0.039        0.038        0.048       0.095
                               (1.415)     (1.347)      (1.482)      (1.452)      (1.900)     (2.587)
      Age                                   -0.001       -0.000       -0.000       -0.001      -0.005
                                          (-0.621)     (-0.414)     (-0.312)     (-0.920)     (-3.741)
      Age × Single                          -0.007       -0.006       -0.007       -0.006      -0.012
                                          (-1.753)     (-1.749)     (-1.762)     (-1.600)     (-2.276)
      T enure                               -0.004       -0.004       -0.004       -0.003      -0.003
                                          (-2.107)     (-2.162)     (-2.160)     (-1.640)     (-1.257)
      T enure × Single                       0.013        0.013        0.013        0.013       0.021
                                           (1.655)      (1.640)      (1.653)      (1.610)     (1.844)
      CEOP rominence                                      0.008        0.008        0.006      -0.014
                                                        (1.504)      (1.519)      (1.230)     (-2.587)
      F irmP rominence                                   -0.001       -0.001       -0.002
                                                       (-0.217)     (-0.178)     (-0.320)
      Inst                                                             0.182        0.167
                                                                     (5.048)      (4.520)
      Inst × Single                                                   -0.063       -0.080
                                                                    (-0.558)     (-0.720)
      R2                       0.150        0.151         0.151        0.151        0.179      0.014


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

                N etAcq = α + β × Single + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × (Single × Ỹ ),

where N etAcq is acquisitions minus asset sales (scaled by net property, plant & equipment), Single is a
dummy variable equaling one if the CEO is unmarried and zero otherwise, X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics,
and Y is a set of CEO characteristics (the speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions are given in Section 2), demeaned when
used in interaction terms: Ỹ = Y − ÊY . All speciﬁcations also include industry (based on the Fama-French
49-industry classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported), with the exception of speciﬁcation (5), which
includes industry×year ﬁxed eﬀects. T-statistics are in parentheses, and are computed using robust standard
errors clustered by ﬁrm.


                                                     47
                      Table 7: Regression Results for R&D and Advertising


                                   1           2            3            4            5          6
      CFt                       0.009        0.010        0.010        0.009        0.008
                               (1.592)     (1.684)      (1.644)      (1.640)      (1.410)
      Mt−1 /Bt−1                0.015        0.013        0.012        0.012        0.012
                               (2.787)     (2.397)      (2.155)      (2.144)      (2.240)
      logAt−1                   -0.026      -0.028       -0.033       -0.033       -0.030
                              (-6.738)    (-6.822)     (-6.739)     (-6.862)     (-6.540)
      Leveraget                 -0.019      -0.025       -0.023       -0.023       -0.029
                              (-1.125)    (-1.422)     (-1.303)     (-1.304)     (-1.690)
      N etAcqt−1                0.806        0.800        0.799        0.799        0.801
                              (39.609)    (38.798)     (38.546)     (38.576)     (39.110)
      F irmAge                  -0.000       0.000        0.000        0.000       -0.000
                              (-0.587)     (0.019)      (0.098)      (0.115)     (-0.310)
      Single                    0.033        0.024        0.029        0.029        0.032       0.324
                               (2.598)     (1.932)      (2.402)      (2.228)      (2.590)     (5.667)
      Age                                   -0.001       -0.001       -0.001       -0.001      -0.016
                                          (-1.966)     (-1.393)     (-1.395)     (-2.100)     (-8.702)
      Age × Single                          -0.005       -0.005       -0.005       -0.004      -0.024
                                          (-1.879)     (-1.886)     (-1.880)     (-1.630)     (-2.478)
      T enure                               -0.002       -0.002       -0.002       -0.001      -0.003
                                          (-2.597)     (-2.769)     (-2.694)     (-2.070)     (-1.143)
      T enure × Single                       0.002        0.002        0.001        0.001       0.013
                                           (0.541)      (0.475)      (0.446)      (0.240)     (0.713)
      CEOP rominence                                      0.009        0.009        0.009      0.016
                                                        (3.233)      (3.226)      (3.040)     (2.148)
      F irmP rominence                                    0.001        0.001        0.001
                                                        (0.198)      (0.192)      (0.190)
      Inst                                                            -0.000       -0.003
                                                                    (-0.014)     (-0.130)
      Inst × Single                                                    0.032        0.031
                                                                     (0.382)      (0.380)
      R2                       0.765        0.761         0.761        0.761        0.770      0.048


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

        R&D + Advertising = α + β × Single + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × (Single × Ỹ ),

where R&D + Advertising is R&D expenditure plus advertising expenditure (scaled by net property, plant
& equipment), Single is a dummy variable equaling one if the CEO is unmarried and zero otherwise, X
is a set of ﬁrm characteristics, and Y is a set of CEO characteristics (the speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions are
given in Section 2), demeaned when used in interaction terms: Ỹ = Y − ÊY . All speciﬁcations also include
industry (based on the Fama-French 49-industry classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported), with the
exception of speciﬁcation (5), which includes industry×year ﬁxed eﬀects. T-statistics are in parentheses, and
are computed using robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm.


                                                     48
         Table 8: Eﬀect of Idiosyncratic Risk on Investment: Within-Firm Evidence


                                      1            2             3            4             5
           CFt                                   0.101        0.100         0.103         0.103
                                               (16.110)      (15.850)      (15.590)     (15.600)
           Mt−1 /Bt−1                            0.207        0.206         0.198         0.199
                                               (21.240)      (21.120)      (19.570)     (19.610)
           logAt−1                               -0.334       -0.341        -0.348       -0.347
                                               (-15.680)     (-15.960)    (-15.640)     (-15.580)
           Leveraget                             0.745        0.762         0.757         0.757
                                               (12.540)      (12.820)      (12.220)     (12.220)
           Investmentt−1                         0.082        0.082         0.074         0.074
                                               (12.690)      (12.580)      (10.970)     (10.970)
           F irmAge                              0.043        0.038         0.038         0.039
                                               (14.200)      (11.800)      (10.440)     (10.500)
           Single                  -0.043        -0.043       -0.048        -0.037       -0.026
                                   (-1.090)     (-1.110)     (-1.260)      (-0.900)     (-0.600)
           Age                                                              -0.003       -0.003
                                                                           (-1.600)     (-1.380)
           Age × Single                                                                  -0.003
                                                                                        (-0.450)
           T enure                                                          0.002         0.001
                                                                           (0.620)       (0.170)
           T enure × Single                                                               0.010
                                                                                         (1.220)
           CEOP rominence                                     -0.009        -0.019       -0.019
                                                             (-0.910)      (-1.730)     (-1.760)
           F irmP rominence                                   -0.016        -0.013       -0.013
                                                             (-1.050)      (-0.810)     (-0.790)
           Inst                                               0.349         0.338         0.337
                                                              (4.950)      (4.660)       (4.650)
           IdV olt−1               -0.175        -0.330       -0.290        -0.288       -0.289
                                   (-3.100)     (-5.940)     (-5.180)      (-4.940)     (-4.950)
           IdV olt−1 × Single       0.216        0.309        0.291         0.312         0.319
                                   (2.250)      (3.320)       (3.130)      (3.220)       (3.270)

The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

     Investmentt = α + β × Single + γ × IdV olt−1 + δ × (Single × IdVg
                                                                     olt−1 ) + ζ × X,

where Investment is our measure of total investment in Table 5 and X is a set of ﬁrm and CEO characteristics.
All variables are demeaned when used in interaction terms (e.g.: IdVg  olt−1 = IdV olt−1 − ÊIdV olt−1 ). All
speciﬁcations also include ﬁrm and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported). T-statistics are in parentheses.
                                                       49
      Table 9: Validating the Instrument: Marital Status and Divorce Law in the U.S.


                                            1               2              3              4
                Intercept                 1.252          1.185          1.182           1.181
                                        (260.000)      (220.560)      (220.160)       (219.970)
                Comm                     -0.007          -0.007         -0.007         -0.007
                                         (-5.730)       (-4.330)       (-4.180)       (-4.190)
                Income                   -0.415          -1.374         -1.274         -1.240
                                        (-38.130)      (-79.080)       (-83.330)      (-82.170)
                Age                      -0.037          -0.031         -0.031         -0.031
                                       (-205.780)      (-142.400)     (-142.480)     (-142.440)
                      2
                Age                       0.027          0.030          0.030           0.030
                                        (177.880)      (152.280)      (152.430)       (152.380)
                Occ                                                     -0.005         -0.084
                                                                       (-0.680)       (-10.790)
                Comm × Income             0.193          0.349
                                         (9.390)        (11.070)
                Comm × Occ                                              0.041           0.018
                                                                        (3.090)        (1.280)

This table presents the results of an OLS regressions of marital status on measures of income as well as
their interactions with the legal regime guiding division of marital assets in divorce in the state of residence,
controlling for age, using the data from the 2000 U.S. Census 5% sample from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series (IPUMS). The regression speciﬁcation is

                                                      Age2              g            g
Single = α+β ×Comm+γ ×Income+δ ×Age+ζ ×                    +η ×Occ+χ× Income×Comm+κ× Occ×Comm,
                                                      100
where Comm is the dummy variable equal to one if the household’s state of residence is a community property
state. Single is a dummy variable equal to one if the head of household has never been married (speciﬁcation
1) or has never been married, is divorced, or is widowed (speciﬁcations 2-4). Income is in millions. Occ is a
dummy variable for whether the head of household is either a lawyer or a surgeon/physician by occupation
                                                                                   g and Occ
(speciﬁcation 3) or a chief executive (speciﬁcation 4). The interacted variables Income    g are demeaned
using population weights. T-statistics are reported in the parentheses.




                                                       50
             Table 10: Predicting CEO Marital Status with Divorce Law Instrument


                                   1           2               3          4          5             6
      Community                 0.050        0.048           0.049      0.049      0.059        0.046
                               (3.740)     (3.510)         (3.610)    (3.580)     (4.410)      (3.250)
      CFt                       -0.006      -0.003          -0.003     -0.003                   -0.001
                               (-1.860)    (-0.930)        (-0.870)   (-0.910)                 (-0.320)
      Mt−1 /Bt−1                -0.008      -0.001           0.001      0.001                   0.001
                               (-2.170)    (-0.260)        (0.340)    (0.330)                  (0.290)
      logAt−1                   -0.041      -0.027          -0.016     -0.017                   -0.016
                              (-11.050)    (-7.000)        (-3.710)   (-3.910)                 (-3.670)
      Leveraget−1               0.018       -0.010          -0.014     -0.015                   -0.011
                               (0.800)     (-0.410)        (-0.620)   (-0.640)                 (-0.480)
      IdV olt−1                 0.037        0.020           0.029      0.031                   0.035
                               (1.740)     (0.870)         (1.320)    (1.440)                  (1.620)
      Investmentt−1             0.009        0.008           0.008      0.008                   0.008
                               (2.950)     (2.640)         (2.820)    (2.800)                  (2.640)
      F irmAge                  -0.001      -0.002          -0.002     -0.002                   -0.002
                               (-3.260)    (-3.840)        (-3.730)   (-3.670)                 (-3.680)
      Age                                   -0.002          -0.003     -0.003      -0.004       -0.003
                                           (-2.900)        (-3.780)   (-3.760)    (-5.450)     (-4.050)
      T enure                               -0.002          -0.002     -0.002      -0.002       -0.002
                                           (-1.400)        (-1.350)   (-1.330)    (-1.430)     (-1.630)
      W ealth                               -0.021          -0.017     -0.017      -0.020       -0.019
                                           (-7.220)        (-5.810)   (-5.780)    (-7.250)     (-6.180)
      CEOP rominence                                        -0.021     -0.021      -0.031       -0.022
                                                           (-5.370)   (-5.370)   (-10.570)     (-5.610)
      F irmP rominence                                      -0.003     -0.002                   -0.002
                                                           (-0.720)   (-0.710)                 (-0.660)
      Inst                                                              0.040                   0.033
                                                                      (1.540)                  (1.300)
      P ayroll                                                                                  0.069
                                                                                               (0.100)
      CEAI                                                                                      -0.121
                                                                                               (-0.280)
      LogIncomeState                                                                            0.055
                                                                                               (1.200)
      R2                        0.09         0.10           0.11       0.11         0.09         0.11


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

                    Single = α + β × Community + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × Z,

where Single is a dummy variable equaling one if the CEO is unmarried and zero otherwise, Community
is a dummy variable equaling one if the ﬁrm is headquartered in a community property state and zero
otherwise, X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics, Y is a set of CEO characteristics, and Z is a set of state-level
control variables (the speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions are given in Sections 2 and 4.3). All speciﬁcations also
include industry (based on the Fama-French 49-industry classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported).
T-statistics are in parentheses, and are computed using robust standard errors clustered by state.
                                                      51
                          Table 11: IV Results for Idiosyncratic Volatility


                                    1            2               3          4         5             6
       CFt                       -0.003       -0.003          -0.004     -0.003                  -0.004
                               (-3.210)     (-3.270)        (-3.470)   (-3.260)                (-3.830)
       Mt−1 /Bt−1                0.003         0.002           0.001      0.001                  0.001
                                (1.810)      (1.130)         (0.580)    (0.660)                 (0.520)
       logAt−1                   -0.015       -0.017          -0.022     -0.020                  -0.020
                               (-3.340)     (-4.920)        (-7.760)   (-7.290)                (-7.490)
       Leveraget                 0.077         0.078           0.079      0.080                  0.079
                               (11.500)     (11.180)        (10.990)   (10.920)                (11.330)
       IdV olt−1                 0.331         0.330           0.326      0.321                  0.318
                                (7.610)      (7.020)         (6.910)    (6.730)                 (6.670)
       F irmAge                  -0.000       -0.000          -0.000     -0.000                  -0.000
                               (-1.970)     (-1.370)        (-1.540)   (-1.590)                (-1.460)
       SingleP red               0.297         0.308           0.301      0.316     0.643         0.330
                                (2.680)      (2.480)         (2.570)    (2.560)    (2.660)      (2.730)
       Age                                    -0.000          0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
                                            (-0.330)         (0.380)    (0.390)    (0.140)      (0.470)
       T enure                                 0.000           0.000      0.000     0.001         0.001
                                             (1.130)         (0.980)    (0.960)    (1.800)      (1.400)
       W ealth                                 0.003           0.001      0.001     0.000         0.002
                                             (0.980)         (0.480)    (0.460)    (0.080)      (0.710)
       CEOP rominence                                          0.010      0.011     0.013         0.011
                                                             (4.410)    (4.390)    (1.910)      (4.540)
       F irmP rominence                                       -0.000     -0.000                  -0.000
                                                            (-0.300)   (-0.350)                (-0.350)
       Inst                                                              -0.075                  -0.075
                                                                       (-4.880)                (-5.000)
       P ayroll                                                                                  0.108
                                                                                                (0.350)
       CEAI                                                                                      0.190
                                                                                                (0.640)
       LogIncomeState                                                                            0.003
                                                                                                (0.190)
       R2                       0.443        0.442           0.442      0.444       0.301         0.444


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

                     IdV ol = α + β × SingleP red + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × Z,

where IdV ol is the annualized standard deviation of residuals from the regression of ﬁrm monthly stock
returns on the market return, SingleP red is the predicted value for Single computed using coeﬃcient
estimates for the corresponding speciﬁcation in Table 10, X is a set of ﬁrm characteristics, Y is a set of
CEO characteristics, and Z is a set of state-level control variables (the speciﬁc variable deﬁnitions are given
in Sections 2 and 4.3). All speciﬁcations also include industry (based on the Fama-French 49-industry
classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported). T-statistics are in parentheses, and are computed using
robust standard errors clustered by state, taking into account the uncertainty in ﬁrst-stage estimates.
                                                       52
                              Table 12: IV Results for Total Investment


                                   1             2            3            4           5             6
       CFt                      0.109          0.109        0.108        0.108                    0.109
                               (6.110)       (5.350)      (5.410)      (5.370)                   (5.600)
       Mt−1 /Bt−1               0.135          0.103        0.096        0.096                    0.096
                               (9.940)       (7.890)      (7.850)      (7.870)                   (7.070)
       logAt−1                  -0.030        -0.083       -0.122       -0.123                    -0.128
                              (-0.800)      (-2.980)     (-5.890)     (-5.840)                  (-6.440)
       Leveraget                0.148          0.245        0.255        0.255                    0.292
                               (2.330)       (4.550)      (4.900)      (4.920)                   (5.420)
       Investmentt−1            0.470          0.464        0.463        0.463                    0.456
                              (18.890)      (20.690)     (20.220)     (20.160)                  (18.780)
       F irmAge                 0.001          0.002        0.002        0.002                    0.003
                               (0.720)       (1.200)      (1.200)      (1.210)                   (1.610)
       SingleP red              2.299          2.197        2.114        2.107       5.367        2.357
                               (2.560)       (2.260)      (2.440)      (2.380)     (1.880)       (2.990)
       Age                                    -0.003       -0.001       -0.001      -0.005        -0.000
                                            (-1.130)     (-0.350)     (-0.350)     (-0.450)     (-0.080)
       T enure                                -0.003       -0.004       -0.004       0.001        -0.003
                                            (-0.910)     (-1.180)     (-1.170)     (0.250)      (-1.130)
       W ealth                                 0.073        0.059        0.059       0.155        0.071
                                             (3.600)      (3.690)      (3.690)     (2.670)       (4.280)
       CEOP rominence                                       0.076        0.075      0.134         0.076
                                                          (4.210)      (4.150)     (1.610)       (4.930)
       F irmP rominence                                     0.004        0.004                    0.009
                                                          (0.360)      (0.360)                   (0.830)
       Inst                                                              0.020                    0.047
                                                                       (0.190)                   (0.570)
       P ayroll                                                                                   0.641
                                                                                                 (0.270)
       CEAI                                                                                       -1.448
                                                                                                (-0.770)
       LogIncomeState                                                                             0.285
                                                                                                 (2.300)
       R2                       0.446        0.445        0.445        0.445        0.170         0.450


The table reports coeﬃcient estimates of the following OLS regression:

                   Investment = α + β × SingleP red + γ × X + δ × Y + ζ × Z,

where Investment is capital expenditures plus acquisitions minus asset sales plus R&D expenditure plus
advertising expenditure (scaled by net property, plant & equipment), SingleP red is the predicted value for
Single computed using coeﬃcient estimates for the corresponding speciﬁcation in Table 10, X is a set of ﬁrm
characteristics, Y is a set of CEO characteristics, and Z is a set of state-level control variables (the speciﬁc
variable deﬁnitions are given in Sections 2 and 4.3). All speciﬁcations also include industry (based on the
Fama-French 49-industry classiﬁcation) and year ﬁxed eﬀects (unreported). T-statistics are in parentheses,
and are computed using robust standard errors clustered by state, taking into account the uncertainty in
                                                      53
ﬁrst-stage estimates.
