NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AMBIGUOUS BUSINESS CYCLES
Cosmin Ilut
Martin Schneider
Working Paper 17900
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17900

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

We would like to thank George-Marios Angeletos, Francesco Bianchi, Lars Hansen, Nir Jaimovich,
Alejandro Justiniano, Christian Matthes, Fabrizio Perri, Giorgio Primiceri, Bryan Routledge, Juan
Rubio-Ramirez and Rafael Wouters, as well as workshop and conference participants at Boston Fed,
Carnegie Mellon, CREI, Duke, ESSIM (Gerzensee), Federal Reserve Board, NBER Summer Institute,
New York Fed, NYU, Ohio State, Rochester, San Francisco Fed, SED (Ghent), Stanford, UC Santa
Barbara and Yonsei for helpful discussions and comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Cosmin Ilut and Martin Schneider. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Ambiguous Business Cycles
Cosmin Ilut and Martin Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 17900
March 2012
JEL No. E32
ABSTRACT
This paper considers business cycle models with agents who dislike both risk and ambiguity (Knightian
uncertainty). Ambiguity aversion is described by recursive multiple priors preferences that capture
agents' lack of confidence in probability assessments. While modeling changes in risk typically requires
higher-order approximations, changes in ambiguity in our models work like changes in conditional
means. Our models thus allow for uncertainty shocks but can still be solved and estimated using first-order
approximations. In our estimated medium-scale DSGE model, a loss of confidence about productivity
works like 'unrealized' bad news. Time-varying confidence emerges as a major source of business
cycle fluctuations.

Cosmin Ilut
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Bldg., Box 90097
Durham, NC, 27708
cosmin.ilut@duke.edu
Martin Schneider
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
schneidr@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

How do changes in aggregate uncertainty affect the business cycle? The standard framework
of quantitative macroeconomics is based on expected utility preferences and rational expectations. A change in uncertainty is then typically modeled as an anticipated change in risk,
followed by a change in the magnitude of realized shocks. Indeed, expected utility agents think
about the uncertain future in terms of probabilities. An increase in uncertainty is described
by the anticipated increase in a measure of risk (for example, the conditional variance of a
shock or the conditional probability of a disaster). Moreover, rational expectations implies
that agents’ beliefs coincide with those of the econometrician (or model builder). As a result,
an anticipated increase in risk is followed on average by unusually large shocks, reflecting
the higher variance of shocks or the larger likelihood of disasters.
This paper studies business cycle models with agents who are averse to ambiguity
(Knightian uncertainty). Ambiguity averse agents do not think in terms of probabilities
– they lack the confidence to assign probabilities to all relevant events. An increase in
uncertainty may then correspond to a loss of confidence that makes it more difficult to
assign probabilities. Formally, we describe preferences using multiple priors utility (Gilboa
and Schmeidler (1989)). Agents act as if they evaluate plans using a worst case probability
drawn from a set of multiple beliefs. A loss of confidence is captured by an increase in
that set of beliefs. It could be triggered, for example, by worrisome information about the
future. Conversely, an increase in confidence is captured by a shrinkage of the set of beliefs –
agents might learn reassuring information that moves them closer toward thinking in terms
of probabilities. In either case, agents respond to a change in confidence if the worst case
probability used to evaluate actions also changes.
The paper proposes a simple and tractable way to incorporate ambiguity and shocks
to confidence into a business cycle model. At every date, agents’ set of beliefs about an
exogenous shock, such as an innovation to productivity, is parametrized by an interval of
means centered around zero. A loss of confidence is captured by an increase in the width of
the interval; in particular, the “worst case” mean becomes worse. Conversely, an increase in
confidence is captured by a narrowing of the interval and thereby a better worst case mean.
Since agents take actions based on the worst case mean, a change in confidence works like
a news shock: an agent who gains (loses) confidence responds as if he had received good
(bad) news about the future.
The difference between a change in confidence and news is that the latter is followed, at
least on average, by a shock realization that validates the news. For example, bad news is
on average followed by bad outcomes. A loss of confidence, however, need not be followed
1

by a bad outcome. Information that triggers a loss of confidence affects agents’ perception
of future shocks, described by their (subjective) set of beliefs. It does not directly affect
properties of the distribution of realized shocks (such as the direction or magnitude of the
shocks). A connection between confidence and realized shocks occurs only if the two are
explicitly assumed to be correlated.
We study ambiguity and confidence shocks in economies that are essentially linear. The
key property is that the worst case mean that supports agents’ equilibrium choices can be
written as a linear function of the state variables. It implies that equilibria can be accurately
characterized using first order approximations. In particular, we can study agents’ responses
to changes in uncertainty, as well as time variation in uncertainty premia on assets, without
resorting to higher order approximations. This is in sharp contrast to the case of changes in
risk, where higher order solutions are critical.
The effects of changes in confidence are what one would expect from changes in uncertainty. For example, a loss of confidence about productivity generates a wealth effect – due to
more uncertain wage and capital income in the future, and also a substitution effect since the
return on capital has become more uncertain. The net effect on macroeconomic aggregates
depends on the details of the economy. In our estimated medium scale DSGE model, a
loss of confidence generates a recession in which consumption, investment and hours decline
together. In addition, a loss of confidence generates increased demand for safe assets, and
opens up a spread between the returns on ambiguous assets (such as capital) and safe assets.
Business cycles driven by changes in confidence thus give rise to countercyclical spreads or
premia on uncertain assets.
To quantify the effects of ambiguity shocks in driving the US business cycle, we incorporate ambiguity averse households into an otherwise standard medium scale DSGE
model based on Christiano et al. (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). Agents view
neutral productivity shocks as ambiguous and their confidence about productivity varies over
time, a type of “uncertainty shock”. Even though uncertainty shocks are present, standard
linearization methods can be used to solve the model and ease its Bayesian estimation. The
main results are that the estimated confidence process (i) is persistent and volatile, (ii) has
large effects on the steady state of endogenous variables, with welfare costs of ambiguity
about 15% of steady state consumption, (iii) accounts for a sizable fraction of the variance
in output - about 30% at business cycle frequencies and about 55% overall, (iv) generates
positive comovement between consumption, investment and hours worked. It is this positive
comovement that distinguishes confidence shocks from other shocks and leads the estimation
to assign an important role to confidence in driving the business cycle.
We emphasize that changes in confidence can also generate booms that look “exuberant”,
2

in the sense that output and employment are unusually high and asset premia are unusually
low, while fundamentals such as productivity are close to their long run average. An
exuberant boom occurs in our model whenever there is a persistent shift in confidence above
its mean. While agents in the model behave on average as if they are pessimistic, what
matters for the nature of booms and busts is how variables move relative to model-implied
averages. Confidence jointly moves asset premia and economic activity, thus generating
booms and slumps. Moreover, the fact that agents behave as if they are pessimistic on
average helps explain the magnitude of average asset premia, which are puzzlingly low in
rational expectations models.
While we do not assume rational expectations, we do impose discipline on belief sets
in the estimation by connecting them to the data generating process. To describe agents’
perception of a shock, we decompose the estimated shock distribution into an ambiguous
and a risky component. For the risky component, agents know the probabilities. For the
ambiguous component, they know only the long run empirical moments. When forecasting in
the short run, however, agents realize that the data are consistent with many distinct models.
Discipline comes from requiring that admissible beliefs make “good enough” forecasts on
average, under any data generating process that is consistent with the long run moments.
More models are “good enough” in this sense if the ambiguous component of the data is
more variable. As a result, movements in confidence about a shock are effectively bounded
by the variability of the shock.
As an additional check on the size and time variation of the estimated belief sets, we
compare the implied range of output growth and inflation forecasts – a measure of ambiguity
perceived about these variables – to the interquartile range of SPF survey forecasts for
output growth and inflation. Disagreement of survey forecasters is often used as a measure
of uncertainty since disagreement among experts plausibly reflects uncertainty about what
the right model of the future is. We find both similar magnitudes (mean forecast ranges
fluctuate between 0.5 and 2%) and qualitatively similar behavior. For example, both forecast
dispersion and implied ambiguity were low in the boom years of the mid 1990s and increased
at the start of recessions and especially in the 2008 Financial Crisis.
Our paper is related to several strands of literature. The decision theoretic literature on
ambiguity aversion is motivated by the Ellsberg Paradox. Ellsberg’s experiments suggest
that decision makers’ actions depend on their confidence in probability assessments – they
treat lotteries with known odds differently from bets with unknown odds. The multiple
priors model describes such behavior as a rational response to a lack of information about
the odds. To model intertemporal decision making by agents in a business cycle model, we
use a recursive version of the multiple priors model that was proposed by Epstein and Wang
3

(1994) and has recently been applied in finance (see Epstein and Schneider (2010) for a
discussion and a comparison to other models of ambiguity aversion). Axiomatic foundations
for recursive multiple priors were provided by Epstein and Schneider (2003).
Hansen et al. (1999) and Cagetti et al. (2002) study business cycles models with robust
control preferences. The “multiplier” preferences used by these authors assume a smooth
penalty function for deviations of beliefs from some reference belief. Models of changes in
uncertainty with robust control thus typically use tools developed for models of changes in
risk, such as higher order approximations (for example, Bidder and Smith (2011)). Multiple
priors utility is not smooth when belief sets differ in means. As a result, it allows for first
order effects of uncertainty that do not arise under expected utility. This is why linear
approximations are sufficient to study dynamics in response to uncertainty shocks.
Some of the mechanics of our model are reminiscent of rational expectations models with
signals about future “fundamentals” (for example Beaudry and Portier (2006), Christiano
et al. (2008), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008), Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009), Blanchard et al.
(2009),Christiano et al. (2010a) and Barsky and Sims (2011)). On impact, the response to
a loss of confidence about productivity in our model resembles the response to noise that is
mistaken for bad news about productivity in a model with noisy signals. The difference is
that noise in a signal only matters for agents’ decisions if the typical signal contains enough
news. Put differently, noise matters for the business cycle only if news shocks are also present
and sufficiently important. In contrast, confidence shocks and their role in the business cycle
need not be connected to news shocks.1
Confidence shocks can affect agents’ actions (and hence the business cycle) even if they
are uncorrelated with shocks to “fundamentals” (such as productivity) at all leads and lags.
They share this feature with noise shocks as well as with sunspots (for example Farmer
(2009)), stochastic bubbles (Martin and Ventura (2011)) and shocks to higher order beliefs
(Angeletos and La’O (2011)). At the same time, confidence shocks differ from those other
shocks in that they alter agents’ perceived uncertainty of fundamentals. This is typically
reflected in asset premia. Depending on the application, this need not be true for the other
types of shocks.
Recent work on changes in uncertainty in business cycle models has focused on changes
in realized risk – looking either at stochastic volatility of aggregate shocks (see for example Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramirez (2007), Justiniano and Primiceri (2008),
Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2010), Basu and Bundick (2011) and the review in FernándezVillaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez (2010)), time-varying probability of aggregate disaster (Gou1

This distinction between noise, news and confidence and its observable implications are discussed further
in Section 3 below.

4

rio (2011)) or at changes in idiosyncratic volatility in models with heterogeneous firms (Bloom
et al. (2009), Arellano et al. (2010), Bachmann et al. (2010) and Christiano et al. (2010b)).
We view our work as complementary to these approaches. In particular, confidence shocks
can generate responses to uncertainty – triggered by news, for example – that is not connected
to later realized changes in risk.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews multiple priors utility and shows how
ambiguity about the mean of a bet entails first order effects of uncertainty. Section 3 analyzes
a stylized business cycle model with ambiguity about productivity. Section 4 presents a
general framework for adapting business cycle models to incorporate ambiguity aversion.
Here we show how uncertainty can be studied using linear techniques. Section 5 describes
the estimation of a medium scale DSGE model for the US.

2

Recursive multiple priors

Ellsberg (1961) showed that there is a behaviorally meaningful distinction between risk
(uncertainty with known odds or objectively given probabilities) and ambiguity (unknown
odds). For example, many people strictly prefer to bet on an urn that is known to contain
an equal number of black and white balls than on an urn of unknown composition. Gilboa
and Schmeidler (1989) showed that Ellsberg-type behavior can be derived from a model of
rational choice with axiomatic foundations. Their axioms allow for a “preference for knowing
the odds” that is ruled out under expected utility.
For our business cycle application, we use a recursive version of the multiple priors model.
Uncertainty is represented by a period state space S. One element s ∈ S is realized every
period, and the history of states up to date t is denoted by st = (s0 , ..., st ). Preferences order
t
n
uncertain streams of consumption C = (Ct )∞
t=0 , where Ct : S → < and n is the number of
goods. Utility for a consumption process C = {Ct } is defined recursively by



Ut C; st = u (Ct ) + β mint E p Ut+1 C; st , s̃t+1 ,

(2.1)

p∈Pt (s )

where Pt (st ) is a set of probabilities on S that govern the distribution of next period state
s̃t+1 .
Utility after history st is given by felicity from current consumption plus expected
continuation utility evaluated under a “worst case” belief. The worst case belief is drawn
from a set Pt (st ) that may depend on the history st . The primitives of the model are the
felicity u, the discount factor β and the entire process of one-step-ahead belief sets Pt (st ).
Expected utility obtains as a special case if all sets Pt (st ) contain only one belief. More
5

generally, a nondegenerate set of beliefs captures the agent’s lack of confidence in probability
assessments; a larger set Pt (st ) says that the agent is less confident after having observed
history st .
Discussion
The maxmin representation (2.1) is implied by a preference for knowing the odds. Gilboa
and Schmeidler assume that one can observe choice among state contingent consumption
lotteries, as in Anscombe and Aumann (1963) axiomatization of the (subjective) expected
utility model. Lotteries are a source of “objective” uncertainty (known odds) whereas for
the state s there are no objectively given probabilities. Observing choice between state
contingent lotteries can then identify whether or not agents deal with uncertainty about s
as if they think in terms of probabilities.
In particular, the necessary conditions for an expected utility representation in Anscombe
and Aumann (1963) include the independence axiom. It says that C is strictly preferred to
C̃ if and only if any lottery between C and some other plan D is also strictly preferred to a
lottery with the same probabilities on C̃ and D. It implies that an agent who is indifferent
between two consumption plans C and C̃ never strictly prefers a lottery between those two
plans. This latter implication contradicts Ellsberg-type behavior. For example, if one plan
is a hedge for the other then forming a lottery assigns known probabilities to otherwise
ambiguous contingencies.2 Put differently, randomizing between two indifferent ambiguous
plans that hedge each other can transform ambiguity into risk, resulting in a strictly more
desirable plan.
Gilboa and Schmeidler show that a maxmin representation of utility follows if independence is replaced by two alternative axioms. Uncertainty aversion says that a lottery between
indifferent plans is weakly preferred to either plan. The axiom thus allows (but does not
require) strict preference for the lottery, weakening independence. Certainty independence
says that the independence axiom holds as long as D is constant. This axiom says that strict
preference for a lottery between indifferent plans can occur only if in fact one plan hedges
the other. Randomizing with constant plans is not helpful because constant plans cannot
be hedges. For example, a lottery between an ambiguous plan and its certainty equivalent
is never strictly preferred to the certainty equivalent (and hence the plan itself). The latter
property is shared by the multiple priors and expected utility models.
Epstein and Schneider (2003) provide foundations for the intertemporal model (2.1).
They consider a family of conditional preference orderings, one for each history st . Each
2
For example, suppose C pays one if state s occurs and zero otherwise, and C̃ is a perfect hedge for C,
that is, it pays one if s does not occur and zero otherwise. Then a lottery between C and C̃ is purely risky
and may thus be preferable to the ambiguous plans C and C̃.

6

conditional preference ordering satisfies the Gilboa-Schmeidler axioms, suitably modified for
multiperiod plans. Moreover, conditional preferences at different histories are connected
by dynamic consistency.3 The setup of the model also implies consequentialism, that is,
utility from a consumption plan at history st depends only on the consumption promised
in future histories that can still occur after st has been realized. Both dynamic consistency
and consequentialism are properties that are also satisfied by the standard time separable
expected utility model.
First order effects of uncertainty
Consider the effect of a small increase in uncertainty at a point of certainty. Fix a
constant consumption bundle C̄, a date t and a nonconstant function f that maps states
into consumption bundles – a “bet” on the state one period ahead at t + 1. Construct an
uncertain consumption plan C by setting Cτ = C̄ for all τ 6= t + 1, but Ct+1 = C̄ + αf (s̃t+1 )
where α is a scalar. We expand utility around certainty (α = 0). For α > 0, we obtain



U C; st = U C̄; st + β mint E p [u C̄ + αf (s̃t+1 ) ]
p∈Pt (s )



 p0
1 2 00  p0 
2
t
0
= U C̄; s + β αu C̄ E [f (s̃t+1 )] + α u C̄ E f (s̃t+1 ) + ... , (2.2)
2
where higher order terms are omitted and p0 is the belief that achieves the minimum. A
similar expansion holds for α < 0, but the minimizing belief p0 may be different since
consumption depends differently on the state s.
We now compare the welfare effects of small changes in uncertainty by varying α (the
scale of the bet) near zero. To isolate the effect of uncertainty, we focus on bets f such that
for any small α 6= 0, the agent is strictly worse off than at certainty (α = 0). In the case of a
risk averse agent with expected utility (u is strictly concave and Pt (st ) = {p0 }) this simply
0
means that the bet f is actuarially fair, or E p [f (s̃t+1 )] = 0.4 Consider now the magnitude
of the utility loss from an increase in risk as α moves away from zero. The first order term
in (2.2) vanishes, but the second term is negative because of risk aversion. We have restated
the familiar result that, under expected utility, changes in risk have second order effects on
utility near certainty.
Consider next a multiple priors agent. To make the argument as simple as possible,
3

In addition to the recursive representation (2.1), the model also allows for a “sequence” representation
where minimization at every node is over probabilities over future sequences of state s and where those
probabilities are updated measure-by-measure by Bayes’ rule.
4
Indeed, if f were not fair and had nonzero mean then for small enough α of the same sign as the mean,
the first order effect in (2.2) dominates and we obtain higher utility than at α = 0. Conversely, taking fair
bets always lowers utility because u is strictly concave.

7

assume that this agent is risk neutral, so that all higher order terms in (2.2) vanish. In order
for the agent to be worse off than at certainty for any small α 6= 0 we must have
min E p f (s̃t+1 ) < 0 < maxt E p f (s̃t+1 ) .

p∈Pt (st )

(2.3)

p∈Pt (s )

In other words, there is ambiguity about whether the bet is fair. The effects of uncertainty
are now driven only by the first order terms. For example, if α > 0 then the worst case mean
is the negative lower bound, whereas if α < 0 the worst case mean is the positive upper
bound. Changes in ambiguity due to changes in the interval of means (2.3) thus have first
order effects on welfare near certainty. More generally, if the agent is also risk averse, then
higher order also terms matter, but changes in welfare near certainty are still dominated by
the first order terms.

3

A stylized example

To illustrate the role of ambiguity in business cycles, we consider a stylized business cycle
model. Our main criterion for this model is simplicity. We abstract from internal propagation
of shocks through endogenous state variables such as capital or sticky prices or wages. For
uncertainty about productivity to have an effect on labor hours and output, we assume
that labor has to be chosen before productivity is known. This introduces an intertemporal
decision that depends on both risk and ambiguity. In fact, with the special preferences and
technology we choose, the effects of both ambiguity and risk can be read off a loglinear closed
form solution, which facilitates comparison.
A representative agent has felicity over consumption and labor hours
U (C, N ) =

1
C 1−γ − βN
1−γ

where γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion (CRRA) or equivalently the inverse of the
intertemporal elasticity of consumption (IES). Agents discount the future with the discount
factor β. Setting the marginal disutility of labor equal to β simplifies some algebra below
by eliminating constant terms.
Output Yt is made from labor Nt according to the linear technology.
Yt = Zt Nt−1 ,
where log Zt is random. The fruits of labor effort made at date t − 1 thus only become
available at date t. One interpretation is that goods have to be stored for some time before
8

they can be consumed. It may be helpful to think of the period length as very short, such
as a week.
For simplicity, we assume that log productivity zt = log Zt is serially independent and
normally distributed. The productivity process takes the form
1
zt+1 = µt − σu2 + ut+1
2

(3.1)

Here u is an iid sequence of shocks, normally distributed with mean zero and variance σu2 .
The sequence µ is deterministic and unknown to agents – its properties are discussed further
below.
Preferences are given by (2.1) with felicity as above. Agents perceive the unknown
component µt to be ambiguous. We parametrize their one-step-ahead set of beliefs at date t
by a set of means µpt ∈ [−at , at ]. Here at captures agents’ lack of confidence in his probability
assessment of productivity zt+1 . We allow confidence itself to change over time to reflect, for
example, news agents receive. We assume an AR(1) process for at :
at+1 = (1 − ρa ) ā + ρa at + εat+1

(3.2)

with ā > 0 and 0 < ρa < 1. The lack of confidence at thus reverts to a long run mean ā.
Periods of low at < ā represent unusually high confidence in future productivity, whereas at >
ā describes periods of unusual lack of confidence. We further assume that εat is independent
of ut .5
Consider now the Bellman equation of the social planner problem


p



V (Y, a) = max U (Y, N ) + β pmin E V ez̃ N, ã
N



µ ∈[−a,a]

where tildes indicate random variables and where the conditional distribution of z̃ under
belief p is given by (3.1) with µt = µp . The transition law of the exogenous state variable a
is given by (3.2).
It is natural to conjecture that the value function is increasing in output. The “worst
case” belief, p0 say, then has mean µp0 = −a. Combining the first order condition for labor
5

We assume that a is an exogenous persistent process, interpreted as the cumulative effect of news that
affect confidence. Epstein and Schneider (2007) and Epstein and Schneider (2008) present a model of learning
under ambiguity that shows how updating affects confidence and Ilut (2009) considers a model of of updating
about a perpetually changing hidden state. A key feature of those models is that confidence moves slowly
with signals. We thus view a as a reasonable stand-in to examine the dynamics of confidence in a business
cycle setting. More generally, it could also be interesting to allow for correlation between innovations to
confidence and other shocks. This is omitted here for simplicity.

9

with the envelope condition, we obtain
 
−γ 
β = E β Z̃N
Z̃
p0

with µp0 = −a

(3.3)

The constant marginal disutility of labor is equal to the marginal product of labor, weighted
by future marginal utility because labor is chosen one period in advance.

3.1

The effect of uncertainty on hours

With our special preferences and technology, optimal hours are independent of current
productivity (or output). Taking logarithms and using normality of the shocks, we can
write the decision rule for hours as


1 2
n = − (1/γ − 1) a + γσu
(3.4)
2
The equation describes the effect of uncertainty on aggregate hours. Uncertainty works the
same way whether it is ambiguity, as measured by a, or risk, as measured by the product of
the quantity of risk σu2 and risk aversion γ.
As usual, an increase in uncertainty has wealth and substitution effects. Consider first
an increase in risk. On the one hand, higher risk lowers the certainty equivalent of future
production, which, in the absence of ambiguity, is given by N exp(− 21 γσu2 ). Other things
equal, the resulting wealth effect leads the planner to reduce consumption of leisure and
increase hiring. However, higher risk also lowers the risk adjusted return on labor. Other
things equal, the resulting substitution effect leads the planner to reduce hiring. The net
effect depends on the curvature in felicity from consumption, determined by γ. With a strong
enough substitution effect, an increase in risk lowers hiring.
Consider now an increase in ambiguity. When a increases, the planner acts as if expected
future productivity has declined. Mechanically, an increase in ambiguity thus entails wealth
and substitution effects familiar from the analysis of news shocks. The interpretation of
these effects, however, is the same as in the risk case. On the one hand, higher ambiguity
lowers the certainty equivalent of future production, which, in the absence of risk, is given
by N exp (−at ). On the other hand, higher ambiguity lowers the uncertainty-adjusted return
on labor. Again, with a strong enough substitution effect an increase in uncertainty lowers
hiring.
Given separable felicity and the iid dynamics of zt , inspection of the Bellman equation
shows that the value function depends on current output only through the utility of consumption – the other terms depend only on the state variable at , not on current productivity or
10

past hours. It follows that the value function is increasing in output, verifying our conjecture
above. Below, we argue that the “guess-and-verify” approach to finding the worst case belief
that we have used here to solve the planner problem is applicable much more widely.
The complete dynamics of the model are then given by the productivity equation (3.1)
as well as
yt = zt + nt−1 ,

1 2
nt = − (1/γ − 1) at + γσu ,
2


at = (1 − ρa ) ā + ρa at−1 + εat ,
The economy is driven by productivity and ambiguity shocks. Productivity shocks temporarily change output but have no effect on hours. In contrast, ambiguity shocks have
persistent effects on both hours and output.
With a strong enough substitution effect (1/γ > 1), a loss of confidence (an increase in
a) generates a recession. During that recession, productivity is not unusually low. Hours
are nevertheless below steady state: since the marginal product of labor is more uncertain,
the planner finds it optimal not to make people work. Conversely, an unusual increase in
confidence – a drop of at below its long run mean – generates a boom in which employment
and output are unusually high, but productivity is not. In other words, a phase of low
realizations of at will look to an observer like a wave of optimism, where output and
employment surge despite average productivity realizations.

3.2

Decentralization

Suppose that agents have access to a set of contingent claims. Write qt (z̃, ã) for the date
t price of a claim that pays one unit of consumption at date t + 1 if (zt+1 , at+1 ) = (z̃, ã) is
realized and denote the spot wage by wt . The agent’s date t budget constraint is
Z
Ct +

qt (z̃, ã) θt (z̃, ã) d (z̃, ã) = wt Nt + θt−1 (zt , at ) ,

where θt (z̃, ã) is the amount of claims purchased at t that pays off one unit of the consumption
good if (z̃, ã) is realized at t + 1. Since aggregate labor is determined one period in advance,
this set of contingent claims completes the market – claims on (z̃, ã) can be used to form
any portfolio contingent on the aggregate state (Y, a).
Assume that there are time invariant functions for prices q (z̃, ã; Y, a) and w (Y, a) as well
as aggregate labor N (Y, a) that depend only on the aggregate state (Y, a). Assume further
11

that the agent knows those price functions. The Bellman equation is




U (C, N ) + β pmin E W θ0 (z̃, ã) , ez̃ N (Y, a) , ã
p



W (θ, Y, a) = max0
C,N,θ (.)
µ ∈[−a,a]
Z
w (Y, a) N + θ = C + q (z̃, ã; Y, a) θ0 (z̃, ã) d (z̃, ã)

Conjecture again that utility depends positively on the state variable Y . The worst case
mean is then once more µp = −a and the maximization problem becomes standard.
In particular, prices are related to the agent’s marginal rates of substitution through Euler
equations. Letting f µ (z̃, ã|a) denote the conditional density of the exogenous variables (z, a)
implied by (3.1) and (3.2) with µt = µ, we have
w = βC (θ, Y, a)γ
q (z̃, ã; Y, a) = βf −a (z̃, ã|a)

(3.5)
C θ0 (z̃, ã) , ez̃ N (Y, a) , ã
C (θ, Y, a)

 !−γ
(3.6)

The wage is equal to the marginal rate of substitution of consumption for hours. State
prices are equal to the marginal rates of substitutions of current for future consumption.
Importantly, state prices are based on the worst case conditional density f −a . This is how
ambiguity aversion contributes to asset premia and how it shapes firms’ decisions in the face
of uncertainty.
For simplicity, we consider two-period lived firms that hire workers only at date t and
sell output only at date t + 1. To pay the wage bill at date t, they issue contingent claims
which they subsequently pay back out of revenue at date t + 1. The profit maximization
problem is
Z

max q (z̃, ã; Y, a) (ez̃ N − θ (z̃, ã))d (z̃, ã)
Z
s.t. wN = q (z̃, ã; Y, a) θ (z̃, ã) d (z̃, ã)
N,θ(.)

As usual, the financial policy of the firm is indeterminate. Substituting the constraint
into the objective, the first order condition with respect to labor equates the wage to the
marginal product of labor
Z
w=

q (z̃, ã; Y, a) ez̃ d (z̃, ã)

(3.7)

Since labor is chosen one period in advance, the marginal product of labor involves state
prices, which in turn reflect uncertainty perceived by agents. Substituting for prices from

12

(3.5)-(3.6), we find that the planner’s first order condition for labor (3.3) must hold in any
equilibrium.
From the first order conditions, wages and state prices can be solved out in closed form.
R
Let Qf (Y, a) = q (z̃, ã; Y, a) d (z̃, ã) denote the price of a riskless bond. We can then write
w (Y, a) = βY γ ,

Qf (Y, a) = βY γ exp a + γσu2 ,
1
q (z̃, ã; Y, a) = Qf (Y, a) f 0 (z̃, ã|a) exp − σu2
2



a
+γ
σu2

2


−

a
+γ
σu2


!
1 2
z̃ − σu
(3.8)
2

where f 0 is the density of the exogenous variables (z̃, ã) if µt = 0.
With utility linear in hours, labor supply is perfectly elastic at a wage tied to current
output. Since output does not react to uncertainty shocks on impact, neither does the wage.
Uncertainty shocks are transmitted to the labor market because asset prices affect labor
demand. The bond price increases with both ambiguity and risk. Intuitively, either type of
uncertainty encourages precautionary savings and thereby lowers the riskless interest rate
rf (Y, a) = − log Qf (Y, a) = − log β − γ log Y − a − γσu2
The price of a claim on a particular state (z̃, ã) in formula (3.8) is equal to the riskless
bond price multiplied by an “uncertainty neutral” density. We have written the latter as the
density for µt = 0 times an exponential term that collects uncertainty premia.
If agents do not care about either type of uncertainty (a = γ = 0), then uncertainty
premia are zero and the exponential term is one. More generally, the relative price of a
“bad” state (that is, lower productivity z̃) is higher when confidence is lower (or a is higher).
Intuitively, when confidence is lower, then agents value the insurance provided by claims
on bad states more highly. This change in relative prices also affects firms’ hiring decision.
Indeed, since firms can pay out more in good (high z̃) states, a loss of confidence that makes
claims on good states less valuable increases firms’ funding cost. Conversely, an increase in
confidence makes claims on good states more valuable; lower funding costs then induce more
hiring.
The functional form of the state price density is that of an affine pricing model with “timevarying market prices of risk” (that is, time varying coefficients multiplying the shocks). This
type of pricing model is widely used in empirical finance. Here time variation in confidence
drives the coefficient a/σu2 + γ on the shock z̃ and thus permits a structural interpretation
of the functional form. A convenient feature of affine models is that conditional expected

13

returns on many interesting assets are linear functions of the state variables. Consider, for
example, a claim to consumption next period. Its price and excess return are
1−γ γ i

ez̃ N (Y, a)
Y = Qf (Y, a) N (Y, a) exp −a − γσu2

re (z̃, Y, a) = log ez̃ N (Y, a) − log Qc (Y, a) − log Qf (Y, a)
Qc (Y, a) = βE −a

h

= z̃ + a + γσu2
Long run average excess returns have an ambiguity and a risk component. Moreover, the
conditional expected excess return depends positively on a. In other words, a loss of
confidence not only generates a recession, but also increases the conditional premium on
the consumption claim.

3.3

Comparison to news and noise shocks

We have seen that confidence shocks in our model work like unrealized news shocks with
a bias. In this subsection we compare our model with confidence shocks to a rational
expectations model with news and noise shocks. We show that the two models can be
distinguished by considering either quantity moments or asset price data. To this end, we
study a version of the stylized model above in which agents receive noisy signals about future
productivity.
Suppose that, at date t, agents observe a signal about productivity one period ahead.
The joint dynamics of the signal and productivity itself are
st = zt+1 + σs εs,t
1
zt+1 = − (1 − π) σu2 + ut+1
2
where the noise εs,t is uncorrelated with all other shocks and π = σu2 / (σu2 + σs2 ). Since the
conditional variance of var (zt+1 |st ) is (1 − π) σu2 the constant in the second equation ensures
that E [Zt+1 |st ] = 1. The parameter π indicates how good the signal is: if π = 1 then the
signal reveals tomorrow’s productivity (a pure news shock) whereas π = 0 says that the
signal is worthless (a pure noise shock).
Optimal hours are now


1
2
nt = (1/γ − 1) πst − γ (1 − π) σu
2
With a strong enough substitution effect, agents work more if a good signal arrives. Of course,

14

the signal could either reflect good future productivity (news) or a positive realization of εs
(noise). In the news case, the shock will be followed by realized high productivity, but in the
noise case this need not happen (and in fact will not happen on average). Ambiguity shocks
are thus similar to noise shocks in that can they affect actions, but not realized fundamentals.
Nevertheless, it is straightforward to distinguish the news & noise model from the
ambiguity model above. First, consider a simple regression of log productivity on log hours.
In a large sample, we obtain a slope coefficient
β̂ =

cov (zt+1 , nt )
(1/γ − 1) πσu2
= (1/γ − 1)−1
=
2 2
2
2
var (nt )
(1/γ − 1) π (σu + σs )

In other words, if news matters for employment (γ 6= 1), then employment must forecast
productivity. In contrast, the ambiguity model above does not predict such a relationship.
The point here is that while ambiguity shocks work mechanically like noise shocks, noise
shocks can matter only if there are also enough news shocks, and the presence of news will
be reflected in the regression coefficient.
A second important difference between a news & noise model and the ambiguity model
above lies in the predictions for asset prices. The price formula (3.8) shows that an
econometrician who observes data from the ambiguity model will recover a pricing kernel
that features “time varying market prices of risk”. Such time variation would be reflected
for example in predictability regressions of excess returns on forecasting variables. Moreover,
prices changes can be dominated by changes in confidence which can be uncorrelated with
changes in expected fundamentals, thus leading to “excess volatility”. In contrast a news
model predicts that risk premia are constant and asset prices move mostly with expected
fundamentals.

3.4

Bounding ambiguity by measured volatility

Consider now the connection between the true dynamics of log productivity z in (3.1) and
the agents’ set of beliefs. In our model, productivity consists of two components, the iid
shock u that agents view as risky, and the deterministic sequence µ that agents view as
ambiguous. In line with agents’ lack of knowledge about µ, we do not impose a particular
sequence as “the truth”. Instead, we restrict only the long run average and variability of µ,
and thereby also of productivity z. We then develop a bound on the process at that ensures
that the belief set is “small enough” relative to the variability in the data observed by agents.
For quantitative modeling, the bound imposes discipline on how much the process at can
vary relative to the volatility in the data measured by the modeler.

15

Consider first the long run behavior of µ. Let I denote the indicator function and let
Φ (., m, s2 ) denote the cdf of a univariate normal distribution with mean m and variance s2 .
We assume that the empirical distribution of µ converges to that of an iid normal stochastic
process with mean zero and variance σµ2 . Formally, we require that, for any integers k, τ1 , ..., τk
and real numbers µ̄1 , ..., µ̄k ,
T
1X 
I µt+τj ≤ µ̄j ;
T →∞ T
t=1

lim

j = 1, .., k



=

k
Y

Φ µ̄j ; 0, σµ2 .
j=1

In particular, we assume that for almost every realization of the shocks u, the empirical
P
second moment T1 Tt=1 µt ut converges to zero.
For example, if we were to observe µ and record the frequency of the event {µt ≤ µ̄} then

that frequency would converge to Φ µ̄, 0; σµ2 . For a two-dimensional example, the frequency


of the event {µt ≤ µ̄1 , µt+τ ≤ µ̄2 } is assumed to converge to Φ µ̄1 , 0; σµ2 Φ µ̄2 , 0; σµ2 . Similarly, recording the frequency of an event that jointly restricts elements of µ spaced in time
as described by the τj s always delivers in the long run the cdf of an iid multivariate normal
distribution. At the same time, almost every draw from an iid normal process with mean
zero and variance σµ2 would deliver a sequence µt that satisfies the condition.
We also require that the ambiguous component in the data is not systematically related to
the risky component. In particular, we assume that for almost every realization of the shocks
P
u, the empirical second moment T1 Tt=1 µt ut converges to zero. This has implications for the
long run empirical distribution of log productivity z. Indeed, given a true sequence µ that
satisfies the above condition, then for almost every realization of the shocks u the empirical
P
P
mean T1 t zt converges to zero, the empirical variance T1 t zt2 converges to σz2 = σµ2 + σu2 ,
and the empirical autocovariances at all leads and lags converge to zero. In other words, to an
econometrician who sees a large sample, the data look like white noise (that is, uncorrelated
with mean zero and variance σz2 ) regardless of the true sequence µ.
If an econometrician fits a covariance stationary statistical model to the productivity
data, he thus recovers an iid process with mean zero and variance σz2 . Ambiguity averse
agents look at the data differently. Even though they know the limiting properties of µ and
hence of z, when they make decisions at date t, they are concerned that they do not know the
current conditional mean µt needed to forecast zt+1 . They understand that statistical tools
cannot help them learn µt in real time. They deal with their lack of knowledge at date t by
behaving as if they minimize over a set of forecasting rules (that is, a set of one-step-ahead
conditional probabilities) indexed by the interval [−at , at ]. It makes sense to assume that
this interval should be smaller the less variable the data are (lower σz2 ) and, in particular,

16

the less variability in the data is attributed to ambiguity as opposed to risk (lower σµ2 ).
We thus develop a bound on the process at , denoted amax , that is increasing in σµ2 . The
basic idea is that even the boundary forecasts indexed by ±amax should be “good enough”
in the long run. To define “good enough”, we calculate the frequency with which one of
the boundary forecasting rules is the best forecasting rule in the interval [−amax , amax ]. The
forecasting rule with mean amax is the best rule at date t if its mean amax − 21 σu2 is closest
to the true conditional mean µt − 21 σu2 , that is, if µt ≥ amax . Similarly, the rule −amax is the
best rule if µt ≤ −amax . We now require that the frequency with which µt falls outside the
interval [−amax , amax ], thus making the boundary forecasts the best forecasts, converges in
the long run to a number α ∈ (0, 1). Given our assumption on the long run behavior of µ
above, the bound is defined by

Φ amax ; 0, σµ2 = α/2
The number α determines the tightness of the bound. For example, α = 5% implies amax ≈
2σµ .
The bound amax restricts the variability in the worst case mean relative to measured
volatility in the data. Suppose the variance of the productivity is measured to be σz2 . Denote
by ρ = σµ2 /σz2 the share of the variability in the data that agents attribute to ambiguity. Then
√
with α = 5% we require at ≤ 2 ρσz . The bound is tighter if less of the variability in the data
is due to ambiguity. In the extreme case of ρ = 0, the process at must be identically equal
to zero – agents treat all variability in z as risk. In practice, the bound dictates parameter
restrictions on the law of motion for at . In a discrete time model, we cannot impose exactly
√
that at ∈ [0, 2 ρσz ]. However, small enough volatility of εat in (3.2) ensures that those
conditions are virtually always satisfied – this is the approach we follow in our quantitative
work below.
It is interesting to compare how risk and ambiguity affect the long run behavior of business
cycles variables in our simple model. Consider, for example, the empirical mean and variance
of output in a large sample


1 2
1 2
ȳ = − σu − (1/γ − 1) ā + γσu
2
2
σ̄y2 = σz2 + (1/γ − 1)2 var (at )
Here we have used the law of large numbers for u together with our assumptions on µ, which
imply that the long run moments are the same for every possible sequence µ. The bound
puts discipline on the role of ambiguity in explaining business cycles. For example, suppose
17

p
p
√
that we assume ā > 3 var (at ) and ā + 3 var (at ) < 2 ρσz in order to keep a almost
√
always in the interval [0, 2 ρσz ]. Together these conditions imply that var (at ) < (ρ/9)σz2 ,
which in turn bounds the share of σ̄y2 that can be contributed by time-varying ambiguity.

4
4.1

General framework
Environment & equilibrium

We consider economies with many individuals i ∈ I and we assume Markovian dynamics. The econometrician’s model of the exogenous state s ∈ S is a Markov chain with
transition probabilities p∗ (st ). Agent i’s preferences are of the form (2.1) with primitives
(βi , ui , {P i (st )}). Given preferences, it is helpful to write the rest of the economy in fairly
general notation that many typical problems can be mapped into. Consider a recursive
competitive equilibrium. The vector X collects endogenous state variables that are predetermined as of the previous date. Let Ai denote a vector of actions taken by agent i. One
action is the choice of consumption and we write ci (Ai ) for agent i0 s consumption bundle
when his action is Ai . Finally, let Y denote a vector of other endogenous variables not chosen
directly by any agent – this vector will typically include prices, but perhaps also variables
such as government transfers.
The technology and market structure are summarized by a set of reduced form functions
or correspondences. A recursive competitive equilibrium consists of action and value functions Ai and V i , respectively, for all agents i ∈ I, as well as a function describing the other
endogenous variables Y . We also write A for the collection of all actions (Ai )i∈I and A−i for
the collection of all actions except that of agent i. All functions take as argument the state
(X, s) and satisfy
W i (A, X, s; p) = ui ci Ai
Ai (X, s) = arg





+ βi E p V i (x0 (X, A, Y (X, s) , s) , s0 )

max

min W i (A, X, s; p)

Ai ∈B i (Y (X,s),A−i ,X,s) p∈P i (s)

V i (X, s) = min
W i (A (X, s) , X, s; p)
i

;i ∈ I

i∈I

(4.1)
(4.2)
(4.3)

p∈P (s)

0 = G (A(X, s), Y (X, s) , X, s)

(4.4)

The first equation simply defines the agent’s objective in state (X, s) if his belief over
the next exogenous state is p; the function x0 describes the transition of the endogenous
state variables. The second and third equation provide agent i’s optimal policy and value
function; B i is the agent’s budget set correspondence. The function G summarizes all other

18

contemporaneous relationships such as market clearing, the government budget constraint
or the optimality conditions of firms. There are enough equations in (4.4) to determine all
endogenous variables Y .
The equations make explicit only the problems of individuals – agents who maximize
utility – since this is where ambiguity aversion enters directly. The problems of firms can
typically be subsumed into equation (4.4) and the transition function x0 . In particular, this is
true for models in which firms maximize shareholder value, as in our stylized example above.
Indeed, shareholder value depends on state prices that can be taken to be elements of Y .
Firm actions can be elements of Y or X (the latter if they are state variables, for example
prices set for some time) and the firm value can be an element of X. Firms’ optimality
conditions as a function of state prices (cf. (3.7) in our example) are contained in G and x0 .
As in the example, ambiguity affects firms as it is reflected in prices.
We have explicitly split the endogenous variables into A, Y and X to clarify the effect of
the minimization step in (4.2) on the choice of A. If there is only one transition density p (s)
that is the same for all i ∈ I (and thus no minimization step), then the system can typically
be written as a single functional equation. We assume that this is possible here as well. Let
w denote the entire vector of endogenous variables chosen the period before the exogenous
state s is realized. It includes not only the endogenous state X, but also past actions. We
assume that, for given p, there is a function H such that the functional equation
E p [H (w, W (w, s) , W (W (w, s) , s0 )) |s] = 0

(4.5)

has a solution
W (w, s) := (x0 (X, A (X, s) , Y (X, s) , s) , A (X, s) , Y (X, s))
Note that the state variable X is the only element of w that affects W since A and Y were
assumed to not directly affect what happens next period. The general notation here does
not fully exploit this feature of the problem. Nevertheless, writing things with one vector w
will make it easier to describe how the model is solved once the worst case belief is known.

4.2

Characterizing optimal actions & equilibrium dynamics

Characterizing equilibrium consists of two tasks. First, we need to find the endogenous
variables A and Y as functions of the state (X, s). Second, we want to describe the dynamics
of the system when the evolution of the state is driven by the econometrician’s transition
density p∗ . The first task involves solving for worst case beliefs. For every state (X, s), there
19

is a measure p0i (X, s) that achieves the minimum for agent i in (4.2). Since the minimization
problem is linear in probabilities, we can replace Pti by its convex hull without changing the
solution. The minimax theorem then implies that we can exchange the order of minimization
and maximization in the problem (4.2). It follows that the optimal action Ai is the same as
the optimal action if the agent held the probabilistic belief p0i (X, s) to begin with. In other
words, for every equilibrium of our economy, there exists an economy with expected utility
agents holding beliefs p0i that has the same equilibrium.
The observational equivalence just described suggests the following guess-and-verify
procedure to compute an equilibrium with ambiguity aversion:
1. guess the worst case beliefs p0i
2. solve the model assuming that agents have expected utility and beliefs p0i (that is, find
the functions A and Y solving (4.1)-(4.4) given p0i or the function W solving (4.5))
3. compute the value functions V i
4. verify that the guesses p0i indeed achieve the minima in (4.3) for every i.
Turn now to the second task. Suppose we have found the optimal action functions A as
well as the response of the endogenous variables Y and hence the transition for the states X.
We are interested in stochastic properties of the equilibrium dynamics that can be compared
to the data. We characterize the dynamics in the standard way by calculating (or simulating)
moments of the economy under the true distribution of the exogenous shocks p∗ . The only
unusual feature is that this true distribution need not coincide with the distributions p0i that
are used to compute optimal actions.

4.3

First order effects of uncertainty

We now specialize the process of belief sets P to capture random changes in confidence that
have first order effects. We assume that the family of distributions of the state next period
can be represented as
st+1 = E p [st+1 |st ] + εst+1 ;
p ∈ P (st )
(4.6)
where the distribution of the innovation εst+1 is independent of p. The restriction here is that
there is no ambiguity about conditional moments other than the mean. At the same time,
the distribution of εs may depend on the state s. For example, there could be heteroskedastic
shocks.
One example for (4.6) is provided by the belief structure in our simple model (3.1)-(3.2).
In that model, ambiguity is about mean productivity, and confidence is a component of s
20

that is uncorrelated with productivity itself. Using the notation of this section, we have
s = (z, a)0 and
st+1 =

µp − 21 σu2
(1 − ρa ) ā + ρa at

!
+

ut+1
εat+1

!
µp ∈ [−at , at ]

;

(4.7)

Here only the first component of the conditional mean E p [st+1 |st ] – the one corresponding
to productivity itself – depends on p through the mean shifter µp . In contrast, the evolution
of confidence is not ambiguous.
The example suggests a way to specify simple but rich families of beliefs that are
compatible with (4.6). Start from a vector u of fundamental shocks that people feel
ambiguous about. In addition to productivity, this set might contain policy shocks. Next,
define a subvector a of s that has the same length as u to capture confidence about u. Finally,
parametrize the set of beliefs by an interval for each fundamental shock, centered at zero
and bounded by |a|. In principle, confidence could be different for different fundamental
shocks. One could imagine, for example, that ambiguity about fiscal and monetary policy is
correlated, but quite different from ambiguity about technology. This is because the flow of
news that drives confidence is likely to be different for those shocks.
Risk shocks and ambiguity
While the simple model is homoskedastic, we emphasize that (4.6) also allows for
nonlinear specifications that link changes in ambiguity and changes in volatility. For example,
consider a variation on (4.7) with stochastic volatility in productivity that feeds back to

2
agents’ perception of ambiguity. Let s = z, σz,t
st+1 =

2
µp − 21 σz,t
2
(1 − ρσ ) σ̄z2 + ρσ σz,t

!
+

σz,t εzt+1
εσt+1

!
;

Rtp

(µp )2
=
≤η
2
2σz,t

where the parameters of the stochastic volatility process are chosen such that the variance
“almost never” becomes negative. With normal distributions, Rtp represents the entropy of a
belief with mean µp relative to a benchmark belief with mean zero. The inequality says that
2
in periods of high turbulence (high σz,t
), there is also more ambiguity about the conditional
mean, reflected in a wider interval for that parameter.

4.4

Essentially linear economies

The computation and interpretation of equilibria is particularly simple if the conditional
mean of the exogenous state is linear under both the econometrician’s belief and the worst
21

case belief, that is,
∗

E p [st+1 |st ] = s̄∗ + Φ∗ (st − s̄∗ )
p0

E [st+1 |st ] = s̄0 + Φ0 (st − s̄0 )

(4.8)
(4.9)

For the econometrician’s belief, this is a common assumption. For the worst case belief, it
is an implicit restriction on the model that must be checked by guess-and-verify. However,
this type of guess is natural if the family of means E p [st+1 |st ] is linear in st . For example,
in the example (4.7), it is natural to conjecture that the worst case mean is µp0 = −at . We
now describe how the above guess-and-verify method works and how the equilibrium can be
analyzed if (4.9) holds.
Finding the equilibrium law of motion
For a given belief p0 , step 2 of the procedure – finding the equilibrium law of motion –
amounts to finding a solution W (w, s) to (4.5). We look for an approximate solution by
linearization. Define the worst case steady state w̄ by

H w̄0 , w̄0 , w̄0 , s̄0 , s̄0 = 0
Intuitively, this is where w would converge if the law of motion of the exogenous state were
(4.6) with the worst case conditional mean (4.9). The actual law of motion will typically
be different if the true conditional mean differs from the worst case. The worst case steady
state, just like the worst case belief, should be viewed only as a tool to describe agents’
responses to uncertainty.
Denote the deviation from the worst case steady state by ŵt0 := wt − w̄0 and ŝ0t := st − s̄0
and perform a first order Taylor expansion of H in (4.5) around this steady state to obtain

0 
0
0
E p α−1 ŵt−1
+ α0 ŵt0 + α1 ŵt+1
+ δ0 ŝ0t + δ1 ŝ0t+1 |st = 0,
where α−1 , α0 , α1 , δ0 , δ1 are constants determined by equilibrium conditions. Together with
(4.9), this is a familiar system of expectational difference equations. We use time subscripts
to make the notation comparable to other such equations in the literature (as for example in
Christiano (2002)). The timing is that wt−1 contains endogenous variables determined one
period before the exogenous state st is realized and wt corresponds to W (wt−1 , st ), determined once st is known. Under the usual regularity conditions, the method of undetermined
coefficients delivers a solution
0
(4.10)
ŵt0 = ρŵt−1
+ ν ŝ0t .
22

It is important to note that the econometrician’s transition density p∗ has not been used
to find this solution. This is because agents do not know the econometrician’s belief about
the data (we do not impose rational expectations). Instead, agents’ behavior is driven by
their worst case belief p0 . Nevertheless, standard tools from solving expectational difference
equations under rational expectations can be used to find the above approximation to the
equilibrium law of motion W .
Step 3 of the guess-and-verify procedure computes agents’ value functions under the
worst case belief, V 0i say. Nonlinearity of the value functions could be important here; it is
thus useful to compute value functions using higher order approximations around (w̄0 , s̄0 ).
Finally, step 4 verifies the guess by solving the minimization problem in (4.2) for the mean
E p . In our applications, this amounts to checking monotonicity of a function. Indeed,
suppose beliefs are given by (4.7) and the guess is µp = E p0 [zt+1 |st ] = −at . It is verified by
checking whether for any X, A, s = (z, a) and a0 , the function
Ṽ (z 0 ) := V 0 (x0 (X, A, Y (X, s) , s, z 0 , a0 ) , z 0 , a0 )
is strictly increasing.
Characterizing equilibrium dynamics
Consider now the dynamics of the model from the perspective of the econometrician.
Agents’ response to ambiguity leads to actions and hence equilibrium outcomes given by
(4.10). At the same time, the exogenous state moves according to the equation in (4.8), in
which the steady state equals s̄∗ . Suppose the volatility of the shocks is negligible. First
order effects of ambiguity imply that the resulting zero risk steady state is typically not
equal to (s̄0 , w̄0 ). Instead, it is given by s̄ = s̄∗ and


w̄ − w̄0 = ρ w̄ − w̄0 + ν s̄∗ − s̄0

(4.11)

Mechanically, the dynamic system behaves as if it has been displaced from (s̄0 , w̄0 ) so as to
make the impulse response of wt take on the value w̄ in both the first and second period after
the shock. The condition in (4.11) states that when the economy’s time t initial condition is
equal to (wt−1 = w̄, st = s̄∗ ), the linearized equilibrium conditions generate a time t solution
W (wt−1 , st ) that maintains the economy at its initial condition w̄. Put differently, the zero
risk steady state reflects the response of agents who observe s̄∗ at date t and whose ambiguity
aversion leads them to act as if the exogenous state will converge to s̄0 .
Denote by ŵt := wt − w̄ and ŝt := st − s̄∗ the deviations from the zero risk steady state.

23

Combining (4.10) and (4.11), those deviations follow the law of motion
ŵt = ŵt0 + w̄0 − w̄


0
+ w̄0 − w̄ + ν ŝ0t + s̄0 − s̄∗
= ρ ŵt−1
= ρŵt−1 + ν ŝt
In other words, the actual movement of the endogenous variables around w̄ when displaced
by actual shocks ŝt is the same as their movement around the worst case steady state when
displaced by shocks ŝ0t .

5

An estimated model with ambiguity

This section describes the model that we use to describe the US business cycles. The model
is based on a standard medium scale DSGE model along the lines of Christiano et al. (2005)
and Smets and Wouters (2007). Many elements of our model are standard in the literature
(for example in Del Negro et al. (2007), Christiano et al. (2008), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2008) and Justiniano et al. (2011)). What is new is that decision makers are ambiguity
averse. We defer the description of the details of the model that are not related to ambiguity
to Appendix 6.1.

5.1

Setup: parametrizing ambiguity

Preferences reflect both ambiguity aversion and internal habit formation.
As in Section
→
→
−
− ∞
4, utility is defined over uncertain streams of consumption C = C t
where date t
t=0
→
−
consumption C t : S t → <2 includes two goods, the final good and leisure. Agent i0 s felicity
function is:
→
− →
− 
ψL
ui C t , C t−1 = log(Ct − θCt−1 ) −
h1+σL .
1 + σL i,t
where Ct denotes individual consumption of the final good, hi,t denotes a specialized labor
service supplied by the household and θ is controls internal habit formation.
Utility follows a recursion similar to (2.1):
→
→
h
→
i
− 
− →
− 
−
Ut C ; st = ui C t , C t−1 + β mint E p Ut+1 C ; st , st+1 ,

(5.1)

p∈Pt (s )

The sets of beliefs Pt (st ) reflect ambiguity about the transitory productivity level Zt+1 . The
technology shock Zt enters into the production of intermediate goods as described in detail

24

in Appendix 6.1. From the perspective of the econometrician, the dynamics for Zt is:
log Zt = ρz log Zt−1 + σz ztx .

(5.2)

We parametrize the sets Pt (st ) of one-step ahead conditional beliefs about future technology
by an exogenous component at that captures time-varying ambiguity:
x
log Zt+1 = ρz log Zt + σz zt+1
+ µt

(5.3)

µt ∈ [−at , −at + 2|at |]

(5.4)

at+1 = (1 − ρa ) a + ρa at + σa axt+1

(5.5)

where the shocks z x and ax are standard normal iid shocks. As in Section 4, we assume that
the agent knows the evolution of at , but that he is not sure whether the conditional mean of
log Zt+1 is really ρz log Zt . Instead, the agent allows for a range of intercepts. If at is higher,
then the agent is less confident about the mean of log Zt+1 – his belief set is larger.
A convenient feature shared by both the model here and the simple model of section 3 is
that it is fairly easy to see what the worst case scenario is, or which µt solves the minimization
problem in (5.1). Indeed, the environment (given by B, x0 u and G in the general formulation
of section 4) is such that, under expected utility and rational expectations, a first order
solution is known to provide a satisfactory approximation to the equilibrium dynamics.
Moreover, it can be checked that the value function, under expected utility, is increasing in
Zt . This monotonicity implies that the worst case scenario belief that solves the minimization
problem in (5.1) is given by the lower bound of the set [−at , −at + 2|at |]. Intuitively, it is
natural that the agents take into account that the worst case is always that the mean
of productivity innovations is as low as possible. According to the worst case belief p0 ,
technology thus evolves as
x
log Zt+1 = ρz log Zt + σz zt+1
− at

(5.6)

Choosing ambiguity parameters
Time variation in ambiguity is governed by the three parameters a, ρa and σa . Two
considerations matter for selecting a prior over these parameters. The first is technical: we
would like the interval for µ remains centered around zero which is true only if a remains
nonnegative. Unfortunately, nonnegativity is incompatible with a linear law of motion for
a. We thus require parameters such that the unconditional mean ā is more than three

25

unconditional standard deviations away from zero:
σa
.
1 − ρ2a

a ≥ 3p

(5.7)

As a result, the probability that a becomes negative is less than .15%, and any negative as
will be small. Any a close to zero will thus represent a small set of belief that is close to
having a single mean close to zero - a very confident agent.
The second consideration is that we want to bound the lack of confidence by the measured
variance of the shock that agents perceive as ambiguous. In section 3.4 we argued that a
√
reasonable upper bound for a is given by 2 ρσz , where ρ ∈ [0, 1] is the share of the variability
in the data that agents attribute to ambiguity. When ρ = 1 we obtain the largest upper
bound, i.e. at ≤ 2σz . Again we cannot enforce the bound exactly, but assume that it is
violated with probability .13%:
σa
≤ 2σz .
1 − ρ2a

(5.8)

a + 3p

In preliminary estimations of the model, we find that when the three ambiguity parameters a, ρa and σa are separately estimated the implied unconditional volatility of the at
process is so large that it implies very frequent negative realizations to at . We thus restrict
attention to the subset of the parameter space in which (5.7) is binding. It is helpful to
write a = nσz with n ∈ [0, 1] because of (5.8). We estimate two ambiguity parameters ρa
and n, together with the other parameters of the model, including σz . We can then compute
a = nσz and infer σa from (5.7).

5.2

Estimation and Data

The solution of our model with ambiguity follows the general steps described in section 4.4;
details are in Appendix 6.3. The linearity of the state space representation of the model and
the assumed normality of the shocks allow us to estimate the model using standard Bayesian
methods as discussed for example in An and Schorfheide (2007) and Smets and Wouters
(2007). We estimate the posterior distribution of the structural parameters by combining
the likelihood function with prior information. The likelihood is based on the following
vector of observable variables:


∆ log YtG , ∆ log It , ∆ log Ct , log Lt , log πt , log Rt , ∆ log PI,t

26



where ∆ denotes the first difference operator. The vector of observables refers to data for
US on GDP growth rate, investment growth rate, consumption growth rate, log of hours per
capita, log of gross inflation rate, log of gross short term nominal interest rate and price of
investment growth rate. The sample period used in the estimation is 1984Q1-2010Q1. The
data sources are described in Appendix 6.4. In the state space representation we do not
allow for a measurement error on any of the observables.
We now discuss the priors on the structural parameters. The only parameter we calibrate
is the share of government expenditures in output which is set to match the observed
empirical ratio of 0.22. The rest of the structural parameters are estimated. The priors on
the parameters not related to ambiguity and thus already present in the standard medium
scale DSGE are broadly in line with those adopted in previous studies (e.g. Christiano et al.
(2010b) and Justiniano et al. (2011)). The prior for each of the autocorrelation parameter
of the shock processes is a Beta distribution with a mean of 0.5 and a standard deviation
of 0.15. The prior distribution for the standard deviation of the 7 fundamental shocks is an
Inverse Gamma with a mean of 0.01 and a standard deviation of 0.01.
Regarding the ambiguity parameters, we follow the argument in section 5.1 and estimate
the two parameters n and ρa . The prior on the scaling parameter n is a Beta distribution
with mean 0.5 and standard deviation equal to 0.25. The prior is loose and it allows a wide
range of plausible values. The prior on ρa follows the pattern of the other autocorrelation
coefficients and is a Beta distribution with a mean of 0.5 and a standard deviation of 0.15.
The prior and posterior distributions are described in Table 2. The posterior estimates
of our structural parameters that are unrelated to ambiguity are in line with previous
estimations of such medium scale DSGE models (Del Negro et al. (2007), Smets and Wouters
(2007), Justiniano et al. (2011), Christiano et al. (2010b)). These parameters imply that
there are significant ‘frictions’ in our model: price and wage stickiness, investment adjustment
costs and internal habit formation are all substantial. The estimated policy rule is inertial
and responds strongly to inflation but also to output gap and output growth. Given that
these parameters have been extensively analyzed in the literature, we now turn attention to
the role of ambiguity in our estimated model.

5.3

Results: steady state

Ambiguity has important effects on both the steady state and the business cycle of our
model. Consider first the steady state. The posterior mode of the structural parameters of
ambiguity implies that the steady state level of ambiguity is
a = nσz = 0.963 × 0.0045 = 0.00435,
27

which means that the agent is on average concerned about a one-step ahead future technology
level that is 0.435% lower than the true technology, normalized to 1. In the long run, the
agent expects the technology level to be Z ∗ , which solves:
log Z ∗ = ρz log Z ∗ − a.
For the estimated ρz = 0.955, we get that Z ∗ = 0.903. Thus, the ambiguity-averse agent
expects under his worst case scenario evaluation the long run mean technology to be
approximately 9% lower than the true mean. Based on these estimates and using (5.7), we
can directly find that the standard deviation of the innovations to ambiguity is σa = 0.000405.
Our interpretation of the reason we find a relatively large a is the following: the estimation
prefers to have a large σa because the ambiguity shock provides a channel in the model that
delivers dynamics that seem to be favored by the data. Indeed, as detailed in the next section,
the ambiguity shocks generate comovement between variables that enter in the observation
equation. This is a feature that is strongly present in the data and is not easily captured by
other shocks. Given the large role that the fit of the data places on the ambiguity shock,
the implied estimated σa is relatively large. Because of the constraint on the size of the
mean ambiguity in (5.7), this results also in a large required steady state ambiguity. Thus,
given also the estimated σz , the posterior mode for n is relatively large. The picture that
comes out of these estimates is that ambiguity is large in the steady state, it is volatile and
persistent.
The estimated amount of ambiguity has substantial effects on the steady state of endogenous variables.6 To describe these effects we perform the following calculations.7 We fix
all the estimated parameters of the model at their posterior mode but change the standard
deviation of the transitory technology shock, σz , from its estimated value of σ z = 0.0045 to
being equal to 0. When σz = 0, then the level of ambiguity a is also equal to 0.8 By reporting
the difference between the steady states with σz = σ z > 0 and with σz = 0 we calculate the
steady state effect of fluctuations in transitory technology that goes through the estimated
amount of ambiguity. In Table 1 we present the net percent difference of some variables of
interest between the two cases, i.e. for a variable X we report 100[XSS(σz =σz ) , /XSS(σz =0) −1],
where XSS(σz =σz ) and XSS(σz =0) are the steady states of variable X under σz = σ z and
6

As described in Section 4.4, we refer to the steady state of our linearized model as a ‘zero risk steady
state’, in which the variances of the shocks only have an effect on the endogenous variables through ambiguity.
7
The quantitative implications of the model are reported by evaluating parameters at the posterior mode.
8
As evident from equation (5.8) or from the discussion of Section 3.4, since 0 ≤ a ≤ σz , then σz = 0
implies a = 0. Intuitively, when there is no observed variability in the zt process, then there cannot be any
perceived ambiguity about its one-step ahead mean.

28

respectively σz = 0.9
Table 1: Steady state percent difference from zero fluctuations
Variable

W elf are Output Capital
-13.1
-15
-14

Consumption Hours N om.Rate
-16.4
-14.8
-42.5

As evident from Table 1, the effect of fluctuations in the transitory technology shock
that goes through ambiguity is very substantial. Output, capital, consumption, hours are all
significantly smaller, by about 15%, when σz = σ z . The nominal interest rate is smaller by
42%, which corresponds to the quarterly steady state interest rate being lower by 73 basis
points. Importantly, the welfare cost of fluctuations in this economy is also very large, of
about 13% of steady state consumption.
The steady state effects of fluctuations in technology that go through ambiguity are much
larger than what it is implied by the standard analysis featuring only risk, as for example
in Lucas (1987). By standard analysis we mean the strategy of shutting down all the other
shocks except the transitory technology and computing a second order approximation of the
model in which there is no ambiguity but σz = σ z . For such a calculation, we find that the
welfare cost of business cycle fluctuations is around 0.01% of steady state consumption. The
effects on the steady state values of the other variables reported in Table 1 is negligible.

5.4

Results: business cycle fluctuations

In this section we analyze the role of time-varying ambiguity in generating business cycles.
We highlight the role of ambiguity by discussing three main points: a theoretical variance
decomposition of variables; a historical variance decomposition based on the smoothed shocks
and impulse responses experiments. We conclude by comparing our model implications for
forecast dispersion to survey data.
Variance decomposition
Table 3 reports the theoretical variance decomposition of several variables of interest.
For each structural shock we compute the share of the total variation in the corresponding
variable that is accounted by that shock at two horizons: one is at the business cycle
frequency which incorporates periodic components with cycles between 6 and 32 quarters,
as in Stock and Watson (1999). The second is at a long-run horizon which is the theoretical
variance decomposition obtained by solving the dynamic Lyapunov equation characterizing
9

For welfare, we report the difference in terms of steady state consumption under σz = 0.

29

the law of motion of the model. These two shares are reported in the first two rows of
Table 3. In the third row, we also report for comparison the variance decomposition in an
estimated model without ambiguity.
At business cycle frequency the ambiguity shock accounts for about 27% of GDP variability. It simultaneously explains a large share of real variables such as consumption (52%),
investment (14%), hours (31%) and less for inflation (2%) and the nominal interest rate (7%).
The long-run theoretical decomposition implies that the shock is even more important. It
explains about 55% of GDP variability and it is a significant driver of the other variables:
consumption (62%), investment (51%), hours (52%), inflation (29%) and the nominal interest
rate (38%). Based on these two sets of numbers we can conclude that the ambiguity shock
is an important factor of business cycle fluctuations while also having a low-frequency
component that magnifies its role in the total variance decomposition. The simultaneous
large shares of variation explained by ambiguity suggest that time-variation in the agents’
confidence about technology shocks can be a unified source of macroeconomic variability.
For comparison, we can analyze the estimated model without ambiguity. The business
cycle frequency variance decomposition for a model that sets the level of ambiguity to zero,
i.e. n = 0, is reported in the third row of Table 3. There the largest share of GDP variability
is explained by the marginal efficiency of investment shock, confirming the results of many
recent studies, such as Christiano et al. (2010b) and Justiniano et al. (2011). Introducing
time-varying ambiguity reduces the importance of the other shocks, except for the transitory
technology shock Zt , in explaining the decomposition of the level of observed variables. The
reduction in effects are especially strong for the marginal efficiency of investment and growth
rate shocks. With ambiguity, the shock Zt becomes more important. The reason is that
ambiguity enters in the model indirectly through the variance of σz . Thus, with ambiguity
the estimated variance of Zt affects the likelihood evaluation through two channels: one
direct, through the shock Zt , and one indirect through the variance of the shock at .
Impulse responses
We now turn to analyzing the impulse responses for the ambiguity shock in the estimated
model. As suggested already in the discussion, an increase in ambiguity generates a recession,
in which hours worked, consumption and investment fall. It is also worth emphasizing that
the impulse response is symmetric: a fall in ambiguity, compared to steady state, generates
an economic boom in which variables comove positively. The fact that this shock predicts
comovement between these variables is an important feature that helps explain why the
estimation prefers in the likelihood maximization such a shock.
Before we proceed further, let us define the excess return on capital. The return on
capital RtK is defined in equation (6.18) in Appendix. The ex-post excess return ext+1 is
30

then defined as the difference between the realized return on capital and the nominal interest
K
rate, i.e. ext+1 := Rt+1
−Rt . As detailed in Appendix, from the two intertemporal optimality
conditions with respect to capital and bonds, it follows that in the linearized equilibrium,
0
0
K
. Thus, under the worst case expectations, Etp ext+1 = 0. However, the
Rt equals Etp Rt+1
0
K
K
average realized Rt+1
will be in general different than Etp Rt+1
. The reason is that the former
is obtained under the true data generating process in which the worst case mean at does not
0
K
K
represents the average Rt+1
materialize on average in the realization of zt+1 , while Etp Rt+1
if at would materialize.
Figure 3 plots the responses to a one standard deviation increase in ambiguity for the
estimated model.10 On top of the mentioned comovement in macro aggregates, the model
also predicts a fall in the price of capital, a fall in the real interest rate and a countercyclical
ex-post excess return.11
We briefly explain these results. The main intuition in understanding the effect of the
ambiguity shock is to relate it to its interpretation of a news shock. An increase in ambiguity
makes the agent act under a more cautious forecast of the future technology. From an
outside observer that analyzes the agent’s behavior, it seems that this agent acts under
some negative news about future productivity. This negative news interpretation of the
increase in ambiguity helps explain the mechanics and economics of the impulse response.
As described in detail in Christiano et al. (2008) and Christiano et al. (2010a), in a rational
expectations model, a negative news about future productivity can produce a significant
bust in real economy while simultaneously generating a fall in the price of capital. This
result is reflected in our impulse response. In our model, the negative news is on average not
materialized, because nothing changed in the true process for technology, as shown in the
first panel of Figure 3. However, because of the persistent effect of ambiguity, the economy
continues to go through a prolonged recession.
The ex-post excess return, defined above as ext+1 , is positive following the period of the
initial increase in ambiguity and it is positive persistently along the path. The explanation for
the countercyclical excess returns is that the negative expectation about future productivity
does not materialize in the true data generating process, so ex-post capital pays more. Thus
0
K
K
along this path of higher ambiguity, Rt+1
is systematically higher than Etp Rt+1
. The ex-post
excess return reflects a rational uncertainty premium that ambiguity averse agents require
to invest in the uncertain asset.
Historical shock decomposition
10

The impulse response is plotted as percentage deviations from the ‘zero risk steady state’ of the model.
By price of capital we mean the Tobin’s marginal q. For the equation determining the evolution of qt in
the scaled version of our economy, see equation (6.20) in Appendix.
11

31

We conclude the description of the role of ambiguity shocks in business cycle fluctuations
by discussing the historical variance decomposition and the smoothed shocks that result from
the estimated model. In Figure 1 we plot the Kalman filter estimate of the ambiguity shock
at , as a deviation from its steady state value. The figure first shows that ambiguity is very
persistent. After an initial increase around 1991, which also corresponds to an economic
downturn, the level of ambiguity was low and declining during the 90’s, reaching its lowest
values around 2000. It then increases back to levels close to steady state until 2005. Following
a few years of relatively small upward deviations from its mean, ambiguity spikes starting
in 2008. Ambiguity rapidly increases, so that throughout 2008 it doubles over each quarter.
Ambiguity reaches its peak in 2008Q4 when it is 8 times larger than its 2008Q1 value. The
figure shows a dotted vertical line at 2008Q3, which corresponds to the Lehman Brothers
bankruptcy. Our model interprets the period following 2008Q1 as one in which ambiguity
about future productivity has increased dramatically.
Based on these smoothed path of ambiguity shocks we can now calculate what the model
implies for the historical evolution of endogenous variables. In Figure 2 we compare, as
deviations from steady state, the observed data with the counterfactual historical evolution
for the growth rate of output, consumption, investment and the level of hours worked when
the ambiguity shock is the only shock active in the model economy. The ambiguity shock
implies a path for variables that comes close to matching the data, especially for output,
consumption and hours. The model implied path of investment is less volatile but the
correlation with the observed data is still significantly large. It is interesting that the
ambiguity shock helps explain some of the business cycle frequency of these variables but
also the low-frequency component as present in hours worked.12
The ambiguity shock generates the three large recessions observed in this sample. Indeed,
if we analyze the smoothed path of the shock in Figure 2, the time-varying ambiguity
helps explain the recession of the 1991, the large growth of the 1990’s (as a period of
low ambiguity), and then the recession of 2001. Given that the estimated ambiguity still
continues to rise through 2005, the model misses by predicting a more prolonged recession
than in the data, where output picks up quickly. The rise in ambiguity in 2008 predicts
in the model that output, investment and consumption fall. The model matches the fall in
consumption, but fails to generate a large fall in investment. It is important to highlight
that the ambiguity shock implies that in the model consumption and investment comove.
Indeed, in the historical decomposition, recessions are times when both of these variables
fall. This is an important effect because standard shocks that have been recently found to be
12

Usually the low-frequency movement in hours worked is attributed to exogenous labor supply shocks,
corresponding to shocks to ψL in our model. See for example Justiniano et al. (2011).

32

quantitatively important (as for example in Christiano et al. (2010b) and Justiniano et al.
(2011)), such as the marginal efficiency of investment or intertemporal preference shocks
imply a weak, and most often a negative comovement between these two components.
Survey dispersion data
Our estimation treats confidence about productivity as a latent variable with its range
restricted by the measured volatility of productivity. The results suggest that time variation
in confidence is an important source of observed economic fluctuations. We provide external
validation for our model by comparing model-implied confidence to popular measures of
confidence based on the dispersion of survey forecasts. In particular, we look at data from
the Survey of Professional Forecasters on one quarter ahead projections for Q/Q real GDP
growth and inflation, expressed in annualized percentage points. Our measure of dispersion
is the interquartile range (the difference between the 75th percentile and the 25th percentile).
We also construct model-implied measures of confidence about GDP growth and inflation.
Agents’ belief sets about one-quarter-ahead technology shocks are given by (5.3)-(5.5).
Agents also know the structure of the economy, so that their set of forecast means about any
variable Xt+1 can be read off the (linearized) solution of the model. Our measure of (lack
of) confidence about Xt+1 is the range of forecasts, Rt Xt+1 , implied by the belief set:
Rt Xt+1 := E at Xt+1 − E −at Xt+1 = 2|E at (Xt+1 |st = 0)|,

(5.9)

where E at (Xt+1 |st = 0) denotes the conditional expectation of Xt+1 evaluated at at and at
values of the other state variables, denoted here by st , equal to zero. The latter equality in
(5.9) follows from the linearity of the law of motion for Xt+1 . Finally, we use the absolute
value operator to maintain a positively valued range.
Table 4 reports summary statistics. The first column shows that the mean range of
forecasts is very similar in magnitude to the SPF interquartile range for both inflation and
real GDP growth. The second column says that the variability of the range of forecasts is
similar to the SPF interquartile range for inflation, while it is about half the SPF interquartile
range for growth. The third column shows the correlation coefficient between the measures:
it is significantly positive for both inflation and growth. Figure 4 plots the range of forecasts
implied by the belief set (solid line) against the SPF interquartile range (dashed line). The
top panel shows real GDP growth and the bottom one shows inflation. The main disconnect
between the model and the data is the high SPF real growth forecast dispersion in the late
1980s. Otherwise, the time path generated by the ambiguity shock at matches qualitatively
the alternative measures of confidence obtained from survey forecasts.

33

References
An, S. and F. Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric
Reviews, 26, 113–172.
Angeletos, G. and J. La’O (2011): “Decentralization, Communication, and the Origins
of Fluctuations,” NBER Working Papers 17060.
Anscombe, F. and R. Aumann (1963): “A Definition of Subjective Probability,” Annals
of mathematical statistics, 199–205.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. Kehoe (2010): “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in
Uncertainty,” FRB of Minneapolis, Research Department Staff Report.
Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. Sims (2010): “Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
Evidence from Business Survey Data,” NBER Working Papers 16143.
Barsky, R. and E. Sims (2011): “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of
Innovations in Consumer Confidence,” The American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2011): “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand,”
Boston College Working Papers 774.
Beaudry, P. and F. Portier (2006): “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review, 96, 1293–1307.
Bidder, R. and M. Smith (2011): “Robust Control in a Nonlinear DSGE Model,”
Unpublished manuscript, San Francisco Fed.
Blanchard, O., J. L’Huillier, and G. Lorenzoni (2009): “News, Noise, and
Fluctuations: An Empirical Exploration,” NBER Working Papers 15015.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, and N. Jaimovich (2009): “Really Uncertain Business
Cycles,” Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.
Cagetti, M., L. P. Hansen, T. Sargent, and N. Williams (2002): “Robustness and
Pricing with Uncertain Growth,” Review of Financial Studies, 15, 363–404.
Calvo, G. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 12, 383–398.
Christiano, L. (2002): “Solving Dynamic Equilibrium Models by a Method of Undetermined Coefficients,” Computational Economics, 20, 21–55.
34

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113.
Christiano, L., C. Ilut, R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2008): “Monetary Policy and
Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles,” ECB Working Papers 955, European Central Bank.
——— (2010a): “Monetary Policy and Stock Market Booms,” NBER Working Papers 16402.
Christiano, L., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2010b): “Financial Factors in Economic
Fluctuations,” Working Papers 1192, European Central Bank.
Del Negro, M., F. Schorfheide, F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2007): “On the Fit
of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25, 123–143.
Ellsberg, D. (1961): “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 643–669.
Epstein, L. and T. Wang (1994): “Intertemporal Asset Pricing under Knightian
Uncertainty,” Econometrica, 62, 283–322.
Epstein, L. G. and M. Schneider (2003): “Recursive Multiple-Priors,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 113, 1–31.
——— (2007): “Learning Under Ambiguity,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 1275–1303.
——— (2008): “Ambiguity, Information Quality, and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance,
63, 197–228.
——— (2010): “Ambiguity and Asset Markets,” Annual Review of Financial Economics,
forthcoming.
Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): “Optimal Monetary Policy
with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 281–313.
Farmer, R. (2009): “Confidence, Crashes and Animal Spirits,” NBER Working Papers
14846.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, J. Rubio-Ramı́rez, and
M. Uribe (2010): “Risk Matters: The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks,” The American
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Fernández-Villaverde, J. and J. Rubio-Ramirez (2007): “Estimating Macroeconomic Models: A Likelihood Approach,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 1059–1087.
35

Fernández-Villaverde, J. and J. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2010): “Macroeconomics and
Volatility: Data, Models, and Estimation,” NBER Working Papers 16618.
Fisher, J. (2006): “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-specific Technology
Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy, 114, 413–451.
Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989): “Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-unique
Prior,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 18, 141–153.
Gourio, F. (2011): “Disasters Risk and Business Cycles,” The American Economic Review,
forthcoming.
Hansen, L., T. Sargent, and T. Tallarini (1999): “Robust Permanent Income and
Pricing,” Review of Economic Studies, 66, 873–907.
Ilut, C. (2009): “Ambiguity Aversion: Implications for the Uncovered Interest Rate Parity
Puzzle,” Unpublished manuscript, Duke University.
Jaimovich, N. and S. Rebelo (2009): “Can News about the Future Drive the Business
Cycle?” The American Economic Review, 99, 1097–1118.
Justiniano, A. and G. Primiceri (2008): “The Time-Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” The American Economic Review, 98, 604–641.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2011): “Investment Shocks and
the Relative Price of Investment,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 101–121.
Lucas, R. (1987): Models of Business Cycles, Basil Blackwell Oxford.
Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2011): “Economic Growth with Bubbles,” The American
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2008): “What’s News in Business Cycles,” NBER
Working Papers 14215.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” The American Economic Review, 97, 586–606.
Stock, J. and M. Watson (1999): “Business Cycle Fluctuations in US Macroeconomic
Time Series,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1, 3–64.

36

Figure 1: Estimated ambiguity shock
−3

x 10

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1
−1.5
−2

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 2: Historical shock decomposition
Output Growth

Consumption Growth

0.02

0.02

0

0

−0.02

−0.02

−0.04

−0.04
Data (year over year)

−0.06
1985

−0.06

Model implied: only ambiguity shock

1990

1995

2000

2005

1985

1990

Investment Growth
0.4

0

0.2

−0.05

0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.15

−0.4

−0.2

−0.6
1990

1995

2000

2000

2005

Log Hours

0.05

−0.25
1985

1995

−0.8
1985

2005

37

1990

1995

2000

2005

technology

ambiguity

GDP

1
0.5

8

−0.5

0

6

−1

−0.5

4
−1.5
2

−1

10

20

30

40

10

Consumption

20

30

40

10

Investment

20

30

40

Hours worked
−0.4

−0.6

−1

−0.6

−0.8

−0.8
−2

−1
−1.2

−1
−1.2

−3

−1.4
20

30

40

10

ex−post excess return
0.02

6

0

4

−0.02

0

30

40

20

30

40

10

20

30

20

30

40

Net real interest rate

−0.04
10

10

price of capital

8

2

20

Annualized, percent

10

percent deviation from ss

percent deviation from ss

percent deviation from ss

Figure 3: Impulse response: positive shock to ambiguity

40

1.4
1.3
1.2
10

20

30

40

Figure 4: Model implied and SPF range of forecasts

annualized percentage points

Real GDP growth
Model
SPF

2

1.5

1

0.5
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

annualized percentage points

Inflation
1.5
Model
SPF

1

0.5
1985

1990

1995

2000

38

2005

2010

Table 2: Priors and Posteriors for structural parameters
Parameter

Description

Prior
Typea
α
Capital share
B
δ
Depreciation
B
−1
100(β − 1) Discount factor
G
∗
100(µ − 1)
Growth rate
N
100(µΥ − 1) Price of inv. growth
N
100(π̄ − 1)
Net inflation
N
ξp
Calvo prices
B
ξw
Calvo wages
B
00
S
Investment adj. cost
G
ϑ
Capacity utilization
G
aπ
Taylor rule inflation
N
ay
Taylor rule output
N
agy
Taylor rule growth
N
ρR
Taylor rule smoothing
B
λf − 1
SS price markup
N
λw − 1
SS wage markup
N
θ
Internal habit
B
σL
Disutility of labor
G
n
Level ambiguity
B
ρz
Transitory technology
B
ρµ∗
Persistent technology
B
ρζ
Efficiency of investment B
ρ λf
Price mark-up
B
ρg
Government spending
B
ρµΥ
Price of investment
B
ρa
Level Ambiguity
B
σz
Transitory technology
IG
σµ∗
Persistent technology
IG
σζ
Efficiency of investment IG
σλ f
Price mark-up
IG
σg
Government spending
IG
σµ Υ
Price of investment
IG
σ R
Monetary policy
IG

Mean
0.4
0.025
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.5
0.5
10
2
1.7
0.15
0.15
0.5
0.2
0.2
0.5
2
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.005
0.01
0.01
0.005

St.dev
0.02
0.002
0.05
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
5
1
0.3
0.05
0.05
0.15
0.05
0.05
0.1
1
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

Posterior
Mode [ .5 ,
0.322 0.291
0.0237 0.0206
0.353 0.2586
0.5
0.4
0.46
0.43
0.85
0.66
0.743 0.681
0.938 0.912
13.92 6.157
1.959 0.433
2.09
1.771
0.059 0.013
0.209 0.116
0.808 0.751
0.22
0.134
0.135 0.069
0.661 0.535
1.886 1.64
0.963 0.827
0.955 0.928
0.132 0.014
0.494 0.351
0.907 0.62
0.954 0.923
0.957 0.929
0.96
0.936
0.0045 0.0041
0.0044 0.0029
0.0183 0.016
0.0102 0.007
0.0195 0.017
0.003 0.0026
0.0015 0.0013

.95]b
0.353
0.0279
0.4728
0.6
0.49
1.17
0.841
0.953
27.962
4.279
2.473
0.188
0.294
0.842
0.314
0.22
0.729
2.288
0.999
0.974
0.509
0.722
0.961
0.977
0.983
0.981
0.0058
0.0064
0.0231
0.033
0.0236
0.0034
0.0017

a B refers to the Beta distribution, N to the Normal distribution, G to the Gamma distribution,
and IG to the Inverse-gamma distribution.
b Posterior percentiles obtained from 2 chains of 200,000 draws generated using a Random
walk Metropolis algorithm. We discard the initial 50,000 draws and retain one out of every 5
subsequent draws.

39

Table 3: Theoretical variance decomposition
Shock\Variable
TFP Ambiguity (at )

Output
27.2
(55.4)
[-]
Transitory technology (zt )
12.1
(5.5)
[4.1]
∗
Persistent technology (µ,t ) 5.9
(8.1)
[18.8]
Government spending (gt )
3.4
(0.6)
[4.8]
Price mark-up (λf,t )
13.1
(8.4)
[16.2]
Monetary policy (R,t )
3.6
(1.7)
[4.1]
Price of investment (µΥ,t )
1.7
(5.1)
[2.2]
Efficiency of investment (ζt ) 32.8
(15)
[49.6]

Cons.
52.1
(62.7)
[-]
13.5
(5)
[7.3]
5.7
(7.1)
[37.4]
2.1
(0.3)
[4.1]
12.5
(8.6)
[27.2]
5.7
(1.8)
[8.8]
0.5
(4.2)
[1.3]
7.6
(10.1)
[13.8]

Invest.
14.4
(51.4)
[-]
9.6
(5.7)
[3.1]
5.3
(8.4)
[12.8]
0.22
(0.1)
[0.3]
13.3
(8.4)
[14.2]
2.3
(1.7)
[2.1]
2.3
(6.1)
[2.2]
52.5
(18)
[65.1]

Hours
31.1
(52.1)
[-]
2.5
(6.5)
[3.1]
10.4
(9.3)
[29.8]
3.3
(0.8)
[3.9]
14.4
(8.9)
[15.2]
4.1
(1.8)
[4]
1.6
(5)
[1.8]
32.3
(15.4)
[42.1]

Inflation Int. rate
2
7.4
(29.6)
(38.5)
[-]
[-]
23.8
15.9
(15.2)
(10.5)
[17.2]
[15.4]
5.1
1.9
(7.7)
(6.7)
[14.2]
[5.9]
0.75
1.4
(0.5)
(0.8)
[0.3]
[0.7]
61.6
46.8
(32.1)
(18.9)
[65.8]
[58.2]
1
13.1
(1.2)
(6.3)
[0.3]
[11.4]
0.3
0.7
(3.3)
(4.4)
[0.1]
[0.4]
5.3
12.6
(10.3)
(13.9)
[2]
[7.7]

Note: For each variable, the first two rows of numbers refer to the variance decomposition
in the estimated model with ambiguity. The first row is the business cycle frequency and
the second row is the long-run decomposition. The third row, in squared brackets, refers to
the business cycle frequency decomposition in the estimated model without ambiguity.

Table 4: Model implied and SPF range of forecasts
Variable
Mean St.dev Correlation
Inflation SPF
0.74
0.27
Inflation Model
0.82
0.24
0.44 (0.27, 0.58)
Real growth SPF
1.12
0.43
Real growth Model 0.96
0.27
0.25 (0.06, 0.42)
Note: The correlation is between the SPF and model implied range of forecasts.
parantheses we report the 95% confidence interval.
40

In

6
6.1

Appendix
Structure of estimated model

In this section we describe the structure of the estimated model in Section 5.
The goods sector
The final output in this economy is produced by a representative final good firm that
combines a continuum of intermediate goods Yj,t in the unit interval by using the following
linear homogeneous technology:
1

Z
Yt =

Yj,t

1
λf,t

λf,t
dj

,

0

where λf,t is the markup of price over marginal cost for intermediate goods firms. The
markup shock evolves as:
log(λf,t /λf ) = ρλf log(λf,t−1 /λf ) + λxf,t ,
where λxf,t is i.i.d.N (0, σλ2f ). Profit maximization and the zero profit condition leads to the
following demand function for good j:

Yj,t = Yt

Pt
Pj,t

 λλf,t−1
f,t

(6.1)

The price of the final good is:
Z

1

1
1−λf,t

Pj,t

Pt =

(1−λf,t )
dj

.

0

The intermediate good j is produced by a price-setting monopolist using the following
production function:
α
Yj,t = max{Zt Kj,t
(t Hj,t )1−α − Φ∗t , 0},
(6.2)
where Φ is a fixed cost and Kj,t and Hj,t denote the services of capital and homogeneous
labor employed by firm j. Φ is chosen so that steady state profits are equal to zero. The
intermediate goods firms are competitive in factor markets, where they confront a rental
rate, Pt retk , on capital services and a wage rate, Wt , on labor services. The variable t is a
technology shock with a covariance stationary growth rate. The variable Zt is a transitory
technology shock. It is stationary from the perspective of the econometrician, but it is
perceived to be ambiguous by agents, as described in Section 5.1.
41

The fixed costs grow with the exogenous variable, ∗t :
α

∗t = t Υ( 1−α t) ,
with Υ > 1. If fixed costs were not growing, then they would eventually become irrelevant.
We specify that they grow at the same rate as ∗t , which is the rate at which output grows.
Note that the growth of ∗t , i.e. µ∗,t ≡ ∆ log(∗t ), exceeds that of t , i.e. µ,t ≡ ∆ log(t ) :
α

µ∗,t = µ,t Υ 1−α .
This is because we have another source of growth in this economy, in addition to t . In
particular, we posit a trend decrease in the price of investment. We discuss this process as
well as the representation for Zt further below. The stochastic growth rate evolves as:
log(µ∗,t /µ∗ ) = ρµ∗ log(µ∗,t−1 /µ∗ ) + µx∗
,t ,
2
∗
where µx∗
,t is i.i.d.N (0, σµ∗ ) and µ is the steady state growth rate of the economy.
We now describe the intermediate good firms pricing opportunities. Following Calvo
(1983), a fraction 1 − ξp , randomly chosen, of these firms are permitted to reoptimize their
price every period. The other fraction ξp cannot reoptimize and set Pit = π̄Pi,t−1 , where π̄
is steady state inflation. The j th firm that has the opportunity to reoptimize its price does
so to maximize the expected present discounted value of the future profits:

Etp

0

∞
X
s=0

(βξp )s


λt+s 
k
Pj,t+s Yj,t+s − Wt+s Hj,t+s − Pt+s ret+s
Kj,t+s ,
λt

(6.3)

subject to the demand function (6.1), where λt is the marginal utility of nominal income for
the representative household that owns the firm. It should be noted that the expectation
operator in these equations is the expectation under the worst case belief p0 . This is because
state prices in the economy reflect ambiguity.
There are perfectly competitive “employment agencies” that aggregate the households
specialized labor inputs hi,t into a homogeneous labor service according to the following
function:
Z

1

Ht =

(hi,t )

1
λw

λw

di

,

0

where λw is the constant markup of wages over the household’s marginal rate of substitution.
These employment agencies rent the homogeneous labor service Ht to the intermediate goods
firms at the wage rate Wt . In turn, these agencies pay the wage Wi,t to the household
42

supplying labor of type i. Similarly as for the final goods producers, profit maximization and
the zero profit condition lead to the following demand function for labor input of type i:

hi,t = Ht

Wt
Wi,t

 λλw−1
w

.

(6.4)

We follow Erceg et al. (2000) and assume that the household is a monopolist in the supply
of labor by providing hi,t and it sets its nominal wage rate, Wi,t . It does so optimally with
probability 1 − ξw and with probability ξw is does not reoptimize its wage. In case it does
not reoptimize, it sets the wage as:
Wi,t = π̄µ∗ Wi,t−1 .
Households
The household accumulates capital subject to the following technology:


K̄t+1



It
= (1 − δ)K̄t + 1 − S ζt
It ,
It−1

(6.5)

where ζt is a disturbance to the marginal efficiency of investment with mean unity, K̄t is the
beginning of period t physical stock of capital, and It is period t investment. The function S
reflects adjustment costs in investment. The function S is convex, with steady state values
of S = S 0 = 0, S 00 > 0. The specific functional form for S(.) that we use is:
" r 
"r 
#
#


S 00
It
S 00
It
It
+ exp −
− 2.
−1
−1
= exp
ζt
ζt
S ζt
It−1
2
It−1
2
It−1

(6.6)

The marginal efficiency of investment follows the process:
log(ζt ) = ρζ log(ζt−1 ) + ζtx ,
where ζtx is i.i.d.N (0, σζ2 ).
Households own the physical stock of capital and rent out capital services, Kt , to a
competitive capital market at the rate Pt retk , by selecting the capital utilization rate ut :
Kt = ut K̄t .
Increased utilization requires increased maintenance costs in terms of investment goods per
unit of physical capital measured by the function a (ut ) . The function a(.) is increasing and

43

convex, a (1) = 0 and ut is unity in the nonstochastic steady state. We assume that a00 (u) =
ϑrk , where rk is the steady state value of the rental rate of capital. Then, a00 (u) /a0 (u) = ϑ
is a parameter that controls the degree of convexity of utilization costs. In the linearized
equilibrium, only ϑ matters for dynamics. The specific form for a (ut ) that we use is
1
1
a(ut ) = rk ϑu2t + rk (1 − ϑ)ut + rk ( ϑ − 1).
2
2

(6.7)

The ith household’s budget constraint is:
P t C t + Pt

It
+ Bt = Bt−1 Rt−1 + Pt K t [e
rtk ut − a(ut )Υ−t ] + Wi,t hi,t + Xi,t − Tt Pt
t
µΥ,t Υ

(6.8)

where Bt are holdings of government bonds, Rt is the gross nominal interest rate, Xi,t is
the net cash inflow from participating in state contingent securities at time t and Tt is net
lump-sum taxes. We assume that the cost in consumption units of one unit of investment
−1
goods is (Υt µΥ,t ) . The stationary component of the relative price of investment follows:
log(µΥ,t ) = ρµΥ log(µΥ,t−1 ) + µxΥ,t ,
where µxΥ,t is i.i.d.N (0, σµ2 Υ ).
The government
The market clearing condition for this economy is:
Ct +

It
+ Gt = YtG ,
µΥ,t Υt

(6.9)

where Gt denotes government expenditures and YtG is our definition of measured GDP, i.e.
YtG ≡ Yt − a(ut )Υ−t K t . We model government expenditures as Gt = gt ∗t , where gt is a
stationary stochastic process. The fiscal policy is Ricardian. The government finances Gt by
issuing short term bonds Bt and adjusting lump sum taxes Tt . The law of motion for gt is:
log(gt /g) = ρg log(gt−1 /g) + gtx ,
where gtx is.i.d.N (0, σg2 ).
The nominal interest rate Rt is set by a monetary policy authority according to:
Rt
=
R



Rt−1
R

ρR 

πt aπ
π̄



YtG
Yt∗

ay 

YtG
G
µ∗ Yt−1

agy 1−ρR
exp(R.t ),

where R.t is a monetary policy shock i.i.d.N (0, σ2R ), π̄ is the constant inflation target, R is
44

the steady state nominal interest rate target equal to π̄µ∗ /β and Yt∗ is the level of output
along the deterministic growth path.

6.2

Equilibrium conditions for the estimated model

Here we describe the equations that characterize the equilibrium of the estimated model in
Section 5. To solve the model, we first scale the variables in order to induce stationarity. As
mentioned in section 6.1, the model has two sources of growth: a stochastic trend in neutral
technology and a deterministic trend in the price of investment goods. The real variables
are scaled as follows:
α

∗t = t Υ( 1−α t) , ct =
k t+1 =

Ct
Yt
Gt
, yt = ∗ , gt = ∗
∗
t
t
t

K̄t+1
It
, it = ∗ t , λz,t = λt Pt ∗t .
∗ t
t Υ
t Υ

where λt is the Lagrange multiplier on the household budget constraint in (6.8). The scaling
here indicates that because of the deterministic trend in the price of investment goods, the
capital stock and investment grow at a faster rate than output and consumption.
Let µt be the Lagrange multiplier on the capital accumulation equation in (6.5) and
define the nominal price of capital expressed in units of consumption goods as
QK̄,t =

µt
λt

Price variables are then scaled as:
qt =

QK̄,t k
Wt
r̃tk
,
w
e
=
,
r
=
t
t
Υ−t Pt
Υ−t
∗t Pt

We will also make use of other scaling conventions:

µ∗,t

= µ,t Υ

α
1−α

,

p∗t

−1

= (Pt )

Z1

λf,t
1−λf,t

Pj,t



f,t
 1−λ
λ



f,t

dj 

0

,

wt∗

= (Wt )

−1

Z1

w
 1−λ
λ
w

λw
1−λw

Wi,t



di

,

0

where the index i refers to households and the index j to monopolistically competitive firms.
We now present the nonlinear equilibrium conditions characterizing the model, in scaled
0
form. The expectation operator in these equations, Etp , is the one-step ahead conditional
expectation under the worst case belief p0 . The latter is described by equation (5.6).

45

Goods production 1. the real marginal cost of producing one unit of output, mt :

mt =

1
1−α

1−α  α k α 1−α
rt w
et
1
α
Zt

(6.10)

2. marginal cost must also satisfy another condition: namely, that mt must equal the cost
of renting one unit of capital divided by the marginal productivity of capital (the same is
true for labor):
rtk
mt =
(6.11)
 ∗ 1−α ,
µ,t lt
αZt Υ kt
where we used that the labor to capital ratios will be the same for all firms. The aggregate
homogeneous labor, lt , can be written in term of the aggregate, ht , of household differentiated
labor, hi,t :
Z1
Z1
λ
∗ λww
lt := Hj,t dj = (wt ) −1 ht , where ht := hi,t di.
0

0

3. Conditions associated with Calvo sticky prices:

p∗t



= (1 − ξp )

Kp,t
Fp,t

λf,t
 1−λ

f,t

p0

Kp,t = λf,t λz,t yt mt + βξp Et
Fp,t = λz,t yt +

0
βξp Etp






+ ξp

π̄ ∗
p
πt t−1

λf,t
 1−λ

f,t

f,t



(6.12)

λf,t+1
 1−λ

π̄

f,t+1

πt+1
 1−λ 1

π̄

f,t
 1−λ
λ

f,t+1

πt+1

Kp,t+1

Fp,t+1

  1−λ1 1−λf,t
f,t
π̄
1
−
ξ
p πt


= Fp,t 

(1 − ξp )

(6.13)
(6.14)



Kp,t

(6.15)

Households 1. Marginal utility of consumption (FOC wrt ct ):
λz,t

µ∗,t
0
bβ
=
− Etp
∗
∗
ct µ,t − bct−1
ct+1 µ,t+1 − bct

(6.16)

2. Capital accumulation decision (FOC wrt k t+1 ):
0

λz,t = Etp

β
k
λz,t+1 Rt+1
πt+1 µ∗,t+1

46

(6.17)

where the return on capital is defined as:
Rtk

ut rtk − a(ut ) + (1 − δ)qt
πt
=
Υqt−1

(6.18)

and physical capital accumulates following:
k t+1




ζt it µ∗,t Υ
(1 − δ)k t
=
+ 1−S
it
Υµ∗,t
it−1

(6.19)

3. Investment decision (FOC wrt it ):






ζt it µ∗,t Υ ζt it µ∗,t Υ
ζt it µ∗,t Υ
1
0
= λz,t qt 1 − S
−S
+
λz,t
µΥ,t
it−1
it−1
it−1




ζt it µ∗,t Υ
it+1 µ∗,t+1 Υ 2
p0 λz,t+1
0
+ βEt ∗
qt+1 S
ζt+1
.
µ,t+1 Υ
it−1
it

(6.20)

4. Bond decision (FOC wrt Bt ):
λz,t = Etp

0

β
λz,t+1 Rt
πt+1 µ∗,t+1

(6.21)

5. Conditions associated with Calvo sticky wages:
"
wt∗ = (1 − ξw )
πw,t = πt µ∗,t
Fw,t
Kw,t

Kw,t



ψL Kw,t
w̃t Fw,t

 1−λ λ(1+σ
w
w

L)


+ ξw

π̄µ∗ ∗
w
πw,t t−1

1−λw
λw # λ
 1−λ
w
w

w̃t
w̃t−1

(6.22)
(6.23)

λw

 1−λ
1
w
1
1
π̄ 1−λw
λz,t
p0
∗ 1−λw
Et
= lt
+ βξw (µ )
Fw,t+1
λw
πw,t+1
µ∗,t+1 πt+1
λw
 1−λ

(1+σL )
w
π̄
p0
1+σL
∗
= lt
+ βξw Et
µ
Kw,t+1
πw,t+1 

 ∗  1−λ1 1−λw (1+σL )
w
π̄µ
1  1 − ξw πw,t

= w̃t Fw,t


ψL
1 − ξw

(6.24)
(6.25)

(6.26)

6. Capital utilization (FOC wrt ut ) :
rtk = a0 (ut )

47

(6.27)

Monetary policy 1. Taylor rule
Rt
=
R



Rt−1
R

ρR "

πt aπ
π̄



ytG
yG

ay

ytG µ∗,t
G
µ∗
yt−1

!agy #1−ρR

Resource constraint 1. Production function:
( 
)
α
λf,t
u
k
t
t
(p∗t ) λf,t −1 Zt
lt1−α − Φ = yt
Υµ∗,t

exp(R.t )

(6.28)

(6.29)

2. Resource constraint:
y t = ct +

it
a(ut )k t
+ gt +
µΥ,t
µΥ,t Υµ∗,t

(6.30)

it
+ gt
µΥ,t

(6.31)

3. Definition of GDP:
ytG = ct +

The 22 endogenous variables to be determined are:
ct , it , yt , ytG , lt , k t+1 , ut , λz,t , qt , rtk , Rtk , mt , Rt , p∗t , πt , Fp,t , Kp,t , wt∗ , Fw,t , Kw,t , w̃t , πw,t .
We have listed 22 equations above, from (6.10) to (6.31).

6.3

Solution method

Here we describe the solution method for the estimated model presented in Section 5.
The logic follows the general formulation in section 4.4, where we show how we solve
essentially linear economies with ambiguity aversion. The solution involves the following
procedure. First, we solve the model as a rational expectations model in which the worst
case scenario expectations are correct on average. The equations describing the equilibrium
conditions under these expectations were presented in the Appendix 6.2. Second, we take
the equilibrium decision rules formed under ambiguity and then characterize the dynamics
under the econometrician’s law of motion for productivity described in equation (5.2).
Let wt denote the endogenous variables and st the exogenous variables. For notational
purposes, split the vector st into the technology shock zt := log Zt , the ambiguity variable
at and the rest of the exogenous variables, set , expressed in logs, of size n. In the case of our

48

estimated model n = 6. Under the worst case belief
x
− at
zt+1 = ρz zt + zt+1

(6.32)

We can summarize our procedure for finding the equilibrium dynamics in the following steps:
1. Find the deterministic ‘worst case steady state’. Here we take the steady state values
of exogenous variables s̄0 . This vector includes setting at = a, set = se0n×1 and finding the
steady state technology level of the process in (6.32). The latter is
zo = −

a
1 − ρz

Using s̄0 := (e
s0n×1 , z o , a) one can compute the ‘worst case steady state’ of the endogenous
variables. This can be done by analytically solving the equilibrium conditions presented in
section 6.2 evaluated at a deterministic steady state s̄0 . Denote these steady state values of
0
these endogenous variables as a vector w̄m×1
.
2. Linearize the model around the ‘worst case steady state’. Denote the deviation from
the worst case steady state by ŵt0 := wt − w̄0 and ŝ0t := st − s̄0 . Posit a linear equilibrium
law of motion:
0
ŵt0 = Aŵt−1
+ Bŝ0t
(6.33)
and specify the linear evolution of the exogenous variables:



 
b
b
set
set−1
εt




 
ŝ0t :=  zbt  = P  zbt−1  +  ztx 
axt
b
at
b
at−1


h
i0
where Ξt := εt ztx axt
denotes the innovations to the exogenous variables st with
Ξt ∼ N (0, Σ). Importantly for us,
0

0

E p ŝ0t+1 = P ŝ0t + E p Ξt+1 ,

(6.34)

0

where E p Ξt+1 = 0. To reflect the time t worst case belief about zbt+1 , recall (6.32) so the
matrix P satisfies the restriction:



ρn×n 0 0


P = 0
ρz −1 
0
0 ρa

49

(6.35)

where ρ is a matrix reflecting the autocorrelation structure of the elements in set .
To solve for matrices A and B, we can use any standard solution techniques of forward
looking rational expectations model. In particular here we follow the method of undetermined coefficients of Christiano (2002). Let the linearized equilibrium conditions, presented
in nonlinear form in Appendix 6.2, be restated in general as:

0 
0
0
+ δ0 ŝ0t + δ1 ŝ0t+1 |st = 0
+ α0 ŵt0 + α1 ŵt+1
E p α−1 ŵt−1

(6.36)

where α−1 , α0 , α1 , δ0 , δ1 are constants determined by the equilibrium conditions. Substitute
the posited policy rule into the linearized equilibrium conditions to get:

0 = α−1 A2 + α0 A + α1 wt−1 + (α−1 AB + α−1 BP + α0 B + δ0 P + δ1 ) st +
et Ξt+1
+ (α−1 B + δ0 )E
Thus, as in Christiano (2002), A is the matrix eigenvalue of matrix polynomial:
α(A) = α−1 A2 + α0 A + α1 = 0

(6.37)

and B satisfies the system of linear equations:
F = (δ0 + α−1 B)P + [δ1 + (α−1 A + α0 ) B] = 0

(6.38)

3. Consider now the dynamics of the model from the perspective of the econometrician.
Agents’ response to ambiguity leads to actions and hence equilibrium outcomes given by
(6.33), where A and B are determined by (6.37) and (6.38). At the same time, the exogenous
state zt moves according to the equation
zt = ρz zt−1 + ztx

(6.39)

so the steady state of z equals z ∗ = 0. Thus, we have to correct for the fact that, from the
perspective of the agent’s worst case beliefs at t − 1, the average innovation of the technology
shock at time t is not equal to 0. Comparing (6.39) and (6.32), the average innovation is
then equal to at−1 :
0
zt = E p zt + ztx + at−1 .
(6.40)
3.a) Find the ‘zero risk steady state’. Take the steady state of the exogenous variables
under the econometrician’s belief s̄∗ := (e
s0n×1 , z ∗ , a) which differs from s̄0 only in the element
corresponding to the steady state technology level z ∗ . Then, the zero risk steady state is the
50

fixed point w̄ that solves


w̄ − w̄0 = A w̄ − w̄0 + B s̄∗ − s̄0
where the difference s̄∗ − s̄0 =

h

∗

0n×1 z − z

o

0

i0

(6.41)

. Thus, w̄ can be analytically found as:

w̄ = w̄0 + B(s̄∗ − s̄0 ) (I − A)−1
3.b) Dynamics around the ‘zero risk steady state’.
Denote by ŵt := wt − w̄ and ŝt := st − s̄∗ the deviations from the zero risk steady state.
Combining (6.33) and (6.41), those deviations follow the law of motion
ŵt = ŵt0 + w̄0 − w̄


0
= A ŵt−1
+ w̄0 − w̄ + B ŝ0t + s̄0 − s̄∗
= Aŵt−1 + Bŝt

(6.42)

We want to characterize the equilibrium dynamics under the econometrician’s belief in which
the worst case belief at−1 is not materialized in the zt realization. That means that the law
of motion for the exogenous states under the econometrician belief is



ρn×n 0 0


ŝt =  0
ρz 0  ŝt−1 + Ξt .
0
0 ρa

(6.43)

As presented in equation (6.40), we can then describe this evolution by adding an average
innovation of at−1 to the expected value of zt formed under the time t − 1 worst case belief.
The latter expectation is formed using the matrix P as defined in (6.35), so we can write
(6.43) as:


0n×n 0 0


ŝt = P ŝt−1 +  0
(6.44)
0 1  ŝt−1 + Ξt
0
0 0

6.4

Data sources

The data used to construct the observables are:
1. Real Gross Domestic Product, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.6, line 1, billions of USD, in 2005
chained dollars.

51

2. Gross Domestic Product, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.5, line 1, billions of USD, seasonally
adjusted at annual rates.
3. Personal consumption expenditures on nondurable goods, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.5, line
5, billions of USD, seasonally adjusted at annual rates
4. Personal consumption expenditures on services, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.5, line 6, billions
of USD, seasonally adjusted at annual rates
5. Gross private domestic investment, fixed investment, nonresidential and residential,
BEA, NIPA table 1.1.5, line 8, billions of USD, seasonally adjusted at annual rates.
6. Personal consumption expenditures on durable goods, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.5, line 4,
billions of USD, seasonally adjusted at annual rates.
7. Nonfarm business hours worked, BLS PRS85006033, seasonally adjusted at annual
rates, index 1992=100.
8. Civilian noninstitutional population over 16, BLS LNU00000000Q.
9. Effective Federal Funds Rate. Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.
We then perform the following transformations of the above data to get the observables:
10. GDP deflator: (2) / (1)
11. Real per capita GDP: (1) / (8)
12. Real per capita consumption: [(3)+(4)] / [(8)*(10)]
13. Real per capita investment: [(5)+(6)] / [(8)*(10)]
14. Per capital hours: (7) / (8)
15. Relative price of investment: We use the price index for consumption expenditures on
durable goods (BEA, NIPA table 1.1.4, line 4) and price index for fixed investment
(BEA, NIPA table 1.1.4, line 8). We follow the methodology proposed in Fisher (2006).
An appendix detailing the procedure used in the construction of this series is available
from the authors upon request.

52

