                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           IMPROVING POLICE PERFORMANCE IN RAJASTHAN, INDIA:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON INCENTIVES, MANAGERIAL AUTONOMY AND TRAINING

                                            Abhijit Banerjee
                                       Raghabendra Chattopadhyay
                                             Esther Duflo
                                            Daniel Keniston
                                              Nina Singh

                                           Working Paper 17912
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w17912


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       March 2012

  We thank Clément Imbert, Selvan Kumar, Dhruva Kothari, Neil Buddy Shah, and Pankaj Verma for
  their outstanding contributions as research assistants on this project. We are indebted to M.K. Devarajan,
  and M. L. Lather for their insights and comments, and A.S. Gill, formerly Director General of Police
  for Rajasthan Police, for initiating and constantly supporting this research. Previously circulated as
  "Can Institutions be Reformed from Within? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment with the Rajasthan
  Police." The findings and opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not in any
  way engage the responsibility of the Rajasthan Police. The paper was written in complete independence
  and the Rajasthan Police, as an institution, did not weigh in on the analysis of the data or the drafting
  of the report. All the data collected in the course of this project is available for download and public
  use (including, but not limited to, replication of our results) at http://dvn.iq.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/jpal.
  We are grateful for funding from the Will and Flora Hewlett Foundation and the UNODC. The Hewlett
  Foundation was not involved in the drafting of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
  the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2012 by Abhijit Banerjee, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Daniel Keniston, and Nina
  Singh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
  explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Improving Police Performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental Evidence on Incentives,
Managerial Autonomy and Training
Abhijit Banerjee, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Daniel Keniston, and Nina Singh
NBER Working Paper No. 17912
March 2012, Revised November 2014
JEL No. H11,H76,K42,O22

                                             ABSTRACT

The role of good management practices in organizations has recently been emphasized. Do the same
principles also apply in government organizations, even the most bureaucratic and hierarchical of them?
And can skilled, motivated managers identify how to improve these practices, or is there a role for
outsiders to help them in this task? Two unique large-scale randomized trials conducted in collaboration
with the state police of Rajasthan, India sought to increase police efficiency and improve interactions
with the public. In a sample of 162 police stations serving almost 8 million people, the first experiment
tested four interventions recommended by police reform panels: limitations of arbitrary transfers,
rotation of duty assignments and days off, increased community involvement, and on-duty training.
Field experience motivated a novel fifth intervention: “decoy” visits by field officers posing as citizens
attempting to register cases, which gave constables incentives to behave more professionally. Only
two of these, training and decoy visits, had robust impacts. The other three, which would have reduced
middle managers’ autonomy, were poorly implemented and ineffective. Building upon these findings,
we designed a second experiment that provided explicit incentives to police officers to carry out
sobriety traffic checkpoints and did not rely on middle managers. Linking good performance with
the promise of a transfer from the reserve barracks to a desirable police station posting, these incentives
worked within existing organizational constraints and had very large effects on performance.


Abhijit Banerjee                                     Daniel Keniston
Department of Economics, E17-201A                    Yale University
MIT                                                  P. O. Box 208269
77 Massachusetts Avenue                              New Haven, CT 06520-8269
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  and NBER
and NBER                                             daniel.keniston@yale.edu
banerjee@mit.edu
                                                     Nina Singh
Raghabendra Chattopadhyay                            IPS
Indian Institute of Management Calcutta              Inspector General of Police
Diamond Harbour Road                                 Headquarters, Rajasthan Police
Joka, Kolkata 700104 West Bengal INDIA               Jaipur
rc@iimcal.ac.in                                      India
                                                     ninasingh89@gmail.com
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E17-201B
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu
1     Introduction
An extremely important line of work in empirical organizational economics in the last few years
was initiated by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) (henceforth BVR), who argue that the quality of
management has an independent role in explaining firm productivity (“management as technol-
ogy”). In a proof-of-concept experiment in India, Bloom et al. (2013) (BEMMR) demonstrate
that management consultants, by providing specific, customized advice, can improve practices and
profits even in large and successful firms operating in a competitive environment. We investigate
what kind of management reforms can work in a very different type of institution—the police de-
partment of the state of Rajasthan, India— by conducting two consecutive large-scale experiments,
covering 162 then 123 police stations serving several million citizens.
    The police, a rigidly hierarchical organization, may seem an unlikely setting for standard man-
agement principles to apply. More generally, the question is still quite open on whether the broad
principles of good management that are identified in Bloom and Van Reenen’s 2007 work apply
to public organizations or government bureaucracies.1 Bloom et al. (2010) find that, in public
hospitals, competition improves management quality, and in turn financial and health outcomes.
However, a recent paper by Rasul and Rogger (2013) uses a unique dataset from Nigeria to ex-
amine whether the BVR measures of management quality explain productivity differences across
different government departments that do the same thing, and thereby throws a different light on
this issue. The results show that (middle) managerial autonomy, one of the study’s main measures
of management quality, has a positive effect on performance, just as in BVR. However, the aspect
of management related to the provision of incentives, which is associated with good performance
in the private sector in BVR, turns out to be negatively correlated with performance on project
implementation in the Nigerian bureaucracy.
    One possible interpretation of the negative effect of incentives is that strong incentives are just
inappropriate in government jobs. The seminal paper by Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) highlights
the problem of multitasking: the nature of a civil servant’s job may be such that he has to attend to
multiple differing objectives, some of which are much more easily measured than others. This makes
it difficult to reward or punish civil servants based on performance, as such incentives will attract
their attention away from the tasks that not easily measured, potentially with counter productive
effects.   2

   1
     There is also a long line of work showing that incentives (an important principle of management according to
BVR) do work in non-commercial settings. Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003) show that both higher wages (and
therefore a higher cost of job loss) and tighter scrutiny reduces what government hospitals in Buenos Aires pay for
supplies, and Olken (2007) demonstrate that audits reduce corruption in local government construction projects.
In India, Hanna and Dhaliwal (2013) find that while incentives were implemented in a government hospital, health
outcomes did improve.
   2
     Consistent with this point, Bandiera, Prat, and Valletti (2009) show that an increased possibility of external
monitoring of government purchases actually increases the cost to government of those purchases. Prendergast
(2001) makes the related point that part of the difficulty in providing incentives to government workers comes from
the nature of the task; for example, criminals are likely to be the only people who have direct evidence that the police
are not pursuing them very vigorously, but they have no incentive to complain. He goes on to show that attempts to
subject the LA police to external oversight led to a sharp reduction in their effort to fight crime.



                                                           2
   However, another possible interpretation is that the problem is not with incentives per se but
the specific way they get implemented in these government departments: perhaps the managers
interviewed by Rasul and Rogger (2013) did not know how to design incentives in a way that avoids
the multitasking pitfalls. If managers cannot always be relied upon to choose the incentives that
work best, then the effect of incentives is mediated through the competence of the managers who
are assigning them, and the appropriate action is not to abandon incentives, but to give managers
the kind of specific advice that helps them choose the right incentive system.
   The tension between the “best practice” and the “contingency” view of management is neither
new, nor specific to government organizations. In BVR, the specific claim is that the relevant
quality of management is reflected in whether the firm has a certain set of best practices in place,
and hence quantified by asking the manager questions of general principles. For example, one of
the indicators for whether the firm has a proper incentive system is the answer to the question,
“If two people both joined the company five years ago and one was much better than the other,
would he/she be promoted faster?” In BEMMR, on the other hand, the kind of advice offered
by the consultants, while inspired by general principles such as “lean management,” was often
very specific, e.g. “Spares [parts should be] stored in a systematic basis (labeling and demarcated
locations).” The job of the consultant was not only to inform the managers of a given practice, but
also to convince them that it was worth trying. The role of the consultant, who adapts the general
principles to the specific setting of the organization, may be particularly important in government.
   This paper sheds light on these issues using a suite of randomized experiments carried out in
partnership with police department in the Indian state of Rajasthan. In the first set of experiments,
the team implemented a series of reforms designed to improve the behavior of the police officers
with the general public and crime victims. These reforms fall into four categories. The first entailed
training police staff, with a strong emphasis on “soft skills” such as sensitivity and communication
best practices. The second was a pair of interventions aimed at improving the working conditions
of lower-level police staff by guaranteeing them a minimum set of working conditions: (a) rotation
of duty assignments within the police station and guaranteed days off, and (b) a freeze on transfers
of police staff for two years. The third was to install civilian observers at police stations in an effort
to improve community monitoring and understanding of the police. The fourth intervention was
designed to increase incentives for police to register crimes that were reported to them: surveyors
posing as crime victims (henceforth referred to as “decoys”) were sent to police stations to register
imaginary crimes. The decoys then revealed their role, giving the police a sense that they were
being monitored.
   To evaluate these reforms, we collected data through two rounds of surveys including police
interviews, surprise visits by surveyors to police stations, and a large-scale representative crime
victimization survey—the first of its kind in India.
   In the second leg of the project we implemented an incentive scheme to improve the efficiency
with which police officers conduct drunk driving prevention checkpoints. The incentives leveraged
the preference among police staff for assignments to station houses rather than the central police


                                                    3
barracks (“police lines”) in order to provide incentives. We designed an intervention that assigned
staff from the police barracks to some randomly assigned checkpoints and promised them an in-
creased possibility of being transferred to a police station if they conducted checks regularly, and
did well in terms of stopping drunk drivers. Data was collected in these and comparison checkpoints
(which were manned by the usual teams from the local police station) on whether checks were per-
formed, how many drivers were stopped in total, and how many drunk drivers were stopped and
fined.
    All of these interventions came out of a collaborative effort between Rajasthan police and the
research team, which included a senior member of the police department. The effort was driven by
the top management of the police, who were keen to improve the popular image of the police force
as well as its performance. These were motivated, thoughtful, reform-minded, and powerful high-
level officials. The first three interventions came out of their ideas, which were in turn influenced by
the recommendations of previous Police Reform Commission reports.3 Interestingly, all of these in
effect reduced the autonomy of the middle manager (the police station chief, in this case), violating
one of the broad management principles found to be important in the literature.
    In contrast, the decoy intervention and the drunk driving checkpoint intervention, both of which
had to do with incentives, came out of our suggestions. Since performance pay and explicit financial
incentives were totally alien to the police managerial system, even senior officers who appreciated
incentives in principle thought that adopting them would require infeasible legal changes. The
researchers’ contribution as pseudo-consultants was to help identify a window where it was possible
to provide some incentive within the existing organization.
    The basic results for the two incentive interventions were uniformly positive. The introduction
of decoy visits to police stations increased the probability of a given case being registered by 16–17
percentage points. The politeness with which potential complainants were received also went up
significantly as measured by our surveyors. Likewise, in the drunk driving checkpoint intervention
we find that the police barracks staff, who were subject to stronger incentives, were much more
effective along every dimension. They were 50% more likely to carry out the checks, stayed longer,
and caught more drivers while there. Over the duration of the project, barracks teams brought to
court twice as many drunk drivers as the police station teams.
    The “soft skills” part of the training experiment (which sought to teach police how to deal with
the public more kindly and effectively) also clearly worked. Trained station staff were more polite
with crime victims who were attempting to register a crime, and the victims were overall much
more satisfied with the police.
    Finally, the three interventions that reduced middle manager’s autonomy were less successful.
Only the freeze on transfers may have had any positive effect, while the duty rotation/day off seems
to have had a negative effect on some outcomes. The community observer had no significant effect
whatsoever.
   3
     The freeze on transfers, guaranteed time off, and training interventions came directly from the Padmanabhaiah
Committee on Police Reforms, constituted largely of active and retired senior police officials, while the community
observer program was developed in response to the Committee’s recommendations on community policing.


                                                        4
        Taken together, these results argue against the view that managers can readily identify the
interventions that work best in their context. The broad management principles that apply in
private firms or in hospitals may very well work in the police context too, in spite of the obvious
differences in culture, but the management needed help to identify the specific interventions that
would help translate these into concrete, implementable programs. Of course, we have only six
interventions that we are comparing; it could be the case that some unidentified force caused the
interventions we suggested to work, while three of the four chosen by the police did not.
        However, the evidence suggests that a main reason the three interventions that reduced man-
agement autonomy had very little effect (either good or harm) is that they were not implemented
properly, despite the support of they enjoyed from the top brass. (In contrast, the three interven-
tions that clearly had a positive impact were also the ones that were best implemented.) This is
of course not entirely surprising since the programs reduced managerial discretion at the station
level and therefore the heads of the police stations had every reason to try to undermine them.
Similarly, in a private sector context, a productivity-enhancing innovation was not adopted in firms
in Pakistan because it was successfully blocked by cutters and printers who stood to lose from its
adoption (Atkins, Chaudhry, Chaudhry, Khandelwal, and Verhoogen 2014).4 However, it is notable
that the senior management did not anticipate the ability of this layer of management to undermine
these reforms or to reinforce their implementation when, over the course of the project, signs of
poor implementation became evident. The basic instinct of the top brass (to rely on discipline over
autonomy, control favoritism through regimentation, and value intrinsic motivation rather than
incentives, explicit or implicit) was a hindrance in selecting implementable interventions. Perhaps
the hierarchical nature of the police does not affect the effectiveness of standard management prin-
ciples, but reduces the chance that the management can identify on their own reforms that go in
the right direction.


2        The Rajasthan Police Experiments: Design and Objectives
2.1       Policing and Police Reform in India
As in many developing countries (e.g. parts of Africa (Opolot 1992), the Philippines (Varona
2010)), the Indian police largely retained the organization and rules established by the colonial
power—indeed, the Police Act of 1861 is still in effect 67 years after independence and 64 years
after the first democratic elections. As might be expected of a colonial law, the emphasis of the
Police Act is on keeping the populace quiescent, in part through intimidation, rather than helping
them with their problems (Kolsky 2010).5 Moreover the military-style hierarchical organization,
with its rigid pay scale and promotion schedule and no guaranteed leave, allows essentially no scope
for formal incentives or disincentives. Since 1977, a succession of police reform commissions have
    4
     Banerjee, Duflo, and Glennerster (2008) and Hanna and Dhaliwal (2013) are two other examples of how middle-
level managers in government bureaucracies undermine programs that limit their discretionary authority.
   5
     Especially because the force is extremely overstretched. According to 2011 UNODC data, India has 129 police
per capita, versus 227 in the USA. http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/statistics/data.html.


                                                       5
recommended wide-ranging changes, but they have very rarely been implemented.
    The recent history and current position of the Rajasthan State Police are broadly consistent
with that of police across India. In 2007 the total force consisted of 70,767 personnel, divided
among 711 police stations with 76% constables—the lowest rank—and only 0.2% members of the
elite IPS cadre that supplies most of the top brass. Crime rates were comparable with other Indian
states: Rajasthan ranked 4th out of 28 states in total crimes serious enough to be investigated
without court order, but 25th in murder rates.
    This long history of estrangement from the public was apparent in the data collected in the
baseline of our study. The representative household survey data that we collected (it turns out, for
the first time in India) showed that only 29% of crime victims had bothered trying to register the
crime, often because they felt that the police would not make an effort to assist them. They were
probably correct. Field surveyors posing as regular citizens trying to report incidents were sent
away without being able to file a report 52% of the time. The lack of trust is further demonstrated
by the 53% of baseline survey respondents who claimed that law-abiding citizens fear the police.

2.2    First Reform Experiment
This alienation of the public from the police was becoming increasingly costly in a time of rising ter-
rorism, when it was important to get citizens to report anything that they felt might be suspicious.
Against this backdrop, in 2005 the Director General of the police in Rajasthan, A.S. Gill took the
unusual step to request our team (made up of Nina Singh, then a senior officer in the Rajasthan
Police and an author of this article, and researchers from J-PAL) help the department identify a
set of reforms that could both improve the public perception of the police and their effectiveness
through randomized control trials.
    The main interventions for this experiment were chosen based by the police top brass after
discussion with the research team, and were strongly influenced by the reports of the various police
commissions, which were co-written by retired senior police officers. Within that set of options,
choice was dictated in part by a preference for ease of implementation and our requirement that
the unit of implementation be a police station (rather than something larger) to ensure that we had
enough independent units to randomize across.6 With a view towards potentially scaling up the
interventions throughout Rajasthan and elsewhere, the police leadership ruled out any reforms that
would require a large increase in budget outlay or manpower, or require changes in the fundamental
processes used by the police (changes in the pay scale, performance bonuses, etc.). Interventions
that explicitly targeted corruption were also ruled out as politically infeasible as a first step.
    Partly to ensure statistical power and partly to make sure that the experiments took place at
scale, the interventions covered large parts of the state—the first round in 11 districts and the second
round in 10, each covering populations larger than the nation of Denmark. With the exception of
the decoy program, which was run by the research team, the primary implementation of the reforms
   6
     The emphasis on not getting into too many fights right at the outset meant that the project did not target
corruption, bribe taking, or ability to handle complicated or violent law-and-order situations.



                                                      6
was performed through the police hierarchy, with general supervision done at the level of state police
headquarters. The district superintendents of police supervised the overall implementation in their
respective districts and, except when specified otherwise by the experiment, police station chiefs
were responsible for carrying out the interventions in their stations.
   The four main interventions were

  1. Freezing of transfers: In the Indian police, transfers are one of the very few incentives
     instruments in the hands of supervisors. Partly as a result, transfers are very frequent: one-
     third of all policemen were transferred in our control stations over a period of eighteen months.
     However, these transfers are not only controlled by the police management. While nominally
     under the control of the police, they are frequently imposed by politicians (who are able to
     apply pressure at the relevant level), often allegedly for partisan or corrupt motives (National
     Police Commission 1980; Centre for Media Studies 2005; Wade 1985). Unchecked transfers
     were seen as both bad for the morale of the police and a disincentive for them to invest in
     acquiring local knowledge, which in turn might affect their police work and relationship with
     the population. The intervention specified that for personnel posted to all police stations
     selected for this intervention (except the control group) all administrative transfers would be
     frozen for period of at least two years. Exceptions could be made for well-documented cases
     of police misconduct that required a transfer.

  2. Weekly day off and duty rotation system: Indian police procedural regulations provide
     little guidance on management of human resources at the police station level. In theory,
     police staff remain on duty for 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and all assignment of
     leave and duties (such as clerk constable, night patrolling, etc.) is at the discretion of the
     police station chief. Such an ad-hoc system is susceptible to accusations of favoritism in
     assigning desirable duties, and many officers report feeling overworked and burnt out (Sidhu
     2003). Replacing this with a transparent and fair system of work allocation would lead to
     less jockeying for positions, more predictability, better informed officers, and higher overall
     productivity. Note, however, that this intervention reduced the ability of the station head
     to allocate staff optimally, and may have blunted incentives. The intervention specified that
     police station-level duties were to be allocated to staff on a rotating basis according to a written
     schedule. The entire staff in selected police stations (except the station chief) received one day
     off every eight days. In smaller police stations, where the shortage of manpower might be more
     acute, the station chief had the option of extending the work period up to fifteen days.

  3. Community observers: Recognizing the lack of police accountability vis-à-vis the public,
     and limited communication between the police and the public, several of the Indian police
     reform commissions have recommended the creation of civilian oversight institutions for the
     police. They have also emphasized the need to communicate to the public a “clear under-
     standing of the limitations and constraints within which the police has to function” (NPC
     61.46). Such experiments have been tried in several developed countries, including the ex-

                                                   7
         Soviet States (Caparini and Marenin 2005) and South Africa (Bruce and Neild 2005) but this
         was the first time in Rajasthan. The intervention specified that two volunteers drawn from a
         (long) list of potential volunteers would spend about three hours in the police station during
         peak operating hours, on rotating basis. The observers’ sole task was to watch the activities
         within the police station and become familiar with the duties, procedures and challenges faced
         by the police. This program had two main goals: first, to give a group of citizens firsthand
         experience with the police in a positive setting and encourage them to share their experience
         with others; and second, to provide community oversight in the police station.

   4. In-Service training program: A lack of skills, both professional (investigation methods,
         etc.) and “soft skills” (mediation, communication) have frequently been recognized as signif-
         icant barriers to effective policing (The Hindu, 2011),. Constables are recruited mainly on
         physical characteristics (height, chest measurements, etc.), and only education through class
         10 (less than high school) is required. After the initial training of 12 months for constables or
         two years for Sub-Inspectors, refresher courses are scarce. Under this intervention randomly
         selected police personnel were given training in at least one of two modules:

           • Professional/Investigation skills: 292 investigating officers (inspectors, sub-inspectors
              and assistant sub-inspectors) were trained for six days at the Rajasthan Police Academy
              with inputs on improving investigation procedures, such as field techniques and documen-
              tation, with emphasis on scientific techniques.
           • Soft skills: 1541 police personnel of all ranks were trained for three days on improving
              attitude with the public with inputs on “soft skills” such as communication, mediation,
              stress management, motivation, team building, leadership, attitudinal, change, etc.

         This training was rolled out across the state of Rajasthan in groups of two to three districts
         in the months after the other reform interventions had begun.

As mentioned earlier, one important public complaint was that police would often refuse to register
cases. To check whether our interventions improved police behavior along this dimension field
officers posing as regular citizens attempted to register complaints at the police station. The crimes
chosen were not representative of the entire range of possible crimes; rather, we chose scenarios
where the crime was relatively petty,7 which is where the tendency to under-register may be the
greatest. These visits were unannounced and the police learned only ex-post that they had been
assigned to a decoy visit, either when the field officer revealed himself in order to prevent the
registration of a false case, or (if the police refused to register the case) when a supervisor called
shortly after the visit.8
       Early in the project, our team observed that the police were animatedly discussing decoy visits
after they happened. It became clear that, although police had already been told that such visits
   7
      Stolen mobile phone (29%), stolen suitcase (25%), stolen bicycle (15%), stolen railway ticket (10%), harassment
of female relative (9%), victim of dangerous driving (8%), domestic violence (2%), burglary (1%).
    8
      These calls were made to insure that the information set did not depend on behavior during the decoy.


                                                         8
could happen, they had not taken it to heart. This suggested that each actual decoy visit would
reinforce the message that these visits were happening, and that knowledge would potentially have
an effect on behavior (even though police staff had been assured that the monitoring was not linked
to a specific punishment). We therefore decided to transform the decoy visits into an intervention.
We randomized the order in which the decoy visits were carried out and used police staff behavior
at subsequent visits as the outcome.

2.3    Second Reform Experiment
Soon after the conclusion of this first round of reforms, the Rajasthan Police began preparations
to acquire a large number of breathalyzers and for the first time begin strict enforcement of anti-
drunken driving laws across the state.9 Anti-drunken driving enforcement in India is carried out
through sobriety checkpoints, where passing vehicles whose drivers are suspected of being drunk are
given a breathalyzer test. Those who are found to be driving drunk have their vehicle confiscated,
and the breathalyzer record is produced in court against them.
    Police management initially planned to implement the crackdown through local police station
staff. However, in the first month of piloting the same implementation failures rapidly became
evident: only 60% of checkpoints were actually performed. The challenge was therefore to provide
the teams with incentives to do this job well, while financial incentives continued to be ruled out.
We focused on identifying specific space in the system where incentives could be provided. It was
determined to provide incentives through the implicit promise of transfers based on performance,
a common informal practice in the police system.
    The teams who could be provided with strong incentives were drawn from the “police lines,” a
reserve force of police kept at the district headquarters barracks who normally perform riot control,
event policing, and VIP security duties. The police lines are generally considered a punishment
posting in the Indian police system, since assignment there effectively removes an officer from
contact with the public. As a result, the promise of a potential transfer out of the police lines could
be used for incentives. Note that there is no a priori contradiction between the freeze of transfer in
the first set of experiments and the use of a promised transfer in this case: the majority of the police
personnel do not want to be transferred in a frequent and unpredictable fashion, but conditional
on assignment to barracks the majority of personnel want to return to a “field” posting.
    To base this incentive on an objective measure of performance, police leadership installed GPS
tracking devices in the police vehicles allocated to the police lines staff to travel from their barracks
at the district headquarters to the checkpoint locations. These devices provided a real-time display
of the vehicle’s location to the district-level supervisory officers via a simple internet interface, and
stored the vehicle’s travel routes for future examination. Senior officers could instantly observe, on
their desktop, whether the police lines teams were at the checkpoint site, but could not observe
whether they were actually stopping vehicles and testing drivers. Police lines teams were told of the
   9
     In a companion paper we evaluate the effects of this crackdown on driver learning and ultimately accidents and
road deaths.



                                                        9
installation of the GPS devices, and were informed that good performance on this assignment might
improve their chances for transfer out of the police lines. This was not set up as a competition
between teams: evidence of solid work on this assignment was going to play a role in the next
transfer decision.
    We assigned the police lines teams to man checkpoints in a randomly chosen subset of police
stations; the rest the checkpoints became part of the regular duties of the staff of the police stations
under whose jurisdiction they fell. This is the status quo for special crackdowns of this type in
the Rajasthan Police. Henceforth we refer to these as the “station teams,” to distinguish them
from the “lines teams.” Both types of teams’ ultimate results in terms of drunken drivers ticketed
were reported to senior officers at regular intervals. However, since none of the senior officers had
previously conducted anti-drunken driving crackdowns in these police stations, they might have
had trouble distinguishing underperforming police from regional variation in propensity to drunken
drive. These teams therefore had relatively weak incentives.
    This comparison is one of the first pieces of evidence of the strength of the promise of transfer
to desirable location as a source of incentives in a government setting. It is far from being a perfect
test, however, since there were other differences between the police lines and police station teams:
first, the personnel is differentially selected, though since the police lines are a punishment posting,
the selection almost certainly works against finding a positive impact. Second, and probably more
important in this case, the police line teams and the police station teams had different activities
during the rest of the day. Station teams may have been tired by the time they had to start their
checkpoints, for example. Nevertheless, since transfers are ubiquitous as an implicit or explicit way
to enforce compliance, this is a useful data point, at least as motivation for further tests.


3     First Reform Experiment: Experimental design, data collection
      and results
3.1   Evaluation Strategy
For the first round of interventions, 162 police stations across 11 districts of Rajasthan were included
in the sample, with districts chosen to be geographically representative of the state of Rajasthan.
The sample represents a substantial fraction of the state: over 20% of the police stations in the
state and a population of almost 8 million people. Not only was this scale necessary to get adequate
power, it also gives meaning to success (or failure) in implementation; this was not a “gold-plated,”
small-scale experiment, but a full-scale rehearsal of what the reforms would look like if they were
to be broadly implemented.
    Police stations were randomly assigned (by the research team, using a computerized random-
ization) to different reform strategies, using stratification to ensure a balance on geographical area
(district), criminality (number of cases registered in 2005), and urban/rural environment. These
variables are included as controls in all regressions performed in this study. Within each police sta-
tion, staff members were randomly selected for the training intervention with the total percentage

                                                  10
of staff trained in each station randomized at 0%, 25%, 50%, 75% or 100% of station personnel.
This allows us to detect whether the effects of training are different when few or almost all the
officers are trained: is it sufficient to train a few police officers, who will then train their colleagues?
Or is a critical mass necessary to get any impact, because trained officers get “contaminated” by
those who have retained their old methods? Or is the effect broadly linear?
   Surveyors visited sample police stations to collect data on a relatively regular basis. To assess
a possible Hawthorne effect—the possibility that the police stations participating in the program
might change their responses or behavior simply because they are being observed by outside eval-
uators—an additional group of police stations was also randomly selected to serve as the “pure
control.” These police stations were not informed of the project, had no staff trained, and were
never visited by investigators until the final endline survey, at which point they were surveyed like
all other stations. The Hawthorne effect can be estimated by comparing the control and “pure
control” groups.
   Table 1 describes how the police stations were allocated to each evaluation group, with the
number of police stations in each group in column 1, and the program elements implemented in
that group in columns 1–4. As shown in column 4, wherever the community observer or weekly
day off/duty rotation interventions were attempted, transfers were also frozen. This was done for
two reasons: first, because long tenure of staff is considered necessary to get acquainted with the
area and people of the police station jurisdiction and see if this has any effect on their performance;
and second, due to concerns about attrition during the study. This implies that the impact of duty
rotation and community observers (or the combination of the two in the all interventions stations)
will be seen on top of the impact of the freezing of transfers.
   Finally, to evaluate the impact of the decoy intervention, we randomly selected the order in
which each police station would be visited by a surveyor pretending to register a crime. Decoy
visits were rolled out in overlapping rounds, so that, for example, the final police stations of the
third round were receiving their decoy visits during the same period as the first stations of the fourth
round. This implies that, conditional on calendar time, the number of past decoys performed is
randomly assigned for any given police station. The scripts used to attempt to register cases, as well
as the identity of the surveyors, were also randomized with surveyors only attempting to register a
decoy case in police stations they had never previously visited.

3.2    Data
A series of surveys and interviews were conducted to establish baseline levels of police performance
and baseline public perception of the police, as well as to estimate the effectiveness of the police
implementation at the endline. These included traditional household surveys, surveys of police
personnel, as well as random, unannounced visits to all police stations to collect data on program
implementation. These rich data sets are one of the outcomes of the project: they are available for
public use at http://dvn.iq.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/jpal.



                                                    11
Visit of Decoy Victim Surveyors

As mentioned above, the “decoy” intervention was originally conceived as a source of objective
data on officer behavior. Surveyors posing as victims of various types of petty crimes visited police
stations in the treatment and control groups and attempted to register cases. Immediately after
the visit to the police station, the surveyor completed a short form recording his success or failure
in registration, and the attitudes and actions of the police. The field officer also recorded their
impression on whether or not they thought the police officer may have suspected them to be a
decoy, which seems to have happened very rarely.

Public Surveys

The other main source of data was a household survey that recorded both general perceptions
of the police and the experiences of those individuals who happened to be victims of crimes in
the previous year. In total 5,895 households were interviewed: in the spring of 2007, a baseline
was conducted with 2,454 households randomly chosen from the 2004 voters list. In the autumn
of 2008, the households that could be located again were re-interviewed along with 3,441 newly
chosen households.10
    Within each household, three modules were administered (at baseline and endline). First, a
general crime-screening questionnaire administered to the head of the household, inquired whether
any member of the household had been a victim of a crime in the previous year. If any victims
were reported, a crime victim survey, recorded much greater detail about the crime. Finally, an
opinion survey, administered to a randomly chosen adult in the household, asked about his or her
contact with the police, and perceptions of police performance and integrity.
    The crime-related surveys were broadly based upon the International Crime and Victimization
Survey from the UN’s Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI), customized to
the Indian context in order to make their results comparable with the crime categories of the Indian
Penal Code. Like any crime victimization survey, these questionnaires do not capture “victimless
crimes” such as gambling or drug use. Also, no attempt was made to measure the incidence
of domestic violence because of concerns about the accuracy of reporting and the possibility of
decreased respondent cooperation.

Case-Investigation Grading

To measure the impact of the training (and potentially other interventions) on the quality of the
actual police work, 982 case files were randomly selected from the project police stations and sent
to a group of retired senior police officers for grading in two rounds, half before the training and
half post-training. The retired officers filled out a detailed report about each case in which they
   10
      In order to gather more data on crime victims, these newly chosen households were selected disproportionately
from police stations that had proven to have high crime victimization rates in the baseline survey. To control for
any imbalance this may introduce into the sample, all regression specifications without police station fixed effects are
re-weighted to be representative of the population of police stations included in the survey.



                                                          12
graded the performance of the officer on his actions at the crime scene, whether scientific techniques
were used, and the care with which the evidence was collected and documents in the case file were
prepared. Due to high turnover of police staff—despite the freeze of transfers that was supposedly
in operation—the sampling of the case investigation grading is not representative of the sample
of officers being trained. Rather, we sampled at endline to ensure representativeness of officers
working in the police stations at that point, and we will compare the quality of the investigation at
the police station level. This comparison will therefore not give us the total effect of the training
(since a trained investigator may now be working in a control training station), but it will shed
light on the channel through which police training improves victim and public satisfaction.

3.3      Crime and Policing in Rajasthan: Baseline Status
The baseline data collected for the project provides further evidence on the context and background
for the interventions and the study. In particular, it confirms many of the problems discussed in
section 1, which motivated our choices of interventions. Table 2 presents some descriptive statistics
with highlights from the surveys at baseline.

Crime

The detailed crime survey provides the first large-scale representative estimates of the crime rate in
Rajasthan, since India does not have a standard crime victimization survey. We find that 1.7% of
individuals were victims of a crime in the past year, and that 5.9% of households had at least one
member who was a victim of a crime. This estimate excludes crimes of domestic violence, which
were not surveyed because of accuracy concerns. Theft was by far the most common, constituting
37.9% of all reported crimes, followed by burglary at 16.6% and assault at 12%.
       However, most crime victims never report their incidents to the police. Only 29% of the crime
victims we surveyed stated that they had visited a police station to report the crime.11 Among those
who attempted to report their crimes, 17% did not succeed in registering a case. The comparison
of crime surveys and official police records confirms that per-capita crime rates are substantially
higher from survey data, especially for property crimes: survey theft rates are 9.24 times registered
rates and robbery rates are 11.35 times higher than in police records. The differential decreases
for violent crimes: rape or molestation surveyed rates are 43% rates reported to the police, and
assault is only 11% higher in the survey (neither difference is statistically significant). While the
biggest reason for not reporting a crime was lack of importance perceived by the victim (28%),
substantial numbers of crime victims did not go to the police because they thought that the police
were incapable of helping (20%) or unwilling to help (17%).12
  11
    The comparable number from the United States is 42%. Source: National Crime Victimization Survey, 2006–2010.
  12
    An interesting analysis of the discrepancy between reporting and actual crime is provided in Iyer et al. (2012).
They show that reporting of crime against women increases when political positions are reserved for women at the
local level, both in our data and in nationally representative data. However, they also find that in our data there is
no actual increase in the incidence of crime.




                                                         13
Police attitude with crime victims

The poor behavior of police officers with victims is clearly demonstrated by the results of the
decoy survey. Overall, in the first decoy visits conducted by our investigators, police were willing
to register a First Information Report (know as an FIR, the necessary first step to a criminal
investigation) from the decoys only 54% of the time. More serious and verifiable cases are registered
significantly more frequently: house break-ins led to 92% FIR registration while stolen mobile
phones had only 40% success in registration. Crime victims who attempted to file an FIR had
better luck on average (83%), likely due to the high threshold before deciding to actually bother
to register: they were less likely to attempt to report the sort of minor crime that were reported
by our decoys. For example, only 7.4% of theft victims who lost less than 1,500 rupees (roughly
the value of a mobile phone) even attempted to register their case with the police.          13

   Decoy visits also allow us to assess the politeness of the police officer. They found that 31% of
the time the police were not polite, and only 11% of the time they were “extremely polite.”

Public Perception of Police and Victim Satisfaction

Few respondents have experience with the police or ever interacted with them. Only 9% of those
interviewed have ever had an interaction with the police in their lives, and only 3% of women have
spoken with a police officer. Even in urban areas, only 20% of male respondents ever reported
interacting with the police. In the absence of personal experience, 72% of those surveyed claimed
that they had formed their opinions based on word of mouth from other citizens, with only 14%
and 16% stating that they based their opinions on print and television news sources, respectively.14
This pattern of information dispersal—opinions formed by hearsay and few real experiences—would
suggest that an intervention like the community observer program, which gives a few citizens
positive experiences with the police, does have potential to improve perceptions of the police.
   Unlike the average citizen, crime victims frequently have personal experience with the police.
39% of victims were either completely satisfied or satisfied, but 35% of victims reported being
completely unsatisfied, and 27% mostly unsatisfied. 82% of the unsatisfied victims stated that they
were unhappy because the police “didn’t do anything special” or “didn’t take interest” in their case.
In contrast, only 15% complained of police corruption, and another 20% complained of discourtesy
when attempting to report a crime.

Case review performance

The reviews of case files by retired officers revealed substantial heterogeneity in the quality of
investigations of different types of cases. The retired officers gave 6.18 out of 10 on average for
overall field investigation quality, and 5.91 out of 10 for quality of case documentation. However,
these grades were very dispersed: standard errors were 1.95 for field investigation and 2.42 for
  13
     We took care that decoys would look and act like typical young men in the area, although if they had been
identified as decoys, the rate of registration would presumably have been greater, not lower.
  14
     Respondents were permitted to list as many sources of information as they wished.


                                                     14
documentation. Only 19% of cases investigated during 2006–2007 and reviewed by our reviewers
made any use of scientific investigation, and most of these were accident cases.

3.4      Reform Implementation
In the previous literature, a major obstacle in the implementation of bureaucratic reform at scale
has been the resistance to sustained implementation on the part of the middle management, on
whom the reform where often imposed. We document similar difficulties in this setting for all the
programs that relied on implementation by the station chiefs. The reasons may be manifold: few
direct benefits to station chiefs from the intervention, lack of manpower and other resources, or
competing priorities such as a violent statewide ethnic agitation and a series of terror blasts in
the state capital that occurred during this period. A key reason, in our view, is that all these
interventions essentially took autonomy away from police station chiefs. In this section, we present
evidence on the strength of implementation.

No Transfer The extent to which transfers were actually frozen is measured through adminis-
trative data from personnel records. We matched names of officers from police station staff lists
at the beginning of the program with those from the end of the program, and counted any officers
not found as having been transferred between the beginning and the end of the project. Table 3
shows that there was indeed a significant reduction in the number of transfers out of police stations
in the ranks that were targeted: 13 percentage points for constables (or a 44% reduction from the
30% mean in the control group), and 15 percentage points for inspectors (a 23% reduction from
the 63.6% rate of transfer in the control group). Still, transfers during the course of the project
remain quite frequent (21% on average across all ranks, in the treatment group), particularly at
higher ranks.15
       While far from a complete freeze, the ban thus resulted in significantly longer posting duration.
Transfers require approval from a senior officer at headquarters, and therefore the ultimate control
resides at the top, which insured some amount of adherence to the policy. However there were pres-
sures to transfer particular staff members both from below and from above (i.e. from politicians),
and some instances were more successfully resisted than others.

Training       The training was the easiest intervention to systematically implement, and there is
administrative evidence that it took place largely as planned. Rajasthan Police Academy records
show that 88% of officers selected for training reported to the academy for training. Like the ban on
transfers, senior officers have tight control over implementation and can instruct specific constables
to report to training.
  15
    These figures are lower bounds, since some personnel may have been transferred into then back out of the sample
police stations during this period and thus included among the transferred staff.




                                                        15
Community Observers              To measure the strength of implementation of the remaining two inter-
ventions (community observers and the combination of weekly day off and duty rotation), surveyors
visited the police station several times during the course of the project. Each police station in the
program designated a specific time during which the observer was available on each day, but in
actuality observers were present only 10.29% of the time during designated hours–and were about
as likely to be at the station at any other time. A villager wishing to visit the police station when
a community observer was present would be very hard pressed to decide when the right time would
be.
       Overall, it appears that the community observer intervention was not properly implemented
on a sustained basis. Unlike the previous two programs, this one was under the direct control of
the station chiefs and their imperfect commitment was exacerbated by the difficulty of sustaining
community participation . The observers had little to gain from spending three hours in the
police station, and goals of better public relations for the police department may have had little
relevance to their own interests. These results echo Olken (2007) and Banerjee, Banerji, Duflo,
Glennerster, and Khemani (2010), who provide further evidence of the difficulty of sustaining
collective monitoring to improve governance.

Weekly Day Off and Duty Rotation

On paper, the implementation of the weekly day off program was good: 84% of treatment police
stations reported executing some type of rotating day off, whereas only 34% of control police
stations reported having any scheduled day off.
       In order to verify that the police station chief was in fact giving days off, surveyors randomly
selected two constables from the staff and interviewed them separately at each of their visits, asking
them to recall the last time that they had had a day off for any reason, the weekly day off program
or otherwise. The results, presented in Table 4, panel A, show that early on, the weekly day off
program did succeed in shortening the time since the last day off, going from an average of 30 days
in control stations to about 21 days in treatment stations. However, this difference shrinks over
the course of the program, eventually disappearing by round five, our last visit.
       The implementation of the duty rotation was also close to complete on paper, with 91% of
station house officers of treatment police stations able to produce a duty roster when asked. 58%
of program police stations posted the duty roster on the wall as stipulated by the implementation
guidelines, as opposed to 39% of control police stations, which had independently created duty
rosters. Table 4, panel C shows the responses over time to questions about the rapidity of changing
duties. It turns out that, even in control stations, the rotation from duty to duty is rapid, if
haphazard. Overall there is no significant impact on time spent on specific duties.16
  16
    One objective of the rotation was to create some predictability in the assignment to limit the jockeying for
positions. Constables in police stations with duty rotation did have a significantly higher probability of reporting
that they knew what their next duty would be, with an overall average of 50% in treatment police stations and 41%
in controls. Unlike the weekly off program, this effect appears to have grown stronger over time, with the greatest
treatment/control differences in the final periods.



                                                        16
3.5     Were the reforms effective?
We now turn to the impact of the interventions on police behavior. We start from the most direct
measure of impact, namely the behavior on the decoy surveys. We then move to crime victim
satisfaction measured from our victimization survey, and finally to any possible broader impact on
the population.

3.5.1    Using the decoy survey outcomes

Table 5 presents regressions of the following form for the two outcomes of interest (whether the
case was registered, and whether the police were very polite):

                      ydj = β0 + βT Tj + βD Dtj + βP (%trained)j + βX Xdj + dj

where d indexes the decoy visit, j indexes the police station, Tj is a vector of binary variables
describing the treatment conditions, Dtj is the number of past decoys performed in this police
station, (%trained) is the percentage of the police station staff that were trained, and Xdj is a
vector of control variables. In particular, all regressions include month fixed effects, crime script
used, district fixed effects (districts include multiple police stations but have a single chief of police),
controls for urban/rural location, and the 2005 crime rate to account for the stratified sampling
design. Since order of decoy visits was randomly assigned, conditional on the calendar date, the
number of past decoy visits is randomly assigned and indicates impact on police behavior of more
past decoy exposure.
   Standard errors in all regressions are clustered at the police station level to accommodate
arbitrary serial correlation across decoy visits within police station.
   Given the combinations of treatment, the treatment variables could have been parametrized in
different ways: this, of course, does not affect the results, but it does affect how the tables must be
read and interpreted. The list below summarizes our parametrization choices, and will be useful
reference for the analysis below.
   Summary of definition of treatment variables:

No transfers: A dummy equal to 1 if transfers were intended to be frozen in the police stations.
            Recall that all treatment stations had a no transfer policy, so this dummy is 1 for every
            police station that received any treatment (except for the training program which was
            not necessarily paired with the no transfer policy).

Weekly off and duty rotation: A dummy equal to 1 if transfers were intended to be frozen and
            the station was assigned the weekly day off/duty rotation intervention but not the
            community observer treatment.

Community observers: A dummy equal to 1 if the station got the no transfer program and the
            community observer program but no weekly day off/duty rotation.


                                                    17
All interventions: A dummy equal to 1 if the station was assigned no transfers, community ob-
                servers, and weekly day off/duty rotation.

Percentage trained: Percentage of police staff in the station that were trained.

Number decoy visits: Number of decoy visits that had previously taken place in this police station.
                Since order of decoy visits were randomly assigned, conditional on the calendar data,
                the number of past decoy visits is randomly assigned and indicates impact on police
                behavior of more past decoy exposure.

In Study:       A dummy equal to 1 if the police station is not in the pure control group (to identify
                any possible Hawthorne effect). Since pure control stations were only surveyed in the
                endline, this effect cannot be identified in regressions with police station fixed effects.

The treatment police stations are compared to the regular control. Further, the “community
observer,” “weekly off,” and “all interventions” dummies indicate the additional effect of being
assigned those additional interventions compared to being assigned no transfers only. So, for
example, to compare a control police station to a police station that received the no transfers
and community observers interventions, we need to add the two coefficients. To compare the
stations that were assigned no transfers, weekly day off/duty rotation, and community observers
to the control group, we need to add the “no transfer” coefficient and the “all three interventions”
coefficients.

       Table 5 presents the results. The baseline FIR registration rate is very low: only 48% of crime
reports that the decoys tried to get registered in the first visit were in fact filed. Columns 1 and
4 are exactly as above, and column 2 and 5 include in addition an indicators for whether the
surveyor thought the police might have suspected that he was a decoy.17 In columns 3 and 6 we
include police station-level fixed effects to control for any random sampling imbalance across police
stations.
       The decoys themselves appears to have a substantial impact on FIR registration. Each previous
decoy visit increases the probability of FIR registration at the subsequent visit by 16–17%. Figure 1
shows these effects graphically, plotting the coefficients on dummy variables indicating the number
of preceding decoy visits from a regression otherwise the same as column 1 in Table 5. This figure
implies that by five previous decoys, the registration rate is close to 100%. We do not believe that
this is due to a special treatment of the decoy visitor. Decoys were local people, dressed normally,
and reporting very common crimes. We asked the decoys to record whether they suspected that
the police officer thought they were decoys. This was reported to be likely in 3% of cases, and
possible in 15% more. Results in columns 2 and 4 show that controlling for cases in which the
surveyor suspected that the police were aware he was a decoy does not attenuate the coefficient
on the number of previous decoy visits. In addition, the staff training shows a positive effect on
  17
    We have also estimated a specification where the effects of training on FIR registration was nonlinear. There was
no effect on that specification either (results available upon request).


                                                         18
registration, becoming much larger and significant when fixed effects are included in column 3. The
other interventions did not have any impact.
    Turning to the effect on politeness, both the number of past decoy visits and police officer
training had a significant impact on the politeness with which the “victim” was dealt with, with
p ≈ .06 in columns 4 and 5. Recall that the training for constables (who are in charge of the FIR
registration) focused on “soft skills,” and in particular on basic notions of how to interact with
victims and regular citizens. This seems to have been effective in changing behavior. Again the
size and significance of the coefficient increases with police station fixed effects in column 6.
    Thus, the decoy survey program had a substantial effect on both FIR registration and behavior
of the police. This, despite the fact that the program was quite explicitly unlinked to any possible
sanction: the police officers were warned at the outset that decoy visits could take place, but that
the results would not be communicated to their superiors. Yet, they clearly believed that the
information might be used in some form (in a more permanent intervention not linked to a research
project, this would be made explicit). This result is consistent with other results in the literature
showing the potential of the threat of “top-down” monitoring to improve rule compliance, even
within generally corrupt environments (Olken 2007).

3.5.2     Victim Satisfaction with Police

After the behavior most directly measured by decoys, the second most direct effects of the reform
intervention would be found on those citizens who have the most at stake in their interactions with
the police: crime victims. We analyze data from the household survey, using the detailed crime
reports to infer whether a crime was committed after the intervention and/or training had been
conducted in a district, and comparing treatment and control police stations while controlling for
district and time effects.18 In each case in which the victim affirmed that the police had become
aware of the crime we collected data on his or her satisfaction with the police conduct on the case.
The interventions had no effect on either incidence of crime (Table A2, not surprising, since it
was not a target of the operation), or the probability of police becoming aware of the case (Table
A3). Thus this selection rule did not induce differential selection in the different treatment police
stations.
    The main specifications in Table 6 shows the results of the project on the probability that the
respondent reports being “satisfied” or “completely satisfied” with the police handling of his or her
case. We estimate two specifications. First, a regression similar to the decoy regression above and
with a slightly different set of control variables.19

                                yij = β0 + βT Tj + βP (%trained)j + βXij + ij
  18
     All endline satisfaction reports for which victims could not recall the date of the crime were tagged as post-training
(24 cases).
  19
     The control variables we include are the variables on which the stratification was conducted (urban/rural area,
past case registration, and district fixed effects) as well as household-level characteristics (indicator variables for
occupation, religion, sex and age of victim, and motorcycle ownership) and controls for the type of crime.



                                                            19
In this regression yij is outcome y reported by citizen i living in the area covered by police station
j. In this specification we use only data collected from crimes that occurred after the training and
intervention had both been carried out in police station j. Because the training was rolled out
district by district, the relevant control observations for the staff training intervention are those
crimes which occurred in the jurisdiction of a district’s control police stations after the staff in that
district’s treatment police stations had received the training.
       Our second approach takes advantage of the police station panel to include fixed effects at the
police station level. Here we estimate difference-in-difference type regressions of the form,
                                     
yijt = β0 +βT F E TjF E × P OST1t +βP F E (%trainedj × P OST2ijt )+βX Xijt +γ1 P OST1t +γ2 P OST2ijt +ηj +ijt

where t now indicates the time at which citizen i was a victim of a crime. P OST1t is an indicator
for the endline survey, and P OST2ijt is an indicator for whether the personnel training had been
completed in the district where station j is located by the time crime i was committed.                 20

       The coefficients of interest (reported Table 6) are those on the interactions with the treatment
vector, βT F E and βP F E . Xijt is a vector of the controls listed above, and ηj denotes the police
station-level fixed effects. To conserve space we do not explicitly write the full description of the
interaction variable into the row labels of the tables when reporting results from regressions with
station-level fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the police station level.
       Consistent with the decoy results on politeness, the training program shows a large impact on
the satisfaction of crime victims, both in the fixed effect and the endline-only specifications. The
effect of going from 0% trained officers to 100% is to raise the probability that victims are satisfied
with police investigation by between 15 and 29 percentage points, depending on the specification.
Since on average only 30% of victims report being entirely or partially satisfied, these changes
represent a greater than 50% increase in satisfaction.
       Unfortunately the crime victim surveys are not very well suited to estimating the effects of the
decoy survey program. Only 149 crime victims were, like the decoy surveyors, males in the age range
20 to 50 who personally reported the crime to police, and of these only 51 reported crimes types
that decoys reported (burglary, theft, and sexual harassment). Nonetheless, the analysis performed
in this very limited sample is quite suggestive: in the fixed effect specification, each extra decoy visit
performed before the crime reportedly happened increased crime satisfaction by 0.17, (p > 10.5)
in the specification without control for types of crime. This increases to 0.26, (p > 17.5) in the
specification with control for type of crime—more than doubling baseline satisfaction rates(Table
A4)
       The other interventions do not appear to have been as robustly effective. There is a 14% to
28% increase in satisfaction attributable to the freezing of transfers (which took place in all the
police stations with any other intervention). However, this average effect is largely or completely
  20
    The variation in P OST2ijt comes both from the roll out of the training by district and from the date at which
the crime was committed. Note that it is defined similarly in treatment and control police station since we use only
district-level variation in the timing of training to construct it.



                                                        20
undone by combining it with any of the other two interventions (community observer and weekly
day off/duty rotation) or with both of them together.
   The effect of the training might operate through two different mechanisms: first, it may affect
public perception by changing what the police do, for instance by improving their investigation
skills, allowing for faster resolution of the case. Alternatively, the effect may be due to the soft-
skills training, which would manifest itself through the way in which the police treat victims and
not their investigation actions. We examine these two alternative hypotheses in Table 7, Table 8,
and column 3 of Table 6.
   Table 7 presents the effects of the training on other police activities, such as registering cases,
asking for bribes, making arrests, or re-contacting the victim. We also add in column 7 variables
collected from the official police statistics about the number of cases registered by month. The
results seem to suggest that most of the effects of the training operated through the behavior of
the police with crime victims rather than their increased investigative success. The only significant
result relates to property recovery, for which the probability increases by 4%. Consistent with the
evidence from the decoy survey, we find suggestive evidence that police officers are more likely to
register crime: a 18% increase with p = .108. The estimated impact of the training on the number
of cases registered in the administrative records (column 7) is also significant at p < 10%, and
suggests a 9.4% increase in case registration for stations with 100% of staff trained.
   However, crime victims may not be well equipped to judge police competence or effort. Table
8 reports the effects of training on the grades given by retired police officers to the case files of
the investigating officers. We find no impact of either an officer’s own training or the training of
his fellow officers on the quality of case paperwork, the reviewer’s evaluation of the officer’s field
investigation, or whether scientific investigation was used in the case.
   Controlling for the police action and success used as outcomes in Table 7 in the satisfaction
regression in column 3 of Table 6 only slightly attenuates the coefficient on training, suggesting
that other, more subtle, changes in attitude affect victim satisfaction. While for the lowest levels
in the police hierarchy (the constables), the training was focused on soft skills, it also included a
week of refresher training on investigations for the more senior officers. These results support the
conclusion that it is the soft skill training that is likely to have had the most impact.
   These regressions impose the restriction that the effect of the fraction of police officers who are
trained is linear in the fraction trained, i.e. that when training 50% of officers, the effect is twice
as large as when training 25%. In reality, the effect could have been non-linear. Our design allows
us to answer this question, since the fraction of officers trained varied randomly from station to
station. Figure 1 displays the coefficients on percentage of personnel trained from a regression like
that in column 2 of Table 6, with the fraction of staff trained broken down by each randomization
category. The effect of training 25% of the station staff is close to zero and insignificant. Only
when 50% of the staff are trained do we see a 20% increase in victim satisfaction, after which the
effects are roughly constant or even decreasing. These results suggest that police training, or at
least police training intended to change attitudes and treatment of the public, must be given to at


                                                  21
least half the staff in order to take root.

3.5.3      Public Perception of Police

Finally, we investigate whether the interventions had an impact on the more general public per-
ception of the police. Given that very few people actually interact with the police in any capacity,
it appears ex-ante unlikely that we would find results on this dimension, but Table 9 directly
investigates this question.
       Since the public opinion survey covered a broad range of qualitative indicators, the 14 major
questions on police performance are aggregated into four broad categories in order to simplify
the interpretation, make sure all questions asked are covered, and guard against false positive
results. The categories were: first, responsiveness of police to citizens, second, fear of police, third,
corruption, and forth, adequacy of police resources21
       The group outcomes are then analyzed following the approach outlined in Kling, Liebman,
and Katz (2007). We first normalize the values of each outcome by the variance of the control
group, and jointly estimate all regressions in the group. The group outcome is, then, the mean
of the normalized individual outcome coefficients, with the standard errors of the mean coefficient
incorporating the variances and covariances of the individual coefficients. The specification is
identical to the specification in Table 6.
       Table 9 displays the effect of each reform on each category, with results in columns 1 limited to
the endline data, and those in columns 2 including the baseline data with police station-level fixed
effects. The results are expressed in standardized effect size, with standard errors in parentheses.
This table indicates that the perceptions of the general public were not particularly affected. Of the
four categories, the project has significant positive effect across both specifications only in one, the
“Fear of Police” category, and for one intervention, the freezing of transfer. The freeze of transfer
seems to reduce the fear of police among ordinary citizens. However, this effect is undone in stations
that also had the weekly day off/duty rotation intervention and, given the limited implementation
of this intervention, it seems a little surprising that it has such a robust effect on its own.22 The
most likely interpretation, assuming that this is not just a statistical accident, given the lack of
  21
      The questions incorporated into the categories were as follows:
   A. Responsiveness of police to citizens: “How do the police behave with normal citizens?” “Do the police help
citizens when required?” “How quick is the police response to distress calls by citizens?”
   B. Fear of police: “Do you think that citizens like you are afraid of the police?” “Are law-abiding citizens afraid of
the police?” and when asked how the population thinks of the police, replies that they “fear them.”
   C. Corruption: “Would you say that the police in your area are generally honest or generally corrupt?” “Is it
necessary to pay the police some money in order to get them do their job?” and “Do policemen themselves violate
the law than the average citizen?”
   D. Amount of police resources: “Do the police have enough personnel to do the work required of them?” “Do the
police have enough money and resources to do the work required of them?” “Should the size of the police force be
increased, decreased, or stay the same?” and “Do you think that the government should spend more money on the
police, even if it means spending less on things like education and roads?”
   22
      Appendix Table A3 unpacks the effect on fear of police by examining the effects of all interventions on the
individual questions that constitute the fear of police outcome separately. While the signs of all coefficients are the
same across questions, the effect seems to be driven primarily by the single question that asks respondents whether
they believe that "law-abiding citizens" in general fear the police.


                                                           22
familiarity with police that the baseline data demonstrate, is that less frequent transfers allowed
the public to become more familiar with the same police staff and hence came to trust them more
and fear them less. It is also possible that once the police staff remained in a post for a longer
period of time, their behavior changed with respect to the inhabitants of that area and they became
less intimidating to the population and more familiar with their beat. This could also help explain
why the duty rotation undid the positive effect of the no transfer policy: duty rotation made it
impossible to implement the beat system, as it results in duty officers having no attachment to a
particular position or neighborhood.23

         In summary, a comprehensive evaluation of the interventions chosen by the top brass from a
menu of commonly suggested reforms provided several interesting lessons. First, consistent with
previous experience, effective implementation is a challenge when it crucially depends on the middle
management and/or community action, even in an intensely hierarchical organization like the police.
Second, training turned out to be one of the most effective policies we evaluated. Third, the only
other clearly effective intervention were the decoy visits which, as far we know, were not considered
as a possible intervention by the police leadership, even though they seem to be easy to implement
if the top hierarchy commits to them. Although they did not carry any explicit punishment, this
was clearly a monitoring intervention and raised the possibility, contrary to some of the previous
literature, that (well chosen and well implemented) incentives can be made to play a positive role
even in a government bureaucracy.
         Taken together, these results increased our motivation to identify a space in the system for a
monitoring intervention combined with some incentive. In the course of the project, the central role
of transfers and posting as the sole motivating tool at the disposal of the hierarchy was frequently
emphasized, in particular in reaction to the duty roster and the freezing of transfer interventions.
In the current system, the transfer system may often be abused, causing excessive dislocation and
low morale, and as we saw, limiting transfers might have some positive effects. But the possibility
of transfers to a more desirable position, used judiciously as a source of positive incentives, seemed
worth exploring.


4         Second Reform Experiment: Transfers as rewards
A crackdown on drunk driving by the Rajasthan Police provided an opportunity to test the hypoth-
esis that combining monitoring with the promise of transfer to a more desirable location could be
an effective intervention. The occasion of these interventions was the purchase of breathalyzers by
the police department to provide evidence of drivers’ intoxication levels, without which prosecution
is extremely difficult. This was intended to motivate and empower the teams carrying out sobriety
checkpoints on the main routes.
    23
    It is much less clear why the day off would undo the positive effect of transfer. However, given that the imple-
mentation of the day off policy quickly diminished over time, the negative interaction is thus more likely to be due
to the duty roster.



                                                        23
    As described in Section 2.3, these sobriety checkpoints were performed by two different teams
of police. In total, 123 police stations were assigned sobriety checkpoints (in one to three locations
depending on the police stations, more details on this part of the project are available in Banerjee,
Duflo, Keniston, and Singh (2014)). During checkpoints, police were to carry out breath analysis
if the drivers appeared drunk. Drunken drivers’ vehicles were impounded and the driver made to
appear in court to pay a fine and recover the vehicle.
    In the precincts of 69 randomly selected police stations the checkpoints were carried out by the
regular station staff. In 54 others they were carried out by teams from the district-based “police
lines,” who were told that good performance on the checkpoints would increase their chances of
transfer to a regular posting. Their movements were monitored by GPS trackers in their police
vehicles. This incentive was not set up as a tournament, but there was a general (and credible,
given the organization and the frequent use of transfer as incentives) promise that performance
would matter.24 The experimental design is thus straightforward, and simply involved comparing
various measures of performance across police lines and police station checkpoints.

4.1    Data
We monitored police implementation of the sobriety checkpoints by sending surveyors to visit the
checkpoint locations on nights when the police were scheduled to be carrying out sobriety checks.
Surveyors recorded whether the police turned up at all, and if they did, noted their arrival and
departure times from the checkpoint location. If the checkpoint was held, the surveyor counted
the number of vehicles stopped, and the number found to be drunk. We present the summary
statistics of this data, for the control (regular teams) police stations at the bottom of Table 10.
The results show that program implementation, as in the first reforms, was far from complete:
in police stations manned by regular teams, only 53% of the scheduled checkpoints were actually
conducted, and even then the police arrived on schedule only 40% of the time.25
    Court records provide a secondary source of administrative data on the project outcomes. For
each police station, the court provided a list of all drunken driving cases heard, including the date of
the offense, level of the fine, and breathalyzer reading. These court records reflect the information
received by senior officers on all teams’ performances, and are net of any cases where police let
drunken drivers go (in exchange for bribes or simply out of clemency). Finally, the breathalyzers
used at the checkpoints provide a source of data on the actions of the police at the roadblocks.
Each time that a breathalyzer is used, it records the date, time, and alcohol level measured. At the
end of the project we copied the memory files off the breathalyzers and can use these to examine
police conduct. Unfortunately these records are partial, since many of the breathalyzer memories
were wiped when their batteries ran out. However, since the police personnel did not know of the
breathalyzer memory recording feature, these erasures are as good as random, and the remaining
  24
     Several district reported to have made these transfers in wake of the sobriety crackdown, although we do not
have access to detailed personnel data during this period.
  25
     Data gathered by surveyors was not reported to police management during the crackdown, and never reported
at the police station level.


                                                       24
data can still be used.

4.2    Results
The effects of the police line intervention on checkpoint enforcement, presented in Table 10, are
clear: the police lines teams perform substantially better on all outcomes. The primary outcome,
whether the checkpoint actually occurred on a night when it was supposed to have been held, is
shown in column 1 using data collected by the surveyors’ observations. Police lines teams were
27.6 percentage points more likely to show up for the checkpoint at all (an increase of around 50%
over the control mean). Columns 2 and 3 report whether to police began checking by 7:00pm and
continued until 10:00pm respectively (the scheduled times). Again, police lines teams were 29.5
percentage points (73%) more likely to arrive on time and 18.5 percentage points (27%) more likely
to continue the roadblock until 10pm. While they were carrying out the checkpoints, they stopped
a larger fraction of the passing vehicles (9.7 percentage points more, or 60%). Overall, they caught
more than twice as many drunk drivers for any given checkpoint that was in fact conducted (since
they also carried out more checkpoints, the total effect is obviously even larger).
    Data from the police teams’ breathalyzer units provides another insight into their performance.
This information has the advantage that it reflects the behavior of the police on all nights, including
those when they were not monitored by surveyors. Table 11 presents the result on breathalyzer
usage during the periods when the police were assigned to carry out roadblocks for the project.
Column 1 shows a simple linear probability regression of whether there was any breathalyzer use at
all during the checkpoint period (a proxy whether the police actually travelled to the location), and
column 2 shows the intensity of breathalyzer use conditional on any usage at all. Consistent with
the results from the surveyors’ reports, the breathalyzer data shows much better performance by
the police lines teams on all outcomes. On the extensive margin, lines teams use breathalyzers 12
percentage points more frequently than the stations teams and, conditional on the presence of any
breathalyzer data on a given night, the lines times tested more than three times as many drivers.26
    While breathalyzer tests provide insight into the number of drunken drivers caught, the number
actually prosecuted might be substantially fewer if many drivers are let off with a warning or a
bribe. Therefore we also gathered data from local courts, one per police station, on the total
number of drivers who appeared in court to pay fines for drunken driving. Column 3 of Table 11
shows that over the duration of the project the police lines teams brought more than twice as many
drunk drivers to court as the regular station teams. This difference persists even when controlling
in column 4 for the number of breathalyzer recordings of drunken drivers, showing that not only
were the lines teams more effective at apprehending drunken drivers, they also prosecuted them
more effectively. Police lines teams knew that this was exactly the statistic that would be reported
to the district level officer evaluating their performance. Since drivers paying fines in court by
  26
     We also tested whether police lines and police station lines acted differently on nights were the surveyors was
present. We find more use of the breathalyzer when the monitor is present (though the effect is smaller than that of
the police line team), but not differentially for police lines and police station teams.



                                                        25
definition did not pay bribes at the checkpoints, the specific monitoring mechanisms may have
both increased effort and reduced corruption.

4.3   Interpretation
Compared to the mixed results of the first set of experiments, and the rather disappointing results
of the use of incentives in the previous literature, these results are extremely encouraging. It is
possible to build incentives into a government system that apparently has no scope for them, and
it seems that these incentives have very large effects on productivity.
    However, it is worth keeping in mind that the police lines teams were different from the station
teams in multiple respects, not just in their incentives. For one, the teams were selected in different
ways—though selection was probably working against us, since the police lines are a punishment
posting. Also the police lines teams probably worked less hard during the day and did less multi-
tasking (since the police lines are not a very high-intensity posting, while regular police teams still
had to handle the rest of the duty at the police station). However, even if incentives per se did not
cause the differences in performance , our basic claim still stands, that there are mechanisms avail-
able within the police system to substantially boost productivity but that these mechanisms are not
implemented even by motivated managers seeking to accomplish fundamentally sound objectives.


5     Conclusion
The experimental results in this paper show that it is possible to affect the behavior of the police
in a relatively short period of time, using a simple and affordable set of interventions. Decoy
visits were effective in getting the police to register more crimes and treat victims more politely.
The promise of transfers out of a less favored assignment—police lines in this case—based on good
performance more than doubled the number of drunk drivers brought to court. Training police staff
in investigation techniques and public relations skills (soft skills) also increased the satisfaction of
crime victims. On the other hand, some other prima facie plausible interventions were not properly
implemented and turned out to be ineffective.
    What does this tell us about the nature of organizational change? It is striking that two
of the three most clearly successful interventions had never been advocated by the many police
Reform Commissions or in the discussions we had with the police top brass despite the motivation
for reform and support of the top administration. In contrast, the interventions that failed to
work were all carefully selected by the police leadership, partly based on the recommendations of
various Police Reform Commissions, who among them combine a huge amount of experience and
expertise. These senior police officers also did not lack human capital, being selected through an
extraordinarily competitive set of exams. Yet they had clearly substantially underappreciated the
difficulty of implementing these interventions even with their full backing, suggesting that they did
not fully realize the nature of the informal authority enjoyed by the station chiefs.
    While it is not possible to rule out the possibility is that bad luck played a role, we see the


                                                  26
relatively poor performance of police force interventions as evidence against the view that the
managers know how to translate the general principles of management into solutions that are
relevant for their organization. The managers in this case were the elite of the Indian police, with
decades of experience and who were motivated enough, among other things, to engage with us to
launch this reform program. They had a clear and articulated understanding of the principles that
motivated the interventions (“unpredictable work schedules are demoralizing,” “a chance to learn on
the job can motivate an employee,” “the customer must be listened to”) and they were recognized
as outstanding leaders (both the Director General A.S. Gill and our co-author Nina Singh were
subsequently assigned to important positions in the central police). However, none of that could
guarantee that they would automatically hone in on all the right interventions. And while they
clearly shared the view that incentives, as a general principle, are important, they could not see a
way to introduce them within the political and administrative constraints, until we intervened as
pseudo-consultants.
   What do outsiders, with less institutional knowledge and experience, provide in these situations?
While we cannot directly test this question, we suggest three reasons why these insights were
unlikely to have arisen within the police institution. First, the idea of introducing individual
incentives for subordinate staff was an implicit acknowledgment that the traditional police hierarchy
and discipline could be inadequate to obtain satisfactory program implementation. Outsiders with
little stake in the existing police power structure were much more willing to consider and advocate
interventions that conceded and accommodated the autonomy of middle managers.
   Second, the evaluation generated evidence and information not typically available to the police
leadership. The police’s own internal monitoring systems, in which subordinates report on their
own performance to superiors, typically confirms that implementation is exemplary. Even in the
case of the two least successful interventions, official records claimed almost complete compliance.
Without external monitoring there would have been no concrete evidence that the basic problem
lay not in the design of some of interventions, but rather in the incentives for their execution.
   Finally, it seems that the initial underestimation of the importance of incentives and soft skills
lay not so much in the lack of information by senior officers, but rather with the view that these
programs would not work in that context. (This is similar to the interventions that the management
in BEMMR knew about, but did not think would work for them.) In a police system based on
the themes of discipline, hierarchy and duty, the idea of individual incentives, particularly financial
ones, has become associated with corruption and the dilution of intrinsic motivation and discipline.
Similarly, the Rajasthan Police themselves acknowledged that “soft skills” and positive public
relations were not part of their institutional heritage. This explains the decision to completely
outsource the soft-skills training to consultants, rather than do so through police trainers or even
a training-of-trainers approach.
   This interpretation may help explain the mixed results in Rasul and Rogger (2013). Perhaps
the efforts to implement incentives in Nigerian government bureaucracies were sufficiently poorly
designed or implemented to backfire; it does not preclude the possibility that consultants would


                                                  27
have been able to design them well. Meanwhile, the correlation between managers’ reported organi-
zational practices and performance in BVR may be partly due to unobserved manager type: relying
on incentives is so fundamental in a private setting that admitting not to use them is the sign that
there is something really wrong with the manager. The view we end up with falls somewhere in
between the “best principle” and “contingencies” view of management. Organizations, both pri-
vate and public, can be improved by helping managers put into practice some fundamentally sound
principles: but the evidence so far suggest that this requires quite careful fine-tuning.




                                                 28
References
 Atkins, D., A. Chaudhry, S. Chaudhry, A. Khandelwal, and E. Verhoogen (2014). Organizational
    Barriers to Technology Adoption: Evidence from Soccer-Ball Producers in Pakistan. Mimeo,
    UCLA.
 Bandiera, O., A. Prat, and T. Valletti (2009). Active and passive waste in government spending:
    evidence from a policy experiment. American Economic Review 99 (4), 1278–1308.
 Banerjee, A. V., R. Banerji, E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and S. Khemani (2010). Pitfalls of par-
    ticipatory programs: evidence from a randomized evaluation in education in india. American
    Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1), 1–30.
 Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, and R. Glennerster (2008). Putting a band aid on a corpse: incen-
    tives for nurses in the Indian public health care system. Journal of the European Economic
    Association 6 (2-3), 487–500.
 Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, D. Keniston, and N. Singh (2014). The efficient deployment of police
    resources: theory and new evidence from a randomized drunk driving crackdown in India.
    Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts (2013). Does management
    matter? Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1), 1–51.
 Bloom, N., C. Propper, S. Seiler, and J. Van Reenen (2010). The impact of competition on man-
    agement quality: evidence from public hospitals. Technical Report 16032, National Bureau
    of Economic Research.
 Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices across
    firms and countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4), 1351–1408.
 Bruce, D. and R. Neild (2005). The police that we want: a handbook for oversight of police
    in South Africa. Center for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation, Johannesburg, South
    Africa.
 Caparini, M. and O. Marenin (2005). Crime, insecurity and police reform in post-socialist CEE.
    The Journal of Power Institutions in Post-Soviet Societies 2, 1–12.
 Centre for Media Studies (Ed.) (2005). Volume 9: Corruption in the Police Department. Trans-
    parency International, New Delhi, India.
 Di Tella, R. and E. Schargrodsky (2003). The role of wages and auditing during a crackdown on
    corruption in the city of Buenos Aires. Journal of law and economics 46 (1), 269–292.
 Hanna, R. and I. Dhaliwal (2013). Making a deal with the devil: experimental evidence on
    bureaucratic reform in India. Working Paper, Harvard Kennedy School of Government.
 Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom (1991). Multitask principal-agent analyses: incentive contracts,
    asset ownership, and job design. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 7, 24.


                                               29
Iyer, L., A. Mani, P. Mishra, and P. Topalova (2012). The power of political voice: women’s polit-
   ical representation and crime in India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4),
   165–93.
Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood
   effects. Econometrica 75 (1), 83–119.
Kolsky, E. (2010). Colonial Justice in British India. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
National Police Commission (1980). National police commission report. Volumes 1-8.
Olken, B. A. (2007). Monitoring corruption: evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia.
   Journal of Political Economy 115 (2), 200–249.
Opolot, J. S. (1992). The resilience of the British colonial police legacies in East Africa, Southern
   Africa, and West Africa. Police Studies: International Review of Police Development 15, 90.
Prendergast, C. (2001, December). Selection and oversight in the public sector, with the Los
   Angeles Police department as an example. Working Paper 8664, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Rasul, I. and D. Rogger (2013, October). Management of bureaucrats and public service delivery:
   evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service. Working Paper, University College London.
Sidhu, H. S. (2003). Management of Reforms in Police - A Study at District Level. Master’s
   thesis, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab.
The Hindu. Rebuild India’s Police Forces. Sept. 9, 2011.
Varona, G. (2010). Politics and policing in the Philippines: challenges to police reform. Flinders
   Journal of History and Politics 26, 101–125.
Wade, R. (1985). The market for public office: why the Indian state is not better at development.
   World Development 13 (4), 467–497.




                                                30
Tables - First Intervention


                                Table 1: Program Design
  Group                                              Program elements
                           Number                Weekly off
                                       Community                No
                           of Police             and duty                 Training
                                        observer              Transfer
                           Stations               rotation
                                                                         Between 0 and
  1. All Interventions        35          Yes        Yes        Yes
                                                                         100% of staff

  2. Community                                                           Between 0 and
                              25          Yes        No         Yes
  Observer + No Transfer                                                 100% of staff

  3. Weekly Off / Duty                                                   Between 0 and
                              25          No         Yes        Yes
  Rotation + No Transfer                                                 100% of staff

                                                                         Between 0 and
  4. No Transfer              40          No         No         Yes
                                                                         100% of staff

                                                                         Between 0 and
  5. Control                  25          No         No          No
                                                                         100% of staff

  6. Pure Control             12          No         No          No          None




                                          31
                       Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                      (1)            (2)                   (3)
                                    Control     Any Treatment          Difference

                                        A. Opinion Survey Respondents
Crime victim in                     0.0547            0.0610            0.0063
household                           (0.228)           (0.239)           (0.015)
Ever met police                     0.0844            0.0915            0.0071
                                    (0.278)           (0.288)           (0.018)
Ever visited police                 0.0943            0.0846            -0.0097
station                             (0.293)           (0.278)           (0.017)
Ever arrested                       0.0223            0.0133            -0.0091
                                    (0.148)           (0.115)           (0.010)

                                                 B. Decoy Surveys
Case not filed                       0.520             0.616            0.0960
                                    (0.510)           (0.488)           (0.110)
Police very polite                   0.200             0.144            -0.0560
to decoy                            (0.408)           (0.353)           (0.087)
Police rude to                       0.120             0.192            0.0720
decoy                               (0.332)           (0.395)           (0.074)

                                              C. Victim Satisfaction
Victim satisfied or very             0.348             0.356             0.008
satisfied                           (0.487)           (0.481)           (0.118)
Case registered with police          0.311             0.301             -0.010
                                    (0.467)           (0.460)           (0.066)

                                                  D. Case Review
Documentation Quality                6.409             6.133             -0.276
                                    (1.797)           (1.931)           (0.300)
Field investigation                  6.537             6.160             -0.378
quality                             (1.636)           (1.823)           (0.272)
Whether used scientific              0.179             0.202             0.023
methods                             (0.386)           (0.402)           (0.053)
Statistics reported for baseline survey, except box B which reports data
from the first decoy visit. Columns 1 and 2 present means with
standard errors in parentheses. Column 3 reports standard errors of
the difference in parentheses, clustered at police station level for boxes
A, C, and D.


                                        32
                               Table 3: Police Staff Transfers by Rank
                                          (1)                           (2)                (3)
                                     Treatment PS
                                                                 Control PS             Difference
                                     (No Transfer )
       Inspector                            48.6%                      63.6%              15.1%
                                                                                         (17.16)
       Sub. Inspector                       47.5%                      68.2%            20.7%∗∗
                                                                                          (8.28)
       Asst. Sub. Insp.                     28.0%                      29.8%               1.8%
                                                                                          (6.16)
       Head Constable                       28.3%                      34.5%               6.2%
                                                                                          (7.00)
       Constable                            16.6%                      30.0%            13.4%∗∗
                                                                                          (4.49)
       All Ranks                            21.1%                      32.8%            11.7%∗∗∗
                                                                                          (3.59)
       Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.
       ∗                ∗∗                ∗∗∗
           p < 0.10 ,        p < 0.05 ,         p < 0.01




                              Table 4: Implementation of Interventions
                                            Round 1         Round 2           Round 3   Round 4      Round 5
                                A. Weekly off: Days since last day off
No weekly off                                     29            32              28         31          30
Weekly off                                        21            22              25         26          32
Difference:                                        8            11               3          5          -2
                B. Number of days constable has been doing current duty
No duty rotation                                 4.05           3.97            6.27      4.17        2.70
Duty rotation                                    5.58           4.51            5.33      4.50        2.78
Difference:                                      1.53           0.54           -0.94      0.33        0.08
                             C. Whether community observer is present
Community observer station                       20%            8%              3%        12%          8%
Surveyors did not record community observer presence in stations not
assigned to that intervention.




                                                           33
                                               Table 5: Decoy Survey Outcomes
                                           (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)           (6)
                                         Case             Case            Case          Police were      Police were   Police were
                                       registered       registered      registered      very polite      very polite   very polite
All interventions                        0.0285           0.0303                           -0.0234         -0.0216
                                        (0.0438)         (0.0438)                         (0.0283)        (0.0281)
No transfer                              -0.0558          -0.0575                          -0.0341         -0.0315
                                        (0.0457)         (0.0447)                         (0.0362)        (0.0366)
Duty rotation,                           0.0494           0.0533                           0.0297          0.0326
weekly off                              (0.0479)         (0.0483)                         (0.0308)        (0.0297)
Community observer                       0.0766           0.0801                          -0.00555       0.0000914
                                        (0.0579)         (0.0586)                         (0.0303)        (0.0293)
Percentage staff                         0.107            0.108           0.233**          0.105*          0.101*       0.196**
trained                                 (0.0829)         (0.0837)         (0.116)         (0.0543)        (0.0539)      (0.0869)
Number of decoy                         0.174***         0.173***        0.165**          0.0700*         0.0746**      0.102**
visits                                  (0.0577)         (0.0579)        (0.0761)         (0.0367)        (0.0366)      (0.0412)
Observations                               788              788             788              788               788        788
R2                                        0.181            0.185           0.141            0.096             0.122      0.112
District FE                                Yes              Yes             No               Yes               Yes        No
Station FE                                 No               No              Yes              No                No         Yes
Controls for police                        No               Yes             Yes              No                Yes        Yes
suspicions
Control mean at                           0.480            0.480           0.480            0.200             0.200      0.200
first decoy visit
∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01 Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.




                                                                   34
                         Table 6: Program Effects on Victim Satisfaction
                                                 (1)               (2)                    (3)
                                               Endline         Station FE             Station FE
                                                only
All interventions                               -0.150*         -0.290**               -0.257**
                                               (0.0777)          (0.136)                (0.118)
No transfer                                      0.144          0.281**                 0.243**
                                               (0.0872)         (0.123)                 (0.104)
Duty rotation,                                  -0.0614         -0.0770                 -0.0886
weekly off                                     (0.0959)         (0.171)                 (0.164)
Community observer                             0.225*           -0.279*                 -0.301*
                                               (0.116)          (0.157)                 (0.155)
In study                                        -0.131
                                               (0.127)
Percentage staff                               0.156**          0.193**                 0.131*
trained                                        (0.0767)         (0.0843)               (0.0763)
Registered case                                                                        -0.00456
                                                                                       (0.0387)
Asked for bribes                                                                       -0.150***
                                                                                        (0.0566)
Made arrest                                                                            0.166***
                                                                                       (0.0618)
Recovered property                                                                     0.679***
                                                                                        (0.185)
Continued                                                                              0.197***
investigation actions                                                                  (0.0485)
Recontacted victim                                                                      0.0877
                                                                                       (0.0622)
Observations                                      269             571                     571
R2                                               0.290           0.222                   0.308
District FE                                       Yes             No                      No
Station FE                                        No              Yes                     Yes
Crime and victim controls                         Yes             Yes                     Yes
Baseline/control mean                            0.246           0.299                   0.299
∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01 Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.
Victim characteristics: age and gender of the respondent, education and dummies for the
occupation of the head of household, indicators for caste or Muslim religion, and indicators
for motorcycle ownership.




                                                          35
                                                             Table 7: Effect of Training on Police Actions
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)         (7)
                                                 Registered      Asked for         Made          Recovered       Continued      Recontacted Monthly
                                                   case           bribes           arrest        property        investiga-       victim    number of
                                                                                                                    tion                      cases
                                                                                                                   actions                  registered
     Percentage staff                               0.176           0.183           0.137         0.0377∗           0.160          0.0683            1.684∗
     trained                                       (0.109)         (0.113)        (0.0868)        (0.0208)         (0.101)        (0.0773)           (0.976)
     Observations                                    571             571             571            571              571             571             3852
     R2                                             0.139           0.107           0.119          0.137            0.087           0.089            0.034
     Station FE                                      Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
     Crime and victim controls                       Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
     Baseline/control mean                          0.590           0.160           0.135          0.0123           0.246           0.135            17.91
     ∗                ∗∗                ∗∗∗
         p < 0.10 ,        p < 0.05 ,         p < 0.01 Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station. Victim characteristics: age and
     gender of the respondent, education and dummies for the occupation of the head of household, indicators for caste or Muslim religion,
36




     and indicators for motorcycle ownership.
                                    Table 8: Case Review Outcomes
                                             (1)               (2)                                         (3)
                                      Quality of field      Quality of                                Used scientific
                                       investigation      documentation                                techniques
Investigating                                0.152                             0.203                      0.0291
officer trained                             (0.205)                           (0.308)                    (0.0372)
Fraction officers                           -0.0713                            -0.251                  -0.0000554
trained in station                          (0.310)                           (0.396)                   (0.0568)
Observations                                  937                               924                        981
R2                                           0.286                             0.327                      0.194
Station FE                                    Yes                               Yes                        Yes
Baseline/pure control mean                   6.199                             6.153                      0.195
Dependent variables in columns 1-2 are ratings given by retired officers to case files on
a scale of 1-10. Dependent variable in column 3 is an indicator for whether the case review
                                                    ∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
indicated that scientific investigation was used.       p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01
Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.




                                                           37
                                        Table 9: Public Opinion
                                                 (1)                         (2)
                                             Only Endline            Police Station FE
                                                    A. Police Responsiveness to Citizens
All interventions                              0.016 (.04)                   -0.011 (.08)
No transfer                                  -0.103** (.05)                  -0.014 (.08)
Weekly off                                     0.052 (.05)                   0.133 (.08)
Community observer                              0.02 (.05)                    0.08 (.09)
Percentage staff trained                       -0.03 (.04)                   -0.054 (.07)
Not pure control                             0.112** (.05)

                                                          B. Reducing Police Corruption
All interventions                              0.067 (.05)                     0.05 (.07)
No transfer                                    0.03 (.05)                      0.02 (.08)
Weekly off                                    -0.058 (.05)                   -0.048 (.07)
Community observer                            -0.007 (.05)                    0.043 (.07)
Percentage staff trained                       0.01 (.05)                     0.016 (.07)
Not pure control                              0.078 (.07)

                                                              C. Lack of Fear of Police
All interventions                               0.012 (.06)                  -0.033 (.09)
No transfer                                   0.132** (.06)                 0.242** (.10)
Weekly off                                   -0.175*** (.05)               -0.216*** (.07)
Community observer                             -0.026 (.06)                  -0.064 (.09)
Percentage staff trained                       -0.053 (.06)                  -0.003 (.08)
Not pure control                               0.075 (.08)

                                                           D. Increase Police Resources
All interventions                              0.036 (.05)                    0.017 (.05)
No transfer                                   -0.047 (.06)                   -0.034 (.06)
Weekly off                                    -0.017 (.05)                   -0.037 (.05)
Community observer                             -0.03 (.06)                   -0.031 (.06)
Percentage staff trained                      -0.027 (.05)                   -0.032 (.05)
Not pure control                              0.13 * (.08)

Police Station Fixed Effects                       No                                Yes
HH characteristics,                                Yes                               Yes
victim/arrested, opinion source
                                                                                 ∗                ∗∗                ∗∗∗
Notes 1. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the police station level.       p < 0.10 ,        p < 0.05 ,
p < 0.01 2. Treatment variables defined as described in Section 5. 3. Control variables are as follows: HH
characteristics: age and gender of the respondent, education and dummies for the occupation of the head
of household, indicators for caste or Muslim religion, and indicators for motorcycle or vehicle ownership.
Victim/arrested: Indicators for whether the respondent was arrested, knows someone who has been
arrested, or is in a household with a crime victim. Opinion source: Indicators for the self-reported source
of the victim’s information on the police, including non-mutually exclusive categories such as TV news,
word of mouth, personal experience, etc.



                                                     38
Tables - Drunken Driving Checkpoint Enforcement

                           Table 10: Police station vs. police lines teams
                             All Nights                   Conditional on checkpoint occurring
                                  (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)                   (5)
                               Whether          Police          Police stay        Percentage              Drunk
                              roadblock        arrive on           until            vehicles               drivers
                               occurred          time            10:00pm            stopped                caught
  Police lines teams           0.276∗∗∗           0.296∗∗∗           0.185∗∗∗           9.718∗∗∗           1.897∗∗∗
                               (0.0392)           (0.0512)           (0.0417)           (2.130)            (0.298)
  Observations                  1196                729                736                759                759
  R2                            0.097              0.097              0.049              0.098              0.160
  District FE                    Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
  Station teams mean            0.528              0.402              0.663              16.09              1.140
  Standard errors in parentheses clustered by district.
  * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                       Table 11: Breathalyzer and Prosecution Performance
                                           (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)
                                           Any         # Breath-            Drunk              Drunk
                                        breatha-       alyzer tests        drivers in         drivers in
                                          lyzer          if used             court              court
                                          data
          Police lines teams            0.120∗∗∗           3.714∗∗∗           22.07∗∗∗           17.69∗∗∗
                                        (0.0451)           (0.593)            (5.705)            (2.769)
          Drunken drivers                                                                         0.219∗
          breathalyzed                                                                           (0.0986)
          Observations                    2703               1023                123                123
          R2                              0.021              0.145              0.251              0.393
          District FE                      Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
          Station teams mean              0.599              1.107              15.33              15.33
          Standard errors in parentheses clustered by district.
          * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                       39
Figures


                                                                     Figure 1: Effect of training on victim satisfaction



                                                     .4
           Chance on victim satisfaction probability
          −.2           0              .2




                                                          0%                        25%                 50%                  75%                                    100%
                                                                                       Percentage of station personnel trained
                                                          Graph points are coefficients from a regression of victim satisfaction on percentage of staff trained,
                                                          including police station fixed effects and controls for crime and victim characteristics. Bars show 90%
                                                          confidence interval.




                                                                   Figure 2: Effect of decoy visits on case registration
                               1
          Chance on case registration probability
          0                   .5




                                                           0                    1                 2                3                           4                     5
                                                                                                Number of previous visits
                                                          Graph points are coefficients from a regression of case registered dummy on prior decoy visits,
                                                          including district fixed effects and controls for case type. Bars show 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                                         40
For Online Publication Appendix

                       Table A1: Attrition in the Police Survey
             No transfer                                        0.325∗∗∗   [0.276,0.373]
             No transfer/Weekly off                             0.385∗∗∗   [0.306,0.463]
             No transfer/Comm. Observer                         0.278∗∗∗   [0.203,0.353]
             All Interventions                                  0.383∗∗∗   [0.330,0.437]
             Control                                            0.447∗∗∗   [0.377,0.517]
             Observations                                        1548
             95% confidence intervals in brackets
             ∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
                 p < 0.05,        p < 0.01,         p < 0.001




                                                       41
                                  Table A2: Program Effects on Crime
                                             (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)
                                           Endline         Endline        Station FE        Station FE
                                            only            only
All interventions                          -0.0112         -0.00848        -0.00645          -0.00876
                                          (0.00822)       (0.00825)        (0.0132)          (0.0131)
No transfer                                 0.0133          0.0118         0.00776           0.00721
                                          (0.00849)       (0.00810)        (0.0119)          (0.0121)
Duty rotation,                            0.000763         0.00124         0.00464           0.00119
weekly off                                (0.00911)       (0.00941)        (0.0151)          (0.0160)
Community observer                         -0.0155∗        -0.0138         -0.00730          -0.00872
                                          (0.00842)       (0.00868)        (0.0130)          (0.0135)
Percentage staff                            0.0105         0.00990          0.0156            0.0139
trained                                   (0.00847)       (0.00855)        (0.0119)          (0.0127)
In study                                   -0.0124         -0.0119
                                          (0.00990)       (0.00975)
Observations                                15594             15550          22771             21900
R2                                          0.021             0.028          0.001             0.008
District FE                                  Yes               Yes            No                No
Station FE                                   No                No             Yes               Yes
Victim characteristic
controls                                     No              Yes              No               Yes
Baseline/control mean                      0.0824           0.0823          0.0776            0.0786
∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01 Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.




                                                         42
         Table A3: Program Effects on Police Awareness of Victims’ Crimes
                                                 (1)                             (2)
                                               Endline                       Station FE
                                                only
All interventions                               0.0266                          -0.0346
                                               (0.0407)                        (0.0518)
No transfer                                     -0.0400                         0.111
                                               (0.0409)                        (0.0734)
Duty rotation,                                  0.0553                          -0.0264
weekly off                                     (0.0553)                        (0.0610)
Community observer                              -0.0501                         -0.0691
                                               (0.0424)                        (0.0730)
In study                                       0.00937
                                               (0.0647)
Percentage staff                                -0.0541                         -0.0442
trained                                        (0.0463)                        (0.0449)
Prior decoy visits                             -0.00481                         -0.0145
                                               (0.0171)                        (0.0143)
Observations                                     1567                            2062
R2                                               0.272                           0.245
District FE                                       Yes                             Yes
Station FE                                        No                              Yes
Crime and victim controls                         Yes                             Yes
Date of crime controls                            Yes                             Yes
Baseline/control mean                            0.271                           0.277
∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01 Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.
Victim characteristics: age and gender of the respondent, education and dummies for the
occupation of the head of household, indicators for caste or Muslim religion, and indicators
for motorcycle ownership. Date of crime controls include dummies for month of crime.




                                                          43
                Table A4: Decoy Intervention Effects on Victim Satisfaction
                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
                                               District         District        District         District
                                                 FE               FE              FE               FE
All interventions                               0.148           -0.0823
                                               (0.193)          (0.334)
No transfer                                    -0.477**          0.272
                                                (0.217)         (0.451)
Duty rotation,                                  0.105           0.00687
weekly off                                     (0.116)          (0.398)
Community observer                              -0.205          -0.0635
                                               (0.247)          (0.390)
Percentage staff                                0.200            0.179
trained                                        (0.188)          (0.807)
Prior decoy visits                              0.130            0.254            0.174           0.257
                                               (0.103)          (0.349)          (0.104)         (0.185)
In study                                       -1.335**          -2.699        -1.558***         -2.344**
                                                (0.567)         (1.590)         (0.491)           (0.853)
Observations                                       51              51               51              51
R2                                               0.602           0.880            0.495           0.863
District FE                                       Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Crime and victim controls                         No              Yes              No              Yes
Date of crime controls                            Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Baseline/control mean                            0.250           0.250            0.250           0.250
∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01 Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.
Sample limited to males aged 20-50 who reported crimes of theft, burglary, or sexual harassment
to the police themselves.
Victim characteristics: age and gender of the respondent, education and dummies for the
occupation of the head of household, indicators for caste or Muslim religion, and indicators
for motorcycle ownership. Date of crime controls include dummies for month of crime.




                                                          44
                                         Table A5: Program Effects on Fear of Police
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)           (6)
                                           Open-          Whether          Whether           Open-             Whether       Whether
                                           ended           citizens           law            ended              citizens        law
                                           police            like           abiding          police               like        abiding
                                          opinion        respondent         citizens        opinion           respondent      citizens
                                          question       fear police      fear police       question          fear police   fear police
                                           elicits                                           elicits
                                           "fear"                                            "fear"
All interventions                          0.0175           -0.0235         -0.0121         0.00231             -0.0290       -0.0238
                                          (0.0427)         (0.0551)        (0.0630)         (0.0435)           (0.0570)      (0.0596)
No transfer                                0.0106           0.0699         0.208***          0.0321              0.100      0.212***
                                          (0.0497)         (0.0664)        (0.0658)         (0.0516)           (0.0657)     (0.0666)
Duty rotation,                            -0.00671          -0.0886        -0.198***         -0.0176            -0.0814     -0.214***
weekly off                                (0.0480)         (0.0555)         (0.0585)        (0.0484)           (0.0549)      (0.0579)
Community observer                         0.0313          -0.0989*        -0.00654          0.0269            -0.0974*       -0.0383
                                          (0.0527)         (0.0554)        (0.0496)         (0.0530)           (0.0575)      (0.0504)
Percentage staff                          0.00716           0.0347          -0.0463         0.00445             0.0565        -0.0693
trained                                   (0.0442)         (0.0527)        (0.0534)         (0.0447)           (0.0532)      (0.0518)
Observations                                7343             7602            7397             6731              6994          6783
R2                                          0.002            0.005           0.014            0.034             0.029         0.026
Station FE                                   Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes
Ctrls for HH chars.,
victim/arrested,
opinion source                               No               No              No               Yes               Yes           Yes
Baseline/control mean                       0.853            0.467           0.371            0.844             0.447         0.363
∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01 Standard errors in parentheses clustered by police station.
Control variable details listed in notes of Table 6




                                                                  45
