                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE EFFECT OF FEDERAL TAX
                  DEDUCTIBILITY ON STATE AND LOCAL
                         TAXES AND SPENDING




                         Martin Felcistein


                         Gilbert Metcalf




                      Working Paper No. 1791




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Government Budgets. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working PAper #1791
                                                     January 1986



                    The Effect of Federal Deductibility
                   on State and Local Taxes and Spending



                                 ABSTRACT



       This paper examines the effect of federal
  local taxes on the fiscal                      deductibility of state and
                            behavior of state and local governments. The
 primary finding is that deductibility
                                        affects the way that state-local
 governments finance their spending
                                     as well as the overall level of
 More specifically, in states where federal deductibility            spending.
 low cost of using deductible                              implies a relatively
                               personal taxes (including income, sales and
 property taxes), there is greater reliance
 business taxes and other revenue sources. on those taxes and less reliance on

     The effect of deductibility
                                 on the state-local financial mix implies that
deductibility has a much lower cost to
                                        the federal government than has
previously been assumed. Indeed, if
of financing from business taxes to personal taxes, causes a large enough shift
                                     deductibility
raise federal tax receipts. The                      deductibility may actually
                                 analysis also implies that deductibility is
likely to be a more cost-effective
general level of state-local       way than direct grants for raising the
                             government spending.
      The present study uses the
                                  individual tax return data in the NBER TAXSIM
model to calculate federal tax
                                prices for itemizers and other taxpayers in
each state. The econometric
                              analysis recognizes that the federal tax price is
endogenous (because it reflects the
                                      state-local spending decisions) and
therefore uses a consistent instrumental
instrumental variable estimation           variable procedure. This use of
                                  exacerbates the difficulty of making precise
estimates from the data. The
                               relatively large standard errors indicate the
need for caution in interpreting
                                  the point estimates.




Martin Feldstejn
                                                   Gifljert Metcalf
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                   NR
                                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Caxthridge, M 02138
                                                   Caithndge,       02138
t                      THE EFFECT OF FEDERAL TAX DEDUCTIBILITY
                        ON STATE AND LOCAL TAXES AND SPENDING


                                   Martin Feldstein*
                                    Gilbert Metcalf*


         The deductibility of state and local tax payments in the   calculation of

    federal personal income tax liabilities is one of the key features of the

    fiscal relation between the federal government and the governments of states

    and localities. For 1984, deductions for state and local personal taxes

    directly reduced federal tax revenues by an estimated $30 billion, more than

    30 percent of the federal grants to state and local governments.1 When the

    Reagan administration proposed to eliminate state and local deductibility as

    part of its November 1984 tax reform proposal, the state and local governments

    objected that deductibility is needed to maintain public support for existing

    spending levels of important state and local activities and that eliminating

    deductibility would subject taxpayers to unfair double taxation. The Treasury

    Department agreed that the current deductibility raises state and local

    spending but argued that this is a tax—induced distortion in the allocation of




         *Martin Feldstein is the George F. Baker Professor of Economics at
    Harvard University and President of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Gilbert Metcalf is a graduate student in Economics at Harvard University. We
    are grateful to Daniel Feenberg for help with the TAXSIM calculation reported
    in Sections 3 and 4. We have also benefited from comments by participants in
    the NBER Tax Program and from additional discussions with Robert Inman and
    Lawrence Summers. This paper is part of the NBER Study of the Government
    Budget and the Private Economy.

        1These figures are for the 1984 fiscal year; see Office of Management and
    Budget (1985).
                                     —2—


resources that should be eliminated. The Treasury also asserted that the

deductibility provision causes a large loss of federal revenue and is of

primary benefit to high income taxpayers.2

     The sensitivity of state and local taxes and spending to deductibility is

therefore a crucial part of the arguments of both the advocates and the critics

of deductibility. Unfortunately, very little is known about the quantitative

effects of the current tax deductibility rule on the behavior of state and local

governments. The purpose of the present paper is to make a first contribution

toward remedying that deficiency.

     The paper gives particular attention to the possibility that the

deductibility of personal tax payments affects the way that state and local

governments finance their spending as well as the amount of that spending.

Separate equations are estimated for (1) per capita state and local personal

income and sales taxes; (2) per capita state and local revenues that are not

deductible in the calculation of personal tax liabilities, including corporate

taxes, taxes on motor vehicle fuels, license and user fees, etc.; and (3) the

level of per capita state and local spending.

     The econometric evidence indicates that deductibility has a powerful

effect on the extent to which states and localities use deductible personal

taxes. The effect of deductibility on the overall level of spending by states

and localities is smaller and more uncertain. Thus deductibility causes

states and localities to rely more heavily on the deductible personal taxes

than on other types of revenue. The estimates suggest that eliminating
                                                                                   C




    2The Treasury arguments are presented in U.S. Treasury (1984) and Office
of the President (1985). For useful summaries of the traditional arguments
for and against deductibility, see Bartlett (1985) and Billman and Cunningham
 (1985).




                                                                                       A
                                             —3—


     personal tax deductibility would probably raise federal tax revenue by only a

     small fraction of the amount predicted by the traditional "static1' revenue
t
     estimates   and might actually reduce it.3

          The paper begins by discussing the theory of the federal tax price of

     state and local spending and the implications of itemizer-only
                                                                      deductibility
    for the sensitivity of taxes and spending to current tax rules. The analysis

    shows that previous evidence on the price elasticity of demand for state and

    local services is not relevant to evaluating the likely effects of changes in

    deductibility. Section 2 then comments briefly on previous research and notes

    the difficulty of using that research to estimate the likely effect of

    eliminating or changing the current deductibility rule. The third section

    discusses our method of using individual tax return data to obtain federal tax

    prices for each state and presents estimates for 1980. Section 4 considers a

    problem of statistical endogeneity that occurs if this federal tax price

    measure is used in ordinary least squares regressions to estimate the response

    of spending to the federal tax price and suggests a statistical procedure for

    avoiding this problem.

         The fifth section discusses the specification of the tax and spending

    equations and presents the statistical estimates of the effects of the federal

    tax price and other variables on state and local taxes and spending. These

    parameter estimates are then used in section 6 to evaluate the effect of

    eliminating deductibility on federal tax revenue and in section 1 to discuss the

    relative efficiency of federal grants and tax deductibility as alternative ways of



        3The analysis in this paper is thus another example of the importance of
    going beyond the traditional static revenue estimation procedures and
    incorporating realistic behavioral assumptions in tax policy analysis. For
    further examples of behavioral simulation methods in tax policy analysis, see
    Feldstein (1983).
                                      —4—



increasing state and local spending. There is then a brief concluding section.



1.   The Theory of the Effect of Federal Tax Deductibility on State and Local
     Taxation and Spending
                                                                                     0

     Before considering the choice process of the state or local community, it

is useful to begin by examining how federal tax deductibility affects the

preferences of a single individual who itemizes his tax deductions in

calculating his federal tax liability. For such an individual, the

deductibility of state and local tax payments reduces the cost of an additional

dollar of state and local taxes. If individual i is an itemizer with marginal

tax rate     the deductibility of state and local taxes means that an

additional dollar of state or local tax payment reduces the individual's federal

tax liability by mi dollars. The net cost to the individual of paying one

dollar to the state or local government is thus 1 -          We will call this the
                                                      mi.4
federal tax price of state and local taxes for individual i. Since the average

marginal tax rate for itemizers is 27 percent, the average federal tax price

among itemizers is 0.73, a substantial reduction in the price of state and local

tax revenue.5 Of course, a non—itemizer's federal tax liability is unaffected

by his payments of state and local taxes; his federal tax price is therefore 1.

     A lower federal tax price for state and local personal taxes increases the

individual's preferred level of state and local spending. It also causes the

individual to prefer to finance those services with greater reliance on



    4This ignores the fact that local and federal taxes are deductible in
calculating taxable income under some state income tax rules.

    5The 27 percent is a weighted average marginal tax rate, weighted by the
amount of state and local taxes deducted. Thus federal revenue is directly
reduced by 27 percent of total personal deductions of state and local taxes.
                                            —5—


 deductible personal taxes rather than personal user charges (which are not

 deductible) or corporate taxes and fees (which could reduce wages or cause

 corporations to leave the state or locality). To the extent that the net costs

 to the individual of the different sources of state and local finance are

 initially perceived to be approximately equal, a change in the federal tax

 price for a state or locality could cause a substantial substitution of one

 type of finance for another without any significant change in the perceived

cost of funds and therefore without any significant change in the desired

 level of spending. This combination of a sensitive composition of finance and

an insensitive level of spending is characteristic of the evidence presented

below.

     The measurement and interpretation of the federal tax price of personal tax

revenue becomes more complicated when we shift attention from the preferences of

a representative itemizer to the decision of the community as a whole. If a

proportion p of individuals itemize, the average federal tax price is
1 - p +   p(1-m)    = 1 - pm.
                                Since only about 30 percent of taxpayers itemize

their tax deductions, the average federal tax price is about 1 -       .3(0.27)   =   .92.
The average price reduction is clearly much smaller than the price reduction

for itemizers.

     Which of these two prices -—       the average tax price or the tax price of
itemizers ——   is   relevant for local government decisions? There is,

unfortunately, no agreement among specialists in state and local public finance

about the relation between local government fiscal decisions and the preferences

of the individual voters in the constituency.6



    6For surveys of the empirical evidence on this issue, see Inman (1979) and
Rubinfeld (1986).
                                     -6-


    The simplest model of this relation is the median voter model, first

proposed by Hotelling (1929) and developed by Bowen (1943), according to which

voters are ordered by their desired level of spending and the preference of the

median voter is decisive. This model has very important implications in the

current context. As a general rule, subject to one exception discussed below,

the median voter model implies that federal tax deductibility affects local

government taxes and spending only if the median voter is an itemizer.

How likely is that?

     Consider this question first in the context of choosing the level of

spending with the sources of finance fixed. Will the median voter in this

context be an itemizer? The position of itemizers in the spectrum of demands

depends on the nature of individual preferences and on the relation between

income and the individuals' price of local public services (i.e., the

individual's state—local tax cost, net of federal deductibility, per dollar of

spending). In the standard empirical median-voter model,7 individuals'

demands for local public services increase with income and decrease with

price, and the price is itself negatively related to income because federal

deductibility outweighs the limited progressivity of state-local tax systems.

In this situation, the individuals who itemize will generally have the highest

demand for local public services. Since only about 30 percent of all

taxpayers itemize, the itemizers' demands will all be greater than the demand

of the median voter in every state and in large local jurisdictions. If




     7See Borcherding and Deacon (1962) and Bergstrom and Goodman (1973) for
 analyses based on this type of specification.
                                        —7--




 eliminating deductibility would still leave the demands of the former

 itemizers above that of the former non-itemizers,
                                                     a change in federal tax

 deductibility would have no effect on state and local spending.

      This very simplified median voter model is likely to underestimate the

 influence of the taxpayers who itemize. One reason is that an itemizer may be

 the median voter even if itemizers prefer higher spending than non-itemizers

 and are only about one-third of all taxpayers.   This could happen simply

 because high income individuals are more likely to vote than lower income

 individuals. The number of voters per tax return is also likely to be greater

for itemizers than for non-itemizers.   Probably the best direct evidence on

this issue is reported by Ladd (1984) who notes that survey information for

Massachusetts indicates that more than half of those who actually vote in most

jurisdictions are itemizers. Among 56 cities and towns in the Massachusetts

analysis, itemizers were the majority of voters in all but 16.

     But even if itemizers are a minority of voters, changes in the

assumptions about state-local tax progressivity or about individual

preferences could also make an itemizer the median voter. A more progressive

state-local tax system could make the price of local services increase with

income, causing high income itemizers to be in the middle of the demand

spectrum. Alternatively, if individual demand for local public services does

not increase monotonically with income, perhaps because high income

individuals are more likely to prefer private education or private recreation

facilities, the median demand for local spending might be that of a high

income itemizer. In either case, eliminating federal tax deductibility would

raise the tax price of the median voter and reduce his demand for local
                                      -8-



spending.
     These comments suggest three different cases in which community demand

for state-local services might adjust to the elimination of deductibility

within the framework of the median voter model.   First if the original median

voter is an itemizer and that individual remains the median voter, his

preferences are decisive. The elimination of deductibility would reduce the
                                                           the increase in his
level of state-local spending by an amount that reflects

federal tax price (from 1-rn to 1) and his personal price elasticity of demand

for state-local services. In the second case, the rise in the price might

cause the demand level of the original median voter and of other itemizers to

drop below the level of previous non-itemizers, causing a non—itemizer to

become the median voter. In that case, the decisive level of demand would also

decline but by less than the fall in demand of the original median voter.

And, third, if the demand of itemizers is initially above the median level,

 eliminating deductibility could cause a previous itemizer to become the median

 voter or could cause the demand of some or all itemizers to drop below the

 median level. In this case also the aggregate level of demand would decline

 but by proportionately less than the demand of the typical itemizer.8

      It is interesting to examine the quantitative implications for the

 responsiveness of government spending to the federal tax price in the first

 case in which an itemizer is initially the median voter and remains the median

 voter when deductibility is eliminated. We shall assume that all spending is

 financed by personal taxes. Consider a state in which 40 percent of voters




     8Note that in this case eliminating deductibility may decrease spending
 even though the median voter is not an itemizer either initially or after the
 change in deductibility.   ,,
                                         —9-



 itemize and in which the average marginal tax rate of itemizers is 30 percent.

 The average tax price of itemizers is therefore 0.7.         Since the tax price is

 1.0 for the 60 percent of individuals who do not itemize, the average tax

 price in the state is 0.4(0.7) +   0.6(1.0)   =   0.88.   Eliminating tax deductibility
would raise the price for itemizers from 0.7 to 1.0, an increase of 43 percent.

 If the individuals' demand elasticity for public spending is E, the elimination

of federal deductibility would reduce the demand for local public spending to

only (07)E times what it is with deductibility. For example, even with a

quite modest individual demand elasticity (E =       0.5),   the individual demand
falls to a fraction (°.ir5 = 0.64 of its current value.9 With a unit

elasticity of demand, eliminating deductibility would reduce the demand of

itemizers by 30 percent.

     Of course, the median voter cannot be observed. If deductibility were

eliminated, we would see only that the mean value of the federal tax price

increased from 0.68 to 1.00, an increase of 14 percent. If an itemizer is and

remains the median voter with a demand elasticity of 0.5 and a tax price of

0.7, demand would fall by 1O0(1-.7) = 16 percent. The observation of a

16 percent fall in demand when the price increases by 14 percent implies an

aggregate price elasticity of approximately 1.4.10 Similarly, if the

individual price elasticity of the median voter is 1.0, the demand would fall

by 30 percent, implying an aggregate price elasticity of nearly 3.



    9See, Inman (1979) and Rubinfeld (1986) for surveys of the estimated
price elasticities of demand for local public services. Inman (1979) reports
that most estimated demand elasticities for local government services are
between 0.1 and 0.1. The problems of interpreting these estimates are
discussed in Section 2.

   10More generally if the if the proportion of itemizers is p and the median
voter is an itemizer with marginal tax rate t and demand elasticity E, the
implied elasticity of aggregate demand with respect to the average tax price
is E* = E ln (1—t)/ln (1 — p + p (1—tfl.
                                      -10-


     In short, if an itemizer is the median voter and remains the median

voter, a quite modest individual price elasticity would cause a relatively

large aggregate price elasticity. More generally, however, if eliminating

deductibility would change the identity of the median voter (i.e., the second

and third cases described above), the aggregate price elasticity might be

smaller or larger than the price elasticity of the typical individual. It is

clear from these comments that, even in the context of the median voter model

with all spending financed by deductible personal taxes, it is wrong to use the

previously estimated price elasticities of demand to evaluate the likely impact

of changing the federal tax deductibility of state and local taxes.11

     It is important to emphasize that this analysis of the impact of

deductibility on spending has assumed that all state and local spending is

financed exclusively be personal tax payments. In fact, no state relies

exclusively on personal taxes to finance state and local spending. On average,

the personal income, sales and property taxes account for about two-thirds of

total state and local revenue exclusive of grants from the federal government.

The remainder includes corporate income taxes, user fees, license fees,

gift and estate taxes, selective excise taxes and other sources of revenue

that are not eligible for the personal income tax deduction.

     The median voter model has important implications about the reliance on

personal taxes to finance state and local spending. Even if itemizers are a

minority of taxpayers, their higher propensity to vote may make them a

majority of voters. In addition, the structure of state and local taxes




   11Several studies have done just that. These include Ladd (1984), Noto and
Zimmerman (1984) and the Congressinal Research Service study prepared for the
Senate Committee on Government Operations by Noto and Zimmerman (1983).
                                       —11—


 (e.g., the progressivity of the personal tax or the range of goods taxed by

 the sales tax) will determine whether itemizers at different income levels

 would prefer the state and local governments to substitute other types of

 finance for personal taxes. In short, there is a wide range of situations in

 which the decisive voter on the share of total revenue to be raised from

 personal taxes will be an itemizer.

      In general, deductibility will increase the extent to which state and

 local governments choose to rely on personal taxes. More generally, a lower

federal tax price of such state—local personal taxes will increase their

relative importance in the financing of state and local outlays. The evidence

presented below indicates that the mix of personal and other taxes is quite

sensitive to the federal tax price of state-local personal taxes.

     This effect of the federal tax price on the mix of state and local

financing is not only important in itself but also has implications for the

effect of deductibility on the level of state and local spending. As we

already noted above in discussing the financing preferences of an individual

itemizer, the ability to substitute alternative sources of state-local revenue

for the personal tax reduces the impact of deductibility on the net individual

cost of state-local spending. This implies that the effect on state-local

spending of changes in deductibility will be less than would be implied by the

corresponding change in the federal tax price of personal tax revenue.

     But even within the median voter model, it is impossible to know from a

priori considerations alone how changes in deductibility that affect the

chosen mix of financing will alter the resulting level of state-local

spending. What matters in the median voter model is how the change in
                                      —12-


financing affects the price perceived by the individual who is the median

voter with respect to the spending decision.12 It is even possible that

eliminating deductibility could reduce the cost of local government spending

for this median voter. For example, if the median voter is and remains a

nonitemizer and elimination of deductibility causes a shift from the personal

tax to the corporate tax, the cost of state-local spending for the median

voter might fall.   In this case, eliminating deductibility would actually cause

state—local government spending to increase.

     We have focused on the implications of the median voter model because of

its analytic attractiveness and its place in the theory of local public

finance. But although the model is analytically attractive, it is clearly not

rich enough to deal with a variety of aspects of actual state and local

spending and tax issues. In general, the local government must make a variety

of interrelated but separate tax and spending decisions. An important feature

of such decision-making may be log—rolling, coalition formation and the

development of stable political parties in which different voter subgroups

support each others' preferred projects and compromise on a package of tax

sources. In addition, a number of studies have pointed to the bureaucracy and

to the politically elected officials as independent sources of influence on

budgetary choices. And, finally, the process of majority choice may induce

migration among jurisdictions that changes the composition of each area's

voting group and therefore the outcome of the voting process.13 The




   12This analysis simplifies by separating the decisions on financing and
spending. If the two are taken together, it is even more difficult to know how
to identify the decisive voter and the conclusions are more ambiguous.

    13For a discussion of these issues, see Inman (1979, 1986).
                                     —13—


implications of the median voter model must therefore be regarded as only

suggestive of the potential effects of federal tax deductibility and of

variations in the tax price of state-local spending.

      These brief comments have three clear implications. First, it is

important to recognize that deductibility is likely to affect the mix of

revenue sources for state and local governments as well as the level of

spending. Second, changes in the mix of revenue sources can greatly attenuate

(or even reverse) the effect of deductibility on the net cost to the local

taxpayer of providing state and local services and therefore on the demand for

state and local services. Third, the median voter model (and presumably other

formal models as well) implies that the aggregate elasticity of demand for

local services may be very different from the underlying individual demand

elasticities. In some cases, where the median voter is decisive and is not an

itemizer, the aggregate demand elasticity may be zero regardless of the demand

elasticities of the individual voters. But the analysis also shows that the

aggregate demand elasticity may be substantially larger than the demand

elasticity of the individual voter. From these three considerations, it is

clear that it is not possible on the basis of either theory or previous

research on state—local demand elasticities to evaluate the likely effects of

changes in deductibility on the mix of financing and the level of spending.

But before turning to our own research, we review briefly the previous

research on the demand elasticity of state and local government spending as

well as some more recent research on the effects of federal tax deductibility.
                                        —14—


2.     Previous Research on the Price Elasticity of Demand for
       Public Services and on the Effects of Federal Tax Deductibility


       Most previous research on the price elasticity of demand for state and

local public services has been based on interjurisdictional differences in the

costs of buying public services that arise because of intergovernmental

matching programs or interjurisdictional differences in the costs of producing

public services.14 It is important to emphasize that these sources of

differences in the costs of public services affect all taxpayers equally. As

a result, they provide little information about the likely impact of a change

in the federal tax price that would affect only those taxpayers who itemize in

calculating their federal income tax liability or that would alter the mix of

financing.

       More specifically, the existing estimates of the price elasticities of

local government spending based on intergovernmental matching grants are, at

best, an approximation of the underlying price elasticities of demand of

individual voters. Even this interpretation is subject to several

difficulties. Many matching grants combine elements of block grant and pure

open-ended matching grant, making it difficult to separate income and price

effects. Moreover, most statistical studies of the effect of pure block

grants indicate a more powerful impact than would be implied by the

corresponding income effect; this is the so-called "flypaper effect"15 that




   4Jnman (1986.) summarizes a large selection of research on this type of
analysis. Inman (1979) reports that most estimated demand elasticities are
between 0.1 and 0.7.

     15The term comes from Gramlich and Galper (1973).
                                       —15—


 causes block grants to local governments or particular agencies to raise their

 spending by much more than an equal increase in the income of the

jurisdiction's residents. Estimates of the impact of the price changes induced

by matching grants are therefore likely to be a combination of a true price

effect and a flypaper effect. Since the change in the federal tax price

affects the cost to individual taxpayers but not the revenue to the local

government, there would be no corresponding flypaper effect.

     Price elasticities estimated on the basis of interjurisdictjon differences

in the costs of producing public services are subject to a quite different

bias that makes them unreliable as a basis for estimating the likely effect of

changes in deductibility. Differences in wages and salaries are the most

important reason for interjurisdiction differences in the cost of providing

services. If these wage differences were a truly exogenous measure of the

supply price of labor input of a fixed quality, they would provide a useful

basis for estimating the price sensitivity of local government spending to

changes in the cost of services to all voters. In practice, however, the

observed wage differences are likely to be endogenous and, in large part, to

reflect local choices of the quality of personnel. The result of this is to

bias the price elasticity toward zero or even to produce estimated price

elasticities that have the wrong sign. For example, a town that has a strong

preference for education (i.e, a positive stochastic disturbance in the

equation describing educational spending) is likely to choose not only a

larger quantity of teachers but also a higher level of teachers' salaries in

order to attract higher quality teachers. In this situation, if the level of

teachers' salaries is used as a price variable in a demand equation, the
                                      —16—


estimated coefficient may well have the wrong sign.

     Robert Inman (1985) has provided the only explicit econometric study of

the effect of the federal deductibility of local taxes. His study examined the

experience of 41 large cities during the years 1960 to 1980 and estimated the

price elasticities of local spending and tax revenue with respect to an

estimate of the local average federal tax price. The resulting parameter

estimates are puzzling, with signs on the key tax price variables that are the

opposite of what would be expected. For example, Inman finds that a higher

tax price for property taxes reduces the use of income and sales taxes and

that a higher tax price for income and sales taxes reduces the use of the

property tax. It seems likely that these surprising results reflect two

serious problems in Inman's procedure.

     First, the basic data needed to estimate the federal tax prices (i.e.,

the actual federal marginal tax rates and itemizer status for individuals in

these cities) is not available. Inman's solution to this serious problem is

to combine the Census Bureau estimates of the income level at the 25th, 50th

and 75th percentile points of each city's income distribution with the tax

rate at that income level and the national proportion of itemizers to create

an estimated tax price. Although this method is probably the best that could

be done to estimate tax prices at the city level, the result is clearly a very

imperfect measure. There is no information on high income individuals who

make up the bulk of the itemizers and therefore no information on the average

tax rate of itemizers. Imputing a probability of itemization on the basis of

national totals ignores the likelihood that middle and upper—middle income

individuals are probably less likely to itemize if they are urban renters than
if they are homeowners and that home-ownership and other factors affecting

itemization may vary significantly among cities.

     The second problem with Inman's procedure is that it focuses on city

budgets when the division of spending responsibilities and of tax bases between

city and state levels of government vary enormously among the 50 states. In

some states, the cities have a great deal of autonomy in setting taxes and are

responsible for spending on a wide range of programs. In other states, the

state government restricts the taxing authority of the cities, assumes

financial responsibility for most types of government services, and influences

local activity by regulations and matching grants. In Massachusetts, for

example, cities are precluded from using income or sales taxes and are subject

to a maximum rate on their local property tax; the state shares its tax

revenue with the cities through block grants and educational matching grants

and assumes full responsiDility for general welfare. Arrangements such as

these, which obviously influence taxes and spending at the city level, must be

taken into account in specifying the city tax and spending equations in order

to obtain unbiased estimates of the price elasticities of demand. Although

Inman has great expertise about these provisions and uses the available data

skillfully, the interstate differences in state—local institutional

arrangements are just too complex to be modelled adequately in Inman's

econometric equations. The inability to incorporate these institutional

arrangements into the estimating structure makes it very difficult to

interpret the estimated price elasticity of demand and the implied estimates

of the effect of eliminating federal tax deductibility.

     A second recent study by fr4ettich and Winer (1984) attempts to assess how
                                      —18—


federal deductibility and other variables affect the share of state taxes

derived from the personal income tax. Although the authors provide an

 interesting analysis of local tax decisions as the outcome of choices by

public decision makers subject to political constraints, their empirical work

has three severe limitations. First, the role of deductibility is measured

very crudely by the percentage of taxpayers in the state with incomes greater

 than $20,000. There is no information on itemization and no assessment of the

 marginal tax rates. The estimated coefficient of this variable is

 statistically insignificant and has the wrong sign. Second, the analysis

 refers to the share of personal income taxes in the state's tax revenue

 rather than to the share of income, property and sales taxes, all of which are

 deductible. A larger number of high income individuals may encourage

 concentration on the income tax rather than the property or sales tax but this

 says nothing about the effect of deductibility on the use of the eligible set

 of taxes. Third, the focus is on the state rather than the combined

 state—local fiscal decision. Since states differ in the division of the tax

 base between the state level and the localities, an analysis of the state's

 relative use of one type of tax base may be misleading. Finally, the authors

 include state expenditure per capita among the regressors. This is a

 potential source of very substantial simultaneous equations bias affecting all

 of the coefficients. More generally, it is not clear why the spending level

 should be taken as logically prior to the composition of taxes. A better

 specification with the cross-section sample would be simultaneous choice, with

 neither taxes nor spending among the regressors. With all of these problems,

 it is not surprising that the estimated effect of deductibility on the
                                       —19—


composition of the tax revenue is estimated to be insignificant and of the

wrong sign.

     The only other study that we know that deals empirically with the effect

of deductibility on the state—local tax structure is the work of Zimmerman

 (1983). He elaborates a median voter model and then concludes, on the basis

of his statistical evidence, that federal deductibility has no statistically

significant effect on the ratio of the state—local taxes paid by the median

income family to the average over all families of the state—local taxes paid

in the state. There are a number of problems with the specification that make

it difficult to interpret this finding. Zimmerman includes the average public

sector wage and the level of state-local spending among the regressors

although both would probably be very endogenous. In addition1 the federal tax

price variable is calculated only for the median voter, who Zimmerman

arbitrarily assumes is the sane as the median income family. If the actual

decision process gives weight to others as well, the tax price of the median

voter may be too restrictive a specification. In particular, the empirical

analysis makes no allowance for the effect of differences in the relative

frequency of itemizers among states. The absence of this source of variation

in the average tax price nay explain why his federal deductibility variable

"apparently does not possess sufficient variation ..   to   make it a significant

determinant."

     We have concluded that because of the shortcomings of previous estimates

of the price elasticity and because of the special problems of analyzing a

policy change that affects only itemizers, there are currently no useful

estimates upon which to base an analysis of the likely effects of changes in
                                      -20-


the federal deductibility of state and local taxes.



3.   Using Federal Tax Prices Based on Individual Tax Return Data
     to Estimate Tax and Spending Behavior of State-Local Governments


     in the present paper, we use observations for a cross—section of states

to estimate the effect of the federal tax price on the combined total of state

and local personal taxation in each state as well as on aggregate state and

local spending in the state. By combining state and local levels in this way,

we avoid the problem of institutional differences in the assignment of

spending and tax responsibilities. In effect, our specification treats the

assignment of such responsibilities as an endogenous behavior that is

influenced by such variables as the federal tax price and the distribution of

income. Our estimates are therefore in the nature of reduced form equations

relating spending and taxes within each state, (including both the state and

local levels of government within the state) to the price, Income, demographic

and environmental variables that characterize the state.

     The statistical analysis presented below relates to three state—local

fiscal variables: (1) the combined state arid local revenue from personal

deductible taxes including income taxes, sales taxes and property taxes; (2)

all other state and local revenue, including corporate income taxes, severance

taxes1 license fees, special excise taxes that are not deductible on personal

tax returns, and gift and estate taxes; and (3) the spending financed from

state-local resources. The third variable is thus the sum of the first two.

Specifically excluded is all forms of federal aid.

     The state and local revenue from personal taxes averaged $813 per capita
                                      —21—


with a standard deviation of $198. This represented an average of 8.9 percent

of personal income with a standard deviation of 1.4 percent. The remaining

state and local revenue averaged $441 per capita with a standard deviation of

$488. This corresponds to an average of 4.6 percent of personal income with a

standard deviation of 3.8 percent. Finally, total spending financed by own

revenue is the sum of these two revenue sources, $1254 per capita or

13.4 percent of income. The standard deviation of total spending is $595 or

4.1 percent when calculated as a percent of income. The per capita levels and

income shares for the three fiscal variables are presented •in Tables A-4 and

A—S of the appendix.

     The key federal tax price variable for each state is calculated using

individual federal income tax returns. More specifically1 the federal tax

price data are generated by the National Bureau of Economic Research TAXSIM

model with data for 1980. The TAXSIM model incorporates 21,787 individual tax

returns provided by the Internal Revenue Service and a computer program that

can calculate each taxpayers liability under existing and alternative tax

laws. The 21,784 tax returns are a one-in-eight random sample of the

stratified random sample of all returns for 1979 provided by the Internal

Revenue Service adjusted to 1980 income levels. Since sample weights and

state identifiers are provided, this sample can be used to estimate average

characteristics of the taxpayers of each state. This use of individual tax

returns is a unique advantage of the current data over previous studies that

had to use various measures of aggregated data or representative individuals

to estimate tax rates for each state (e.g., Inman (1985) and Phares (1980)).

     For each individual, the federal tax price is defined as 1 if the
                                            —22—


    individual Is a non-itemizer and as one minus the decrease in federal tax

    liability per dollar increase in itemized deductions for an individual who

    itemizes. In general, the tax price for an itemizer is one minus the

    individual's marginal tax rate but the calculation is more complex for

—   individuals   who are income averagers, subject to the alternative minimum tax,

    or in other special situations. The TAXSIM program calculates the correct

    federal tax price by increasing the individual's itemized deductions by $100,

    recomputing the individual's tax liability, and dividing the difference in

    tax liability by $100.

         Table A—i of the appendix shows the federal tax price for each state, the

    proportion of taxpayers who itemize and the federal tax price for those

    itemizers. The average value of the federal tax price is 0.92, implying that

    federal tax deductibility reduces the cost of state and local spending by an

    average of 8 percent. The federal tax price ranges from a low of 0.87 in

    Alaska to a high of .96 in South Dakota with a standard deviation of 0.02.

    Much of the variation in the federal tax price reflects interstate differences

    in the proportion of itemizers. Column 2 shows that this varies from a low of

    14 percent in South Dakota to a high of 44 percent in Michigan with a standard

    deviation of 6.6. The average federal tax price among itemizers varies from a

    low of 0.65 in Alaska to a high of 0.78 in Montana with a standard deviation

    of 0.02.

         The econometric estimates relate each of the three fiscal measures to the

    federal tax price, to per capita income and to several other economic and

    demographic characteristics of the state. Two alternative specifications are

    examined. In the income share equations, the dependent variable is the ratio
                                          —23—


  of each fiscal variable to
                               average personal income in the state and the
 price variable is the average federal
                                         tax price in the state. In the constant
 price elasticity equations, the dependent variable is the logarithm of the
                                                                            per
 capita value of the fiscal variable (e.g.. the
                                                logarithm of per capita
 state-local personal taxes) and the price variable is the logarithm of the

 federal tax price.

      The income variable used in these analyses is the Census definition of

 average per capita personal money income.       It is worth noting that there is
 no problem of potential collinearity and
                                             underidentifjcaj0 of the type that
 arises when a marginal tax rate variable and an income variable for each

 individual derived from tax return data are included in a microeconometric

demand equation because in the current specification the income variable is
                                                                            a

broader measure of money income and,
                                       more importantly, because the federal
tax price variable includes the marginal tax rate only for itemizers. The

correlation between the income variable and the federal tax variable is

only -0.53.

     Most of the other variables Included in the
                                                      estimation equations are the
familiar explanatory variables of previous studies of state and local spending.

These include the number of pupils per capita, the road mileage per capita,

and the proportions of the population who are aged, in poverty, homeowners,

living in urban areas, married and nonwhite.16 In addition to these variables,

we have also used the NBER TAXSIM model to derive
                                                      several measures of the
distribution of income in each state: the variance and skewedness of the income




  16Sources of these variables are listed in Appendix A—3
                                               —24—


distribution; the average ratio of dividends to adjusted gross income; the

average ratio of capital gains to adjusted gross income; and the percentages

of taxpayers with adjusted gross incomes in the ranges $7500 to $15,000;

$15,000 to $25,000; $25,000 to $35,000; $35,000 to $50,000; and over $50,000.

       In addition to the average federal tax price for the state, we have also

estimated equations with the tax price for itemizers, with the proportion of

taxpayers who itemize, and with various combinations of these variables. This

allows us to compare a pure median voter model (in which the median voter is

an average itemizer) with the more general specification in which the relative

number of itemizers is also important.



4.     A Problem of Statistical Endopeneity


       There is however a serious problem in using any of these federal tax

price variables to estimate the effect of federal tax deductibility on the

 level of state and local personal taxes. To understand the nature of this

problem, consider a simplified specification of the basic equation that we

 have estimated. If         is the per capita level of state and local personal

 taxes in state i, P. is the federal tax price in state i, and V1 is the level

 of per capita income, a constant elasticity specification is given by:


            in T = a0   +        ln   +        ln V1 +
 (1)                        a1            a2


 where u1 is a stochastic disturbance that reflects tastes and other unobserved
 factors influencing the level of state and local taxation in state i.

       Ordinary least squares estimation gives unbiased parameter estimates only
                                         —25—


 if the stochastic disturbances are
                                      statistically independent of the price and

 income variables. Consider what happens if the individuals in state i have

 a greater than normal preference for relying on personal taxes to finance

 state and 'local services.   A higher level of state and local personal tax

 revenue per capita raises the typical individual's potential itemized

 deductions and makes it more likely that individuals in that state will find

 it optimal to itemize their federal tax return. This has the effect of

 lowering the federal tax price for that state. Thus, to the extent that a

 positive taste for financing state and local services by personal taxes

 reduces the federal tax price, it induces a negative correlation between the

price variable and the unobservable stochastic disturbance.
                                                               In short, the

price variable is endogenous and standard econometric theory tells us that the

estimated price elasticity (a1 in equation (1)) will be biased in a negative

direction; i.e., the negative price elasticity will be overstated in

magnitude.

     The reason for this statistical bias is easy to see. Consider what would

be observed if state and local governments were notat all sensitive to the

federal tax prices of their residents when deciding how much to spend and how

to finance that spending. Since an above average taste for state and local

services financed by personal taxes would lead to increased itemization and

therefore a lower federal tax price, there would still be a negative

relationship between personal taxes and the federal tax price. The

statistical estimation procedure would interpret this negative relation

incorrectly as a measure of the sensitivity of state and local personal taxes

to the federal tax price even though, in this case, there is no behavioral
                                      —26-


relation between the federal tax price and the level of state and local

personal taxes. More generally, when a lower federal tax price does increase

the chosen level of state and local personal taxation, the simultaneous effect

of state and local taxation on the federal tax price will lead to an

exaggerated estimate of the effect of the federal tax price on the tax and

spending decisions of state and local governments.

     Even when we look only at itemizers, there is a relationship between the

unobservable disturbance and the federal tax price. A positive disturbance

raises per capita state and local personal taxes, thereby increasing the

itemized deduction of those who itemize and tending to move them into lower

federal marginal tax rate brackets. For an itemizer, a lower marginal tax

rate means a higher federal tax price. Thus, for itemizers, an above average

taste for state and local services raises the federal tax price and tends to

diminish the absolute magnitude of the estimated price elasticity.

     Since the statistical bias that operates through the increased

probability of itemizing is in the opposite direction of the effect through

the marginal tax rate of itemizers, the sign of the bias cannot be determined

a priori. However, since the variability and importance of itemization is

substantially greater than the variability of the marginal tax rate of

 itemizers, it seems likely that the itemization bias will dominate. The

 evidence presented below Indicates that this is so, causing the estimated

 coefficient to be biased toward a more negative (absolutely larger) value.

      Although ordinary least squares estimation results in a statistically

 biased estimate of the effect of the federal tax price variable, a consistent

 and asymptotically unbiased estimate can be obtained by using an instrumental
                                       -27-


 variable procedure with an appropriate instrument for the federal tax price

 variable. An appropriate instrumental variable is any variable that is

 uncorrelated with the stochastic disturbance term (u.) but correlated with the

exogenous component of the federal tax price variable.

     We have used the TAXSIM sample of individual tax returns to construct a

set of instrumental variables that are correlated with the exogenous component

of the federal tax price and, as far as possible, uncorrelated with the

unobserved stochastic "taste" disturbance term. To compute the first such

instrumental variable, we begin by excluding the deduction for state and local

taxes from all itemized tax returns. We then calculate the marginal tax rate

for each tax return, including both itemizers and non-itemizers.     Next we assign

to each tax return a probability of being an itemizer based only on the

adjusted gross income (AGI) class of the return and the national proportion of

taxpayers in that AGI class who itemize.17 An average marginal tax rate is

then calculated for each state with each tax return for that state    weighted

by that return's probability of itemizing as well as by a weight that

correctly adjusts for the stratified random sample. This itemization-weighted

marginal tax rate is subtracted from 1 to form a type of tax price variable.

For an individual who itemizes his deductions, this procedure corresponds to

calculating the tax price associated with the first dollar of state and local

tax deduction; we will therefore refer to this as a first dollar tax price

instrument. Note that this variable reflects the marginal tax rates of all

taxpayers and not just of those who itemize. Because the synthetic




  17For this purpose, we use 8 AGI classes
                                       -28—


probability of itemization is used, the variable is not sensitive to the

actual rate of itemization In the state.

     it might of course be objected that there is still some possible

endogeneity in this instrumental variable, i.e., some correlation between the

instrument and the taste disturbance in the behavioral equation. The first

dollar marginal tax rate reflects the level and distribution of income and of

such demographic variables as the proportion of aged persons in the

population, the number of children ,   the   relative number of homeowners, etc.

Since these variables also potentially affect the demand for local services

and, arguably at least, the reliance on personal taxes, the instrumental

variable would be correlated with the disturbance in the equation. To reduce

or eliminate this problem, these variables are explicitly Included among the

regressors in the specification of the equation.

     The second instrumental variable is similar to the first in all respects

except that, instead of replacing each itemizer's state and local tax

deduction with zero, we replace it with the national average state and local

deduction for individuals in that adjusted gross inôome class. We refer to

this as the average dollar tax—price instrumental variable.

     Our third instrumental variable is the proportion of taxpayers in the

state who would be expected to itemize if each taxpayer's probability of

 itemizing was equal to the national average for his adjusted gross income

class. This is clearly uncorrelated with the taste factors peculiar to each

state and depends only on a particular nonlinear configuration of the state's

distribution of adjusted gross income. Since several variables representing

 the size distribution of money income are explicitly included among the
                                       -29-


 regressors in the equations presented in the next section, the disturbance term

 can reasonably be presumed to be tree of the effects of income distribution

 that are the basis of this instrumental variable. More generally, this

 instrumental variable gets its identifying power from the difference between

AOl and money income and from the particular nonlinear relation between AGI

and itemization. Two further instrumental variables have been constructed.

The first of these is the average first-dollar tax-price
                                                            among itemizers only
and the second is the average—dollar tax-price among itemizers.

     In summary, the instrumental variables, unlike the tax price variable

itself, do not directly reflect the proportion of individuals in each state

who itemize or the deductions for state and local taxes within that state.

They are correlated with the federal tax price variable for each state to the

extent that that variable reflects the distribution of taxable income and

other characteristics of the taxpayers in the population.

     Columns I through 3 of Table A-2 show the three instrumental variables:

the average-dollar tax price, the synthetic proportion of itemizers, and the

average dollar tax price for itemizers.



5.   The Statistical Estimates


     The estimated coefficients of the tax—price variable corresponding to

different dependent variables and different specifications are presented in

Table 1. The first three columns refer to the ratio specifications in which the

dependent variable is expressed as a fraction of personal income, e.g., personal

taxes per dollar of taxable income. The last two columns refer to the
                                      -30-


logarithmic constant elasticity specification. The coefficients of the other

variables in each equations are presented in Appendix Table A—6 and A-?.

These estimates are based on data for the 48 contiguous states.

     Consider first the coefficients of the tax price variable in the equation in

which the dependent variable is personal taxes per dollar of personal income.

When all of the potential explanatory variables described in section 3 are

included in the specification and the equation is estimated by ordinary least

squares, the estimated coefficient of the tax—price variable is —0.43 with a

standard error of 0.14. This is shown in the first column and first row of

table 1.

     Before looking at any of the other estimated coefficients, it is

interesting to calculate the elasticity of personal taxes with respect to the

federal tax price that corresponds to this coefficient. Since the mean value of

the tax price variable for the 48 contiguous states is 0.92 and the mean

value of personal taxes per dollar of personal income is 0.081, the elasticity

at these mean values is —4.55; this figure is shown in square brackets beneath

the standard error of the coefficient. Although —4.55 seems like a very high

elasticity, it is important to stress that it is not an elasticity of demand

for state and local services but for tax—deductible personal taxes used to

finance state and local spending. It is also helpful to recall that in a

median voter model (with realistic values of the tax parameters) the aggregate

price elasticity is approximately three times the elasticity of the individual

median voter.18




   18See pages 8 and 9 above, especially footnote 2 of page 9.
                                       Table 1

                      The Effects of Federal Deductibility on
                         State and Local Taxes and Spending



                                Ratio Specification          Logarithmic Specification
                                              Restricted                     Restricted
                            All Variables      Variables    All Variables     Variables
Dependent Variable           OLS      IV           IV             IV             IV
                             (1)      (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)



Personal Taxes              —0.43    —0.33       —0.15           —2.36         —1.71
                            (0.14)   (0.21)       (0.13)         (2.47)        (1.43)
                           [—4.55] [—3.49]       [-1.59]
Other State—Local            0.10     0.18        0.17            3.24          2.15
Revenue                     (0.19)   (0.28)      (0.15)          (7.32)        (3.70)
                            [2.19]   [3.94]      [3.72]
Net State—Local            —0.34     —0.15        0.02          —0.15          -0.08
Spending                    (0.23)   (0.34)      (0.18)         (—2.74)        (1.35)
                           [—2.44] [-1.08]       [0.14]


All coefficients are of the tax price variable; see text for description of other
variables and Appendix Tables A-6 and A-i for their coefficients; standard errors are
shown in parentheses. For the ratio specification, the elasticities at the mean values
are shown in square brackets.
                                      —31—


     When the same specification is estimated by an instrumental variable

procedure using the instrumental variables described in the previous section,

the coefficient increases from -0.43 to -0.33 with a standard error of 0.21.

This IV estimate is shown in the second column of Table 1. The rise in the

value of the coefficient reflects the OLS bias discussed in the previous

section. It implies that the positive correlation between a taste for personal

tax financed spending by state and local governments and the resulting higher

level of itemization outweighs the negative correlation between the taste for

personal tax financed spending by state and local governments and the resulting

lower level of the marginal tax rate of itemizers.

     The implied size of the OLS bias, about one-third of tfle consistently

estimated coefficient, is large enough to warrant the use of the instrumental

variable estimates even though they produce large standard errors. Despite the

decrease in absolute value, the IV estimate of the coefficient of the

tax price variable implies that the elasticity of personal taxes with respect

to the tax price is a very substantial —3.49.

     The specification in columns I and 2 includes all 19 variables described in

section 3, including 9 variables that describe the distribution and composition

of income. Since there are only 48 observations, the coefficients of most of

these 19 regressors are smaller than their standard errors. In general, the

variables for which the coefficient is at least 1.5 times its standard error

are the number of pupils per capita, the percentage of the population in the

state living in urban areas, the percentage of the population that are aged,

and the percentage of the population that own their own homes. Restricting

 the regressors to these four variables in addition to per capita income and
                                        —32—


 the federal tax price, yields the tax price coefficients presented in

columns 3 and 5.

     In the ratio specification, the tax price coefficient declines to -0.15

with a standard error of 0.13. The implied elasticity of —1.59 Is very similar

to the constant elasticity of -1.71 estimated with the logarithmic

specification and presented in column 5. Restriciting the number of regressors

generally has the advantage of reducing the standard errors of the remaining

coefficients, something which is particularly useful in the context of

instrumental variable estimation, but also adds to the risk that the

coefficient estimates are biased. Although we believe that the complete

specification is preferable, we present both types of estimates.19

     Return now to column 2 and the instrumental variable estimates for the

specification with all variables included. To assess the importance of the

tax price coefficient, recall that the average value of the tax price variable

is 0.92 and that, on average, the ratio of personal taxes to personal income

is 0.087. The coefficient of the tax price variable in the equation for

personal taxes implies that increasing the federal tax price to 1.0

(i.e. eliminating deductibility) would reduce the ratio of personal taxes to

personal income by 0.08 x 0.33    0.026, or about 30 percent of the existing

state and local personal taxes.

     The coefficient of the tax price variable in the equation for all other

state and local revenue (excluding grants from the federal government) is a

positive 0.18. This implies that eliminating deductibility would cause state




   190n the question of whether or not to exclude variables in order to reduce
the mean square error of the coefficient of interest, see Madalla (1971,
Chapter 10) and Feldstein (1973).
                                       —33—


and local governments to change other tax rules in a way that increased

revenue from these sources as a proportion of personal income by 0.16 x 0.08 =

0.014.   This is enough to offset sli9htly more than half of the revenue that

is foregone because of the induced changes in personal taxes implied by the

coefficient —0.33.

     unfortunately, the large standard error makes it difficult to have

confidence in the precise estimate of this tax substitution. It is somewhat

reassuring therefore that the specification with the restricted set of

explanatory variables results in an estimated taxprice coefficient of 0.17

with a standard error of 0.15, a coefficient that is almost identical to the

0.18 obtained for the full set of regressors. Some support can be also taken

from the fact that the implied elasticity at the means (3.94) is very similar

in magnitude to the constant elasticity estimated in the logarithmic

specification (3.24), although the standard error of that estimate is also

very large.

     Since the net public spending financed by state and local resources is

equal to the sum of personal taxes and of other state and local revenue, the

coefficients of the tax price variable in the ratio specification in columns 1

through 3 is the sum of the coefficients in the two tax equations. Thus, in

the specification with all variables included (column 2), the tax price

coefficient is —0.15. This implies that eliminating deductibility would

reduce state—local spending by 0.15 x 0.08 = 0.012 or slightly less than

one-tenth of the current share of income accounted for by state and local

governments. The implied price elasticity of aggregate state and local

spending with respect to the tax price variable Is —1.08.
                                       —34—


      Once again, however, the standard error is very large and one cannot

 reject the hypothesis that variations in the federal tax price of state and

 local taxes have no effect on the level of spending. The specification with

 the restricted set of variables provides further evidence that the effect of

 the tax price on spending is very small. In that specification, the estimated

coefficient is only 0.02 with a standard error of 0.18. The general

 impression of a small impact of the federal tax price on state and local

spending is also supported by the evidence from the logarithmic

specification.

     The relatively large standard errors of virtually all of the coefficients

in Table 1 imply that the estimated price elasticity parameters must be

interpreted with great caution. It is nevertheless useful to summarize the

general pattern of behavior that is implied by these estimated elasticities

of tax and spending behavior with respect to the federal tax price variable.

     The key finding is that the effect of deductibility is substantially

greater on the amount of personal deductible taxes paid to state and local

governments than on the total amount of revenue collected by the state and

local governments. In those states where the tax situation of residents leads

to less reliance on deductible personal taxes, the state and local governments

substitute other revenue sources. The parameter estimates indicate that

between half and all of the reduction in personal tax revenues induced by

variations In the federal tax price are offset by increases in other sources

of state and local revenue.

     These statistical conclusions are based on a model in which the effect of

deductibility is represented by the weighted average tax price of both
                                       —35—


itemizers and nonitemizers. At the risk of trying to squeeze too much

information from the data, we have examined three alternative specifications

in which the state and local tax decisions depend in a less restricted way on

the proportion of itemizers in the state (p) and on the average tax price of

itemizers in the state (tpi). The results of these more general
                                                                           -


specifications, presented in Table 2, support the basic conclusion that

federal   tax deductibility induces state and local governments to rely more

heavily on deductible personal taxes but has a much smaller influence on the

total amount of state and local revenue.

     The coefficients in Table 2 are all estimated by an instrumental variable

procedure and are based on the ratio specification (tax dollars per dollar of

personal income). The previously reported estimates for the effect of the

federal tax price on personal taxes are shown in the first line. When all the

variables are included in the equation, the coefficient is -0.330 with a

standard error of 0.214 (shown in column 1). When the specification is

restriàted to the tax price and the four statistically significant economic

variables identified above, the coefficient is —0.147 with a standard error of

0.130 (shown in column 4).

     Line 2 shows the effect of adding the proportion of taxpayers who

itemize their deductions as a separate explanatory variable. This variable

is completely insignificant. It is less than one—third of its standard error

in both specifications. Line 3 shows that the same is true when the tax

price of itemizers is included as a separate variable; the coefficient is

very small and less than one-third of its standard error. Finally, in line 4,

we exclude the tax price variable and include the proportion of itemizers and
                                          —36-


the average tax price of itemizers as separate variables, It follows from the

definition of the tax price variable (tax price =       1   -
                                                                p +   p(tpi)   or

tax price =   I   + p (tpi—1)) that if the restriction of line I is appropriate,

the coefficient of p in line 4 would be tpi —     1   times the coefficient of tax

price in line 1 and the coefficient of tpi in line 4 should be p times the

coefficient of tax price in line 1. Since the average value of tpi -1 is

-0.28 and the average value of p is 0.27, the corresponding estimated

coefficients are reasonably close to their predicted values.20 In short, all

three alternative specifications confirm that the weighted average tax price

variable used in Table I and repeated in line I of Table 2 is an appropriate

specification for the explanation of the personal tax raised by state and

local governments.

     The effect of deductibility on other types of state and local tax revenue

is analyzed in the specifications of lines 5 through 8. Including a separate

term for the proportion of itemizers in the state (line 6) or the average tax

price of itemizers (line 7) indicates that the variations in the tax price of

itemizers has a more powerful effect than the proportion of itemizers in the

state on the amount of state and local revenue other than the deductible

personal tax revenue. This is confirmed by the specification (line 8) that

substitutes the two separate tax variables for the taxprice variable; only the

average tax price of itemizers is significant. These results are generally

confirmed when the set of explanatory variables is restricted (columns 5

through 8).



   20Compare the estimated coefficient of 0.100 for p with the predicted value
at the mean of -0.26 x - 0.33 = 0.09. The estimated coefficient of -0.142 for
tpi compares with the predicted value at the mean of 0.27 x -0.33 = —0.09; at
the weighted average value of p of 0.50, the predicted coefficient is -0.17.
                                        Table 2

           Alternative Specifications of the Federal Tax Price variable


                               All Variables                Restricted Variables
Dependent             Tax Price        p          tpi    Tax Price     p       tpi
Variable                 (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)




Personal        (1)    —0.330                             —0.147
Taxes                  (0.214)                            (0.130)

                (2)    —0.522       —0.049                —0.198    —0.017
                       (0.608)      (0.145)               (0.373)   (0.113)

                (3)    —0.350                  —0.041     —0.149     0.006
                       (0.228)                 (0.151)    (0.137)   (0.114)

                (4)                  0.100  —0.142                  —0.040    —0.037
                                    (0.066) (0.184)                 (0.040) (0.110)

Other           (5)     0.183                              0.168
State—Local            (0.284)                            (0.153)
Revenue
                (6)     1.690        0.387                 0.610     0.143
                       (0.849)      (0.203)               (0.429)   (0.130)

                (7)     0.381                   0.419      0.122               0.131
                       (0.320)                 (0.212)    (0.159)             (0.132)

                (8)                 —0.114      0.539               —0.033   0.166
                                    (0.094)    (0.259)              (0.046) (0.127)

Net             (9)    —0.148                              0.021
State-Local            (0.341)                            (0.185)
Spending
               (10)     1.170        0.338                 0.412     0.126
                       (1.01?)      (0.241)               (0.517)    0.156

               (11)     0.031                   0.379     —0.027              —0.137
                       (0.384)                 (0.254)    (0.191)             (0.160)

               (12)                 —0.014   0.396                   0.007   0.129
                                    (0.113) (0.311)                 (0.056) (0.153)

All coefficients are of the tax price variables; see text for full
description of the other variables in the complete ("all variables") and
restricted specifications. Estimation is by instrumental variable procedure.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
                                       —37-


     The results are quite similar for the effect of deductibility on the net

spending of state and local governments. The average tax price of itemizers

has a more powerful and statistically more significant effect than the

proportion of taxpayers who itemize.

     The standard errors of the separate coefficients are however very large and

the point estimates of the coefficients imply implausible changes In "other

state-local revenue" and in net spending. When all of the variables are included

in the specification (columns 1 through 4), the unrestricted specifications

imply that eliminating deductibility would increase "other state—local revenue"

by enough to raise total net state-local spending substantially. The

specifications with the limited number of explanatory variables (columns 4

through 6) imply more modest and therefore more plausible effects of

deductibility on "other state—local revenue" and net state—local spending.

Although these specifications also Imply that a higher federal tax price for

state—local spending raises the net spending by state and local governments, the

coefficients are smaller than their standard errors.

     In short, the decomposition of the federal tax price variable into its two

components (the proportion of itemizers and the average tax price for Itemizers)

does not alter the two key conclusions reached with the composite tax price

varIable: (1) deductibility substantially increases the use of deductible state

and local personal taxes but (2) the net effect on total net spending is offset

in whole or in part by the decreased use of other sources of state and local

revenue. Although the standard errors are in general too large to make any

confident statements about the relative importance of the number of itemizers

and the average tax price of itemizers, variations in the average tax price of
                                      —38—


itemizers may be more important.


                                                                                 -t

6.   Effects of Deductibility on Federal Tax Revenue


     The present analysis has important implications about the effect of

deductibility on federal tax revenue and therefore about the efficiency of

deductibility as a way of increasing state—local spending. This section

discusses the effect of deductibility on federal revenue and section 7

considers the efficiency of deductibility as a means of increasing state-local

spending.

     As we noted above, the Treasury has recently proposed eliminating the

deductibility of state and local personal taxes. The Treasury predicts that

this change in tax rules would raise amounts that increase from $33 billion in

fiscal year 1987 to $40 billion by fiscal year 1990. As such, the elimination

of deductibility is the largest single source of increased revenue in the

Administration's plan. Indeed, by 1990 it accounts for more than 85 percent

of all of the additional revenue raised from individuals by broadening the tax

base. Stated differently, it finances 55 percent of the personal rate

reductions, with most of the remainder financed by the increased taxes on

corporations.

     The research presented here implies that eliminating deductibility may

not produce anything like the amount of additional revenue that the Treasury

predicts and may actually cause a fall in total tax revenue. The reason is

that eliminating deductibility is likely to cause state and local governments

to switch some of their revenue from individuals —— where each dollar of state
                                      -39-


and local tax payment has a relatively small impact on federal tax receipts

to corporations where those same state and local tax payments have a much

larger impact on federal tax revenue. If eliminating deductibility causes a

large enough shift from personal taxes to taxes and fees paid by business, the

Treasury could actually lose revenue by eliminating deductibility.

     Consider more specifically the situation in 1984 and the implications of

the estimates presented in section 5. The Treasury estimates that the

deduction of state and local personal taxes (including income, sales and

property taxes) reduced federal revenue by $29.9 billion in fiscal year 1984

and $32.4 billion in fiscal year 1985; we will take the revenue loss for

calendar year 1984 to be $30.5 billion. If deductibility had been eliminated

for 1984 and if state and local governments did not alter their business taxes

or fees, federal revenue would have increased by $30.5 billion.

     In contrast, the estimates presented in Table I imply that eliminating

deductibility would increase the "other state-local revenue" as a proportion

of personal income by 0.18 times the resulting change in the federal tax price

of currently deductible personal taxes. The average federal tax price in the

1980 sample used to estimate those behavioral equations was 0.92; eliminating

deductibility would raise the federal tax price by 0.08 and would therefore

increase "other state—local revenue" by 1.44 percent of personal income.

Since personal income in 1984 was $3,012 billion, this represents a $43

billion increase in "other state-local revenue". Note that since the decrease

In personal taxes implied by the estimated coefficient of —0.33 is equivalent

to $80 billion in 1984, the increase in "other state—local revenue" would
                                      —40—


offset 54 percent of the personal tax revenue lost by state and local

governments.

     Before considering the implications of this increase in "other state-local

revenue't for federal revenue, it is worth considering an alternative estimate

of the effect on "other state-local revenue" of eliminating deductibility. In

1984, state and local governments collected $282 billion in the form of income

taxes, sales taxes and property taxes. Since approximately 50 percent of the

$98 billion of property taxes included in this total were paid by businesses,21

the potentially deductible personal taxes totalled $233 billion. A comparison

of the $30.5 billion of revenue loss in 1984 with the $233 billion of state—

local personal taxes implies a federal tax price of 0.81; with this value, the

parameter estimate of Table 1 implies that eliminating deductibility would

increase "other state-local revenue" by 2.34 percent of personal income.22

This 2.34 percent of personal income implies that "other state and local

revenue" would have increased by $70 billion.

     The impact on federal tax receipts of the increase in "other state-local

revenue" depends on the nature of the increase. If these additional revenues

are paid by businesses in the form of higher taxes or increased fees, the




   21The 1982 Census of Governments (1982) reports that single family homes
represent 52 percent of taxable property values. Unfortunately, these data
refer to assessed values rather than market values or actual tax revenues.

   22The difference between the 0.92 average federal tax price in the
cross—state data and the 0.81 federal tax price implied by the 1984 experience
reflects two effects. First, the federal tax price of 0.92 is based on an
unweighted average of the marginal tax rates of itemizers and of the
probability of itemizing while the actual revenue loss reflects the positive
correlation of individual state and local tax liabilities with itemization and
marginal tax rates. Second, the 0.87 value reflects the fact that businesses
pay about 50 percent of property taxes.
                                      -41-


federal government would lose approximately 46 percent of the rise in "other

state-local revenue" through lower corporate tax receipts or between $20

billion md $32 billion of reduced corporate tax receipts. In addition, the

reduction in net corporate income would mean reduced dividends and other

personal capital income and therefore a further reduction in personal tax

payments to the federal government. The combination of the decreased

corporate and personal federal taxes that results from the induced increase in

other state-local revenue would thus offset between 65 percent and more than

100 percent of the direct increase in federal revenue that results from

eliminating the personal deduction.

     In practice, the offset to the direct increase in federal revenue might

be smaller than this because at least some of the increased "other state-local

revenue" would be in the form of greater charges to households for services

provided by state and local governments. The analysis is also complicated by

the fact that the businesses might in part respond to increased state-local

taxes and fees by reducing real wages. To that extent, the relevant tax rate

is not the corporate 46 percent rate but the personal rate on wage and salary

income.

     There is, however, an important reason why the calculations presented above

may understate the adverse effect on federal revenue of a shift in the

composition of state and local revenue. The parameter estimates from

section 5 used to derive the shift in the composition of state-local

revenue are based on interstate differences in the federal tax price at a

point in time. A change in federal tax deductibility that affects all states

equally is more likely to induce an increase in taxes on business than the
                                       -42-


 same size difference in tax rates between two states. If one state raises its

 tax on business because it has a higher federal tax price for personal

 state-local taxes than the neighboring states, it is likely to drive some

 business away, thereby reducing its tax base and decreasing the demand for

 local labor. But if all states are faced with an increased federal tax price

for personal state—local taxes because of a change in deductibility, they can

all simultaneously raise their taxes on business without concern about driving

business away.

     All of these considerations make it impossible to provide a precise

estimate of the likely effect on federal revenue of eliminating deductibility.

But they do make it clear that an induced shift in the composition of state—

local taxation in response to the elimination of deductibility could reduce

substantially, and might even more than fully eliminate, the prospective

increase in federal personal income tax revenue. As a minimum, the analysis in

this paper shows that it would be unwise for the federal government to assume

that eliminating the deductibility of state-local taxes would increase federal

tax receipts.



7.   The Cost—Effectiveness of Grants and Tax Deductibility


     The low (or possibly negative) cost to the federal government of the

deductibility of state and local taxes implies that deductibility may be a

very cost—effective way for the federal government to stimulate additional

spending by state and local governments. This conclusion runs counter to the

conventional assertion that deductibility is a high cost way of stimulating
                                         —43—


state—local spending.23 This section compares the cost—effectiveness of

deductibility and federal grants in raising state-local spending.

     The basic coefficient estimates of section 5 (for the full specification

in ratio form estimated by an instrumental variable procedure) imply that

deductibility increases the ratio of state and local spending to personal

income by —0.15(—0.08) =    0.012, on the assumption that the relevant federal
tax price is 0.92.24 What is the cost to the federal government of achieving

this increase and how does it compare to the cost of other policies that may

achieve an equal increase in state and local spending?

     The same data imply that the ratio of personal deductible taxes to

personal income is 0.087. Since the effective tax rate (reflecting the extent

of itemization and the marginal tax rate of itemizers) at which this is

deducted is 0.08, the resulting federal revenue loss is 0.70 percent of

personal income. Against this must be offset the extra revenue that the

federal government collects from businesses because deductibility induces

state and local governments to tax businesses more lightly and from individual

shareholders and creditors because of the increased net-of-tax income of

businesses. The relevant parameter estimate implies that deductibility

reduces "other state-local revenue" as a fraction of personal income by

0.18(0.08) =   0.0144.   If a fraction b of this reduction in "other state—local




   23See the Congressional Research Service study for the Senate Committee on
Government Operations by Noto and Zimmerman (1984) for a recent example of
this conventional conclusion.

   24Parallel calculations based on the federal tax price of 0.87 are
presented in footnote 21.
                                      —44—


revenu&' would otherwise have been paid by business and deducted against a

federal tax rate of 0.46 percent, deductibility increases federal revenue from

businesses as a fraction of personalincome by O.46(O.0144)b = 0.0066 b.

     The net cost of deductibility to the federal government, expressed as a

fraction of personal income, is therefore 0.0070 — 0.0066 b.25 If all of the

"other state-local revenue" is raised by taxes on business (b =   1),
deductibility has essentially zero cost to the federal government; this is the

result noted in the previous section. But even if only half of the !Iother

state-local revenue" is raised from businesses, the net cost of deductibility

is 0.37 percent of personal income or $11.1 billion at 1984 levels. Since

deductibility raises spending by 1.2 percent of personal income, the

cost-effectiveness of deductibility can be expressed as 1.2/0.37 = 3.24

dollars26 of increased state and local spending per dollar of net federal cost.27




   25This ignores the additional personal taxes collected because of higher
dividends and interest income. Omitting this relatively small effect tends to
overstate the cost of deductibility.

   26Taking the increased federal tax revenue on dividends and interest would
raise the cost-effectiveness of deductibility.

   27With a federal tax price of 0.87, reflecting the weighted average
effective marginal tax rate for state and local tax deductions, the preceding
calculations imply that deductibility increases the ratio of state and local
spending to personal income by 0.15(0.13) = 0.020. With an effective marginal
tax rate of 0.13, deductiblity causes a direct loss in federal revenue as a
fraction of personal income equal to 0.0113. Business taxes rise as a
fraction of personal income by 0.18(0.13)b = 0.0234 b and federal corporate tax
receipts therefore fall by 0.46(0.0234 b) = 0.0107 b. The net effect of
deductibility is therefore to reduce federal tax receipts as a fraction of
personal income by 0.0113 - 0.0107 b.  If all of the other revenue is paid by
business, deductiblity has essentially no cost to the federal government. Even
when b = 0.5, the cost—effectiveness of deductibility is 0.020/0.006 = 3.33
dollars of increased state-local spending per dollar of federal net cost.
                                            —45—


      What is the net cost to the federal government of increasing state—local

spending by block grants to state and local governments? Several studies have

shown that federal block grants to state and local governments increase

spending by less than a dollar but more than the amount that would be expected

by a pure income effect.28 If the increased state—local spending per dollar of

federal block grant is s, the state—local governments reduce their tax

receipts by 1—s per dollar of federal block grant. If a fraction p of this

reduction is in personal taxes that would be deducted at effective marginal

tax rate iii   and, of the remainder, the fraction paid by business is b, a dollar

of federal block grant raises the federal government's tax revenue by

(I—s)(pm +     (1—p)(.46b)).   The increase in state-local spending per dollar of

cost to the federal government is thus s/fl - (1—s)(pm +       (l—p)(.46 bfl. For
example, using the average observed values of p = 0.65 and m = 0.08 and

assuming s = 0.3 and b =       0.3 implies that this cost—effectiveness ratio is
only 0.32 dollars of increased state and local spending per dollar of net

federal cost. Even if each dollar of federal block grant raised state and

local spending by a full dollar, the cost-effectiveness ratio would only rise

to one dollar of increased local spending per dollar of federal cost.

      Federal grants/cande more cost-effective than tax deductibility only if

the federal grants are matching grants that increase state-local spending by

substantially more than one dollar for every dollar of federal grant. For

example, if each dollar of federal matching grant raised state local spending

by two dollars, the cost ratio becomes 1.82 dollars of increased state-local




   28See Inman (1979) and Rubinfeld (1986) for summaries of these studies.
                                      -46-


spending per net dollar of federal cost. But even with this very powerful

matching effect, the federal matching grant is far more costly than

deductibility per dollar of increased state and local spending.

     These calculations imply that substituting direct block grants or

matching grants for deductibility would be very likely to increase the cost

to the federal government of achieving the current level of state-local

spending. It is likely that federal grants to state and local governments can

be rationalized only as a way to increase spending beyond the level that is

achieved by deductibility or to alter the distribution of spending among states

and program areas, or to redistribute income geographically.



B.   Conclusion


     This paper has examined the effect of the federal deductibility of state

and local taxes on the fiscal behavior of state and local governments. The

primary finding is that deductibility affects the way that state—local

governments finance their spending as well as the overall level of spending.

More specifically, in states where federal deductibility implies a relatively

low cost of using deductible personal taxes (including income, sales and

property taxes), there is greater reliance on those taxes and less reliance on

business taxes and other revenue sources.

     The effect of deductibility on the state—local financial mix implies that

deductibility has a much lower cost to the federal government than has

previously been assumed. Indeed, if deductibility causes a large enough shift

of financing from business taxes to personal taxes, deductibility may actually
                                      -47-


raise federal tax receipts. The analysis also implies that deductibility is

likely to be a more cost-effective way than direct grants for raising the

general level of state-local government spending.

     The present study uses the individual tax return data in the NBER TAXSIM

model to calculate federal tax prices for itemizers and other taxpayers in each

state. The econometric analysis recognizes that the federal tax price is

endogenous (because it reflects the state-local spending decisions) and

therefore uses a consistent instrumental variable procedure. This use of

instrumental variable estimation exacerbates the difficulty of making precise

estimates from the data. The relatively large standard errors indicate the

need for caution in interpreting the point estimates.

     There are several directions in which the current work could usefully be

pursued. Combining cross-sections for two or more years could improve the

precision of the parameter estimates. A more disaggregated analysis of the

responsiveness of different types of revenue sources would make it possible to

calculate the federal cost of deductibility more accurately. This could

usefully be paralleled by a disaggregated analysis of spending.

     But as of now, the analysis and data suggest that it would be wrong to

assume that eliminating federal deductibility would substantially increase

federal revenue or that substituting block grants for deductibility would

permit the current level of state-local spending to be maintained at lower

cost to the federal government.


Cambridge, MA
November 1985
                                      —48—


                                 Bibliography


Bartlett, Bruce. "The Case for Eliminating Deductibility of State and Local

     Taxes," Tax Notes, September 2, 1985.

Bergstrom, T. and Goodman, R. "Private Demand for Public Goods." American

     Economic Review 63: 286-96, June 1973.

Billman, Brookes 0., Jr. and Cunningham, Noel B. "Nonbusiness State and Local

     Taxes: The Case for Deductibility," Tax Notes, September 2, 1985.

Borcherding, T. E. and Deacon, R. T. "The Demand for the Services of

     Nonfederal Governments," American Economic Review 52, 891-901, 1962.

Bowen, H.R. "The Interpretation of Voting in the Allocation of Economic

     Resources," Quarterly Journal of Economics 58, 27-48, 1943.

Bridges, Benjamin, Jr. "Deductibility of State and Local Nonbusiness Taxes

     Under the Federal Individual Income Tax," National Tax Journal 14:1, March

     1966.

Feldstein, Martin. Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis,

     National Bureau of Economic Research. Chicago: University of Chicago

     Press, 1983.

Feldstejn, Martin. "Multicollinearity and the Mean Square Error of

    Alternative Estimates," Econometrica, 1973.

Gramlich, E. and Galper, H. "State and Local Fiscal Behavior and Federal

    Grant Policy." Broolcjngs Papers on Economic Activity 1: 15—58, 1973.

Hettich, Walter and Winer, Stanley. "A Positive Model of Tax Structure,"

    Journal of Public Economics 24, 67—87, 1984.
                                          -49-


Hotelling, Haro'd. "Stability in Competition." Economic Journal 39: 41—51,

        January 1929.

Inman, Robert P., "Four Essays on Fiscal Federalism," unpublished Ph.D.

       Dissertation, Harvard University, 1972.

Inman, Robert P. "The Fiscal Performance of Local Governments: An

       Interpretative Review," Current Issues in Urban Economics, pp. 270—321.

       P. Mieszkowski and N. Streizheim (eds.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.

       1979.

Inman, Robert P. "Does Deductibility Influence Local Taxation?" NBER Working

       Paper #1714. October 1985.

Inman, Robert P., "Markets, Government, and the 'New' Political Economy." In

       Handbook of Public Economics Vol. II. A. Auerbach and N. Feldsteiri

       (eds.).    North—Holland Press, 1986.

Ladd    Helen F. "Federal Aid to State and Local Governments" Federal Budget

       Pol icy   in the l980s. 6. B. Mills and J. L. Palmer (eds.). Washington, DC:

       Urban Institute, 1984.

Madalla, 6.S. Econometrics. New York: McGraw Hill, 1977.

Noto, Nonna A. and Zimmerman, Dennis, "Limiting State-Local Tax Deductibility

       In Exchange for Increased General Revenue Sharing: An Analysis of the

       Economic Effects," Senate Print 98—77, Washington, DC:    U.S. Government

       Printing Office, 1983.

Noto, Nonna A. and Zimmerman, Dennis. "Limiting State-Local Tax Deductibility:

       Effects Aaiong the States," National Tax Journal, 1984.
                                     -50—


Office of Management and Budget. "Special Analysis H: Federal Aid to State

    and Local Governments." The Budget for Fiscal Year 1986. Washington, DC:

    U.S. Government Printing Office, 1985.

Office of the President. The President's Tax Proposals to the Congress for

     Fairness, Growth, and simplicity, 62—69, washington, DC: U.S. Government

     Printing Office,1985.

Phares, Donald. Who Pays State and Local Taxes? Cambridge, MA:

     Oelgeschlager, Gunn and Ham, 1980.

Rubinfeld, Daniel L., "The Economics of the Local Public sector." In Handbook

     of Public Economics Vol. II. A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.).

     North-Holland Press, 1986.

The Tax Foundation, Facts and Figures on Government Finance, Washington, DC,

     1981.

U.S. Department of Commerce, State and Metropolitan Area Data Book,

     Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982. (NOTE: This is

     note the County and City Databook.)

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Property Taxation, Census of Governments,

     Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982.

U.S. Department of Treasury. Tax Reform for Fairness, Simplicity and Economic

     Growth, Vol. 1, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1984.

Zimmerman, Dennis. "Resource Misallocation From Interstate Tax Exportation:

     Estimates of Excess Spending and Welfare Loss in a Median Voter Framework,"

     National Tax Journal, 1983.
                                   Table A-I
                 Federal Tax Price and Related Statistics, 1980

                                            Proportion               Federal
                         Federal           of Taxpayers             I ax    Price
State                   Tax Price           Who Itemize           For Itemizers

Alabama                     .94                 .22                        .72
Alaska                      .87                 .38                        .65
Arizona                     .92                 .31                        .76
Arkansas                    .94                 .25                        .74
California                  .90                 .36                        .72
Colorado                    .89                 .42                        .73
Connecticut                 .91                 .31                        .72
Delaware                   .95                  .18                        .70
Florida                    .94                  .24                        .75
Georgia                    .92                  .29                        .72
Hawaii                     .92                 .27                         .71
Idaho                      .i                  .37                      .75
Illinois                   .92                 .27                      .70
 Indiana                   .93                 .24                      .71
 Iowa                      .93                 .23                         .69
 Kansas                    .92                 .27                      .72
 Kentucky                  .93                 .26                      .73
 Louisiana                 .94                 .19                      .71
 Maine                     .95                 .19                      .73
 Maryland                  .89                 .36                      .58
Massachusetts              .91                 .32                      .72
Michigan                   .87                 .44                      .70
Minnesota                  .91                 .32                      .73
Mississippi                .95                 .20                      .73
Missouri                   .94                 .21                      .73
Montana                    .93                 .32                      .78
Nebraska                   .94                 .23                      .72
Nevada                     .93                 .26                      .73
New Hampshire              .95                 .19                      .73
New Jersey                 .91                 .28                      .69
New Mexico                 .94                 .21                      .72
New York                   .90                 .35                      .71
North Carolina             .93                 .23                      .72
North Dakota               .93                 .27                      .75
Ohio                       .93                 .23                      .70
Oklahoma                   .92                 .28                      .73
Oregon                     .91                 .34                      .73
Pennsylvania               .93                 .25                      .72
Rhode Island               .92                 .28                      .71
South Carolina             .92                 .30                     .74
South Dakota               .96                 .14                     .75
Tennessee                  .94                 .21                     .72
Texas                      .93                 .22                      .69
Utah                       .92                 .31                     .74
Vermont                    .94                 .21                     .71
Virginia                   .90                 .31                     .69
Washington                 .93                 .24                     .69
West Virginia              .92                 .26                     .71
Wisconsin                  .91                 .34                     .72
Wyoming                    .95                 .16                     .70

Source: Authors' calculation using NBER TAXSIM Model for 1960.
                                 Table A-?
                     Federal Tax Price Instruments, 1980

                                       Synthetic           Ave rage Dollar
                     Average Dollar    Proportion          Tax Price for
                       Tax Price       of Itemizer             Itemizer


Alabama                  .93              .25                   .72
Alaska                   .87              .38                   .66
Arizona                  .93              .24                   .72
Arkansas                 .92              .28                   .72
California               .91              .30                   .70
Colorado                 .91              .31                   .70
Connecticut              .91              .31                   .70
Delaware                 .93              .23                   .71
Florida                  .93              .25                   .71
Georgia                  .92              .27                   .71
Hawaii                   .92              .26                   .71
Idaho                    .92              .29                   .72
Illinois                 .90              .32                   .69
Indiana                  .91              .31                   .70
Iowa                     .92              .28                   .70
Kansas                   .91              .31                   .70
Kentucky                 .93              .24                   .72
Louisiana                .92              .28                   .71
Maine                    .94              .23                   .73
Maryland                 .90              .32                   .68
Massachusetts            .92              .27                   .70
Michigan                 .88              .37                   .68
Minnesota                .93              .25                   .71
Mississippi              .94              .22                   .72
Missouri                 .93              .26                    .71
Montana                  .92              .28                    .73
Nebraska                 .92              .29                    .72
Nevada                   .93              .26                    .71
New Hampshire            .93              .24                    .71
New Jersey               .91              .30                    .68
New Mexico               .92              .28                    .73
New York                 .91              .28                    .69
North Carolina           .93              .25                    .72
North Dakota             .93              .26                    .73
Ohio                     .91              .30                    .70
Oklahoma                 .91              .31                    .72
Oregon                   .91              .30                    .70
Pennsylvania             .91              .31                    .72
Rhode Island             .91              .28                    .69
South Carolina           .93              .26                    .73
South Dakota             .93              .25                    .71
Tennessee                .92              .26                    .72
Texas                    .90              .29                    .66
Utah                     .93              .25                    .12
Vermont                  .93              .25                    .72
Virginia                 .90              .31                    .68
Washington               .91              .30                    .69
West Virginia            .90              .34                    .70
Wisconsin                .91              .30                    .70
Wyoming                  .91              .29                    .71

Source: Authors' calculation using NBER TAXSIM Model for 1980.
                                    Table A-3

                                 Sources of Data


Name                                  Definition                Source


State—Local Fiscal Variables

Personal Taxes 7               General and selective sales,      (1)
                               income, and property taxes

Other State-Local Revenue      S&L general expenditure less      Genl. exp. — (2)
                               personal taxes, and federal       Pers. tax — (1)
                               aid to S&L                        Aid - (2)

Net State-Local Spending       S&L general expenditure less      (1), (2)
                               federal aid to S&L

OemoQraphic and Economic
Characteristics

Personal Income per capita /                                     (2)

Pupils   per capita                                              (2)

Road Mileage per capita /                                        (2)

Percentage of Nonwhites                                          (2)

Percentage of Urban Dwellers /                                   (2)

Poverty percentage /           Percentages of persons with       (2)
                               incomes below poverty level

Aged percentage                Percentage of population          (2)
                               55 years and over

Homeowners percentage '        Percentage of occupied housing    (2)
                               units owner occupied

Family Income                  Family Money Income (1979)        (2)

Variance of AGI                Calculated from individual        (3)
                               tax returns

Skew of AOl                    Calculated from individual        (3)
                               tax returns

Dividend and Interest          Calculated from individual        (3)
Deductions to AGI Ratio        tax returns

Capital Gains to               Calculated from individual        (3)
AGI Ratio                      tax returns
Table A-a (Continued)



Name                               Definition               Source


Percentage Married          Percentage of joint returns      (3)
                            as well as individual returns
                            indicating married filer.

Tax Price Variables                                                       —

and Instruments

                                                             (3)




Sources

(1) The Tax Foundation, Facts and Figures on Government Finance, Washington,
     D.C., 1981.

(2) U.S. Department of Commerce, State and Metropolitan Area Data Book,
     Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982.

(3) Calculated using NBER TAXSIM Model, Individual Tax Model File, 1979.




                                                                               I
                                   Table 4-4
              State and Local Taxes and Spending per Capita, 1980

                                          Other                Net
                                       State—Local         State-Local
                         Personal        Revenue             Spending


Alabama                    580             338                  918
Alaska                    1398            3704                 5102
Arizona                    927             311                 1238
Arkansas                   SSO             228                  788
California                ioi              443                 1462
Colorado                   897             337                 1233
Connecticut                938             273                 1210
Delaware                   714             635                 1348
Florida                    637             379                 1016
Georgia                    708             224                  932
Hawaii                    1202             264                 1465
 Idaho                     641             308                  949
 Illinois                  962             233                 1194
 Indiana                   680             270                  951
 Iowa                      842             501                 1344
 Kansas                    807             432                 1239
 Kentucky                  616             460                 1075
 Louisiana                 612             574                 1186
 Maine                     757             184                  940
 Maryland                 1025             346                 1371
 Massachusetts            1118             174                 1292
 Michigan                  930             524                 1455
 Minnesota                 949             537                 1486
 Mississippi               566             316                  882
 Missouri                  690             243                  934
 Montana                   762             390                 1151
 Nebraska                  880             316                 1196
 Nevada                    890             556                 1446
 New Hampshire             615             350                  964
 New Jersey                967             336                 1303
 New Mexico                633             509                 1142
 New York                 1363             296                 1659
North Carolina             649             321                  971
North Dakota               656             652                 1308
Ohio                       724             388                 1113
Oklahoma                   583             473                 1056
Oregon                     821             609                 1430
Pennsylvania               821             268                 1088
Rhode Island               895             356                 1250
South Carolina             631             295                  926
South Dakota               734             210                  944
Tennessee                  560             362                  922
Texas                      641             442                 1083
Utah                                       443                 1223
Vermont                    794             109                  902
Virginia                   780             328                 1108
Washington                 923             453                 1376
West Virginia              734             300                 1034
Wisconsin                  947             421                 1368
Wyoming                   ioaa             632                 1715
                                 Table A-S
   State and Local Taxes and Spending per Dollar of Personal Income, 1980

                                        Other                Net
                                     State—Local         State-Local
                       Personal        Revenue             Spending


Alabama                  .08             .05                  .12
Alaska                   .11             .29                  .40
Arizona                  .11             .04                  .14
Arkansas                 .08             .03                  .11
California               .09             .04                  .13
Colorado                 .09             .03                  .12
Connecticut              .08             .02                  .10
Delaware                 .07             .06                  .13
Florida                  .07             .04                  .11
Georgia                  .09             .03                  .12
Hawaii                   .12             .03                  .15
Idaho                    .08             .04                  .12
Illinois                 .09             .02                  .11
Indiana                  .08             .03                  .11
Iowa                     .09             .05                  .14
Kansas                   .08             .04                  .12
Kentucky                 .08             .06                  .14
Louisiana                .07             .07                  .14
Maine                    .10             .02                  .12
Maryland                 .10             .03                  .13
Massachusetts            .11             .02                  .13
Michigan                 .09             .05                  .15
Minnesota                .10             .06                  .15
Mississippi              .09             .05                  .13
Missouri                 .08             .03                  .10
Montana                  .09             .06                  .13
Nebraska                 .09             .03                  .13
Nevada                   .08             .05                  .13
New Hampshire            .07             .04                  .11
New Jersey               .09             .03                  .12
New Mexico               .08             .05                  .13
New York                 .13             .03                  .16
North Carolina           .08             .04                  .12
North Dakota             .07             .07                  .15
Ohio                     .08             .04                  .12
Oklahoma                 .06             .05                  .12
Oregon                   .09             .07                  .12
Pennsylvania             .09             .03                  .12
Rhode Island             .09             .04                  .13
South Carolina           .09             .04                  .13
South Dakota             .09             .03                  .12
Tennessee                .07             .05                  .12
Texas                    .07             .05                  .11
Utah                     .10             .06                  .16
Vermont                  .10             .01                  .12
Virginia                 .08             .03                  .12
Washington               .09             .04                  .13
West Virginia            .09             .04                  .13
Wisconsin                .10             .05                  .15
Wyoming                  .10             .06                  .16
                                    Table A-6

                      The Effects of Federal Deductibility on
              State and Local Taxes and Spending: Ratio Specification


                                                         Variable
                                                       Other            Net
                                                                    State—Local
 Tax Price                       Personal Taxes       Revenue         Spending

Tax Price                            -.330              .183            -.148
                                    (0.214)            (.284)            (.341)

Pupils per capita                    0.573             -.634            -.061
                                    (0.239)            (.317)            (.380)

Road Mileage per capita              -.0279             .031             .003
                                    (0.0467)           (.062)           (.074)
Nonwhite %                          —0.010              .085            -.095
                                    (0.037)            (.049)           (.059)
Urban %                             —0.30              .054              .024
                                     (.021)           (.028)            (.033)

Poverty %                           0.757              .057              .814
                                    (0.367)           (.467)            (.584)

Aged %                              0.484             -.754             -.270
                                    (0.186)           (.246)            (.295)
Homeowners %                        -.204              .151             -.053
                                     (.051)           (.068)            (.082)

Family Income:

 $    7500—15000                    0.937             —.392              .545
                                    (.481)            (.638)            (.765)
     15000—25000                    0.739             —.244              .494
                                    (.390)            (.517)            (.620)
     25000-35000                    1.203             —.149             1.054
                                    (.534)            (.709)            (.850)

     35000-50000                    0.635             -.724             -.089
                                    (.529)            (.701)            (.841)

  50000+                             .544              .203              .747
                                    (.531)            (.705)            (.845)
Table A-6 (Continued)



                                            Dependent Variable
                                                    Other            Net
                                                 State—Local     State-Local
 Tax Price                    Personal Taxes       Revenue         Spending


Variance of AG!                    —.396             .664             .268
                                  (1.635)          (2.170)          (2.601)

Skew of AG!                         .212            -.877            —.665
                                  (1.676)          (2.224)          (2.666)

Dividends and Interest           -14.048           —6.318          -20.417
per dollar of AG!                 19.225           25.515           30.586

Capital Gains to Aol                .887             .334            1.221
                                  (1.105)          (1.466)          (1.757)

Percentage of Married              —.033             .039             .006
                                   (.034)           (.045)           (.054)

Constant                           — .429            .165            - .264
                                   (.380)           (.504)           (.604)

The dependent variable in each equation is measured as a ratio to personal
income. All equations are estimated by an instrumental variable procedure.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses. See Table A—3 for definition of
the variable.
                                      Table A-7

                       The Effects of Federal Deductibility on
            State and Local Taxes and Spending:
                                                 Logarithmic Specification


                                               Dependent Variable
                                                       Other            Net
                                                    State-Local     State-Local
                                 Personal Taxes*      Revenue*        Spending*

Tax Price*                          —2.364             3.241           —.509
                                    (2.477)           (7.325)         (2.746)
Personal Income per capita*          -   .040          2.305            .681
                                     (.613)           (1.812)          (.679)
Pupils per capita*                       .937         —3.131           -.304
                                     (.509)           (1.506)          (.565)
Road Mileage per capita*             —.010              .063            .009
                                     (.030)            (.089)          (.033)
Nonwhite %                           —.172            —1.679           —.766
                                     (.422)           (1.247)          (.458)
Urban %                                  .347          1.514            .178
                                     (.234)            (.692)          (.260)
Poverty %                            4.905             2.472          4.573
                                    (5.269)          (15.580)         (5.841)
Aged %                              5.142           —21.500          —2.563
                                    (2.131)           (6.300)         (2.362)
Homeowners %                       —2.412             4.967           —.446
                                     (.618)           (1.829)         (.686)
Family Income

  $ 7500—15000                      8.017            —9.038           2.510
                                   (6.370)          (18.835)         (7.061)
   15000—25000                      5.126            —4.127           2.323
                                   (5.284)          (15.624)         (5.858)
   25000—35000                     11.392            —4.074           6.255
                                   (6.869)          (20.311)         (7.614)
   35000—50000                      6.481           —22.561          —1.303
             -                     (5.979)          (17.679)         (2.294)
   50000+                           5.058              .531           5.002
                                   (6.052)          (17.895)         (6.709)
Table A-7 (Continued)



                                            Dependent Variable
                                                    Other            Net
                                                 State-Local     State-Local
                              Personal Taxes*      Revenue*        Spending*


                                  4.741            44.936           6.598
Variance of AOl
                                (19.388)          (57.328)        (21.492)

                                 —6.422           —27.476         —10.523
Skew of AOl
                                (20.694)          (61.190)        (22.940)

                               -153.13           -320.74         —133.53
Dividends and Interest
to AGI                          (177.91)          (525.07)        (197.22)

                                   9.881           17.902             8.080
Capital Gains to AGI
                                 (10.242)          (30.286)        (11.353)

                                   —.434              .538             .016
 Percentage of Married
                                   (.383)           (1.134)           (.425)

                                   6.194           —32.053            —.016
 Constant
                                  (8.600)          (25.423)           (9.533)

 Variables marked with an asterisk are transformed into logarithms.

 The dependent variable in each equation is measured as a ratio to personal
 income. All equations are estimated by an instrumental variable procedure.
 Standard errors are shown in parentheses. See Table A-3 for definition of
 the variable.
