NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

'FISCAL DEVALUATION' AND FISCAL CONSOLIDATION:
THE VAT IN TROUBLED TIMES
Ruud de Mooij
Michael Keen
Working Paper 17913
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17913

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

We are grateful to Carlo Cottarelli, Alexander Klemm, Daniel Leigh, Jim Poterba, Mick Thackray,
and participants in the NBER conference “Fiscal policy after the financial crisis” for useful comments
and suggestions. Views expressed here are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the
IMF, its Executive Board or management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ruud de Mooij and Michael Keen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

'Fiscal Devaluation' and Fiscal Consolidation: The VAT in Troubled Times
Ruud de Mooij and Michael Keen
NBER Working Paper No. 17913
March 2012
JEL No. F32,H20
ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on two core tax design issues that arise in addressing current fiscal challenges It
first explores the idea, prominent in troubled Eurozone countries, of a ‘fiscal devaluation:’ shifting
from social contributions to the VAT as a way to mimic a nominal devaluation. Empirical evidence
is presented which suggests that in Eurozone countries this may indeed improve the trade balance
quite sizably in the short-run, though, as theory predicts, the effects eventually disappear. The paper
then assesses the wider scope for VAT reform in meeting fiscal consolidation needs, developing and
beginning to apply a methodology for finding additional VAT revenue in ways less distortionary and
fairer than further raising the standard rate.

Ruud de Mooij
IMF
1900 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
RDeMooij@imf.org
Michael Keen
Fiscal Affairs Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
mkeen@imf.org

2
I. INTRODUCTION
In the aftermath of the financial crisis and in the midst of sovereign debt tensions—
amounting to full-blown crisis in some Eurozone members—fiscal policy in many advanced
economies is a high stakes game played under severe constraints. The over-arching need is
for substantial fiscal consolidation, to both reduce levels of public debt and provide space to
address looming pension and (especially) health expenditure needs associated with aging.1
Figure 1, setting out an illustrative adjustment path for the average advanced economy,
illustrates the scope of the former challenge. At the same time, fostering growth remains
imperative.
For the shorter term, several countries face immediate and severe unemployment problems:
above-average fiscal deficits are found along with above-average unemployment rates in the
US, France, Portugal, Greece, Ireland, Slovak Republic and Spain (Figure 2). For these
countries, rapid fiscal consolidation risks impeding economic recovery and raising
unemployment, while slow adjustment risks losing market confidence, triggering higher
spreads and inducing a nasty circle of higher spending and worsening deficits. Over the
medium and longer terms, growth is critical to improving the debt dynamics, reducing the
relative scale of adjustment needed. And underlying poor growth performance in many
countries are structural problems that are especially pronounced in some of the troubled
Eurozone countries, and made evident in their sustained trade deficits: Greece and Portugal,
for instance, ran trade deficits prior to their crises in the order of 11 percent of GDP.
Figure 1: Fiscal Consolidation in Advanced Economies
6
4
2

Cyclically
Adjusted
Primary
Balance

0
-2
-4
-6

Primary
Balance

-8

Overall Balance

-10
2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

Source: IMF (2011)
Note: Figure shows a path of average balances that would reduce gross public debt to the lower of 60 percent or
the pre-crisis level (and net debt to 80 percent of GDP in Japan).

1

Public health care spending in advanced countries is projected to increase, on average, by about 3 percent of
GDP over the next 20 years and by 6.5 percent over the next 40 years (IMF, 2010b). Public pension costs are
expected to rise by 2.4 percent of GDP during the next 50 years in Europe (European Commission, 2009).

3
Figure 2: Deficits and Unemployment in Advanced Economies
22
20

SPA

18
EST

Unemployment

16
SVR

14

IRE
GRE

12

POR
10

FRA

USA

8

ITA
FIN
BEL
CAN ICE
SLO CZE
GER
ISR
NZE CYP

GBR

6

MAL
AUS
NET AUT

JAP
4

SWE
LUX

DEN

SWI

KOR

2
-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Government Balance
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook database.
Notes: Data refer to 2010, except for Ireland where the projected deficit in 2011 is taken.

All this poses substantial challenges for the detailed design of a wide range of tax and
expenditure policies. For the latter, the core challenges are to reparameterize public pension
schemes and, conceptually much harder, limit rising health costs. On the tax side—the focus
of this paper—the need is to identify reforms that strengthen the fiscal position while being,
if not growth-promoting, at least minimally distortionary and growth-retarding, while
respecting equity concerns.
The purpose here is not to review the full range of tax options to support fiscal sustainability:
this is done, for instance, in IMF (2010a) and Cottarelli and Keen (2012). Instead the focus is
on two key issues surrounding some of the core instruments that, ultimately, will have to bear
the brunt of adjustment and in the redesign of which can be seen real prospects for meeting
the consolidation, growth and structural challenges.
The first issue is the potential value and effectiveness of revenue-neutral tax shifts in
addressing competitiveness and employment problems. Certainly there is strong evidence
that labor taxation is harmful for employment (see for instance Nickell and Layard, 1999;
Bassanini and Duval, 2006; OECD, 2011) —although there are several subtleties in this
relationship and interactions with labor-market institutions are important—which has led to
increased interest in reducing labor taxation in general and social contributions in particular.
So too has the perception that high labor costs are a key structural problem in several of the
troubled Eurozone countries, with reduced labor costs seen as a way to ease and accelerate
the needed adjustment. Measures of this sort have featured in stimulus programs and indeed
in 2010 eight OECD countries reduced their social contribution rates for employers. The
difficulty, of course, is that cutting social contributions runs counter to consolidation
objectives, and is quite simply not affordable in many of the countries in the upper left of

4
Figure 2. The question then is whether there exist ‘tax shifts’ combining such a cut with
increases in revenue from other sources that do not offset the beneficial labor market and
competitiveness effects. In Europe, this has led to prominent proposals for ‘fiscal
devaluations’—sometimes also referred to as ‘internal devaluations’ or, in France, a ‘social
VAT’—in the form of a revenue-neutral (or revenue-enhancing) shift from social
contributions to the VAT. This was a major element, for instance, of Portugal’s initial
arrangement with the IMF; and France has announced its intention to undertake such a tax
shift. Section II explores the theoretical case for tax shifts of this kind, provides what appears
to be the first empirical analysis of whether and how these and other tax shifts might affect
trade performance, and discusses some of the detailed design issues that arise in practice.
The second set of issues concern the VAT itself. This has already emerged as a focus of
consolidation efforts in the EU, and its greater use or introduction are widely viewed as
leading options (indispensible, in the views of some) for fiscal sustainability in both Japan
and the U.S., respectively. In Europe, a strengthening of the VAT would be required for
countries that aim at a substantial tax shift along the lines of a fiscal devaluation. The aim in
Section III of the paper is therefore to assess the merits of the VAT in achieving
consolidation, growth and fairness objectives and, more particularly, to develop and begin to
apply a methodology for diagnosing weaknesses in VAT design and implementation so as to
find ways to these ends that are likely to be less distortionary and fairer than raising the
standard rate from levels that are in many cases already very high.
Conclusions on these two issues are set out briefly in Section IV.
II. FISCAL DEVALUATION: TAX SHIFTS TO PROMOTE EMPLOYMENT AND
COMPETITIVENESS

The rise in unemployment rates during the crisis has led many countries to implement ‘job
strategies’ to reverse these developments. These often include reductions in the social
contributions paid by employers (‘SCR’ rates) as well as wage subsidy schemes. For
instance, the OECD Employment Outlook 2010 reports that 12 countries expanded their job
subsidy programs in 2010, while another 8 reduced their SCR rates. The underlying hope, of
course, is that lower labor costs will raise labor demand, reduce unemployment and, for
Eurozone countries facing deep structural problems, improve international competitiveness.
But, in direct terms at least, cutting SCR rates is revenue-losing. This raises the question of
whether, without negating the hoped-for beneficial effects of an SCR cut, revenue could be
preserved, or even increased, by at the same time increasing the VAT (or, perhaps, some
other suitable source of revenue source). The potential effectiveness and design of such a
‘fiscal devaluation’ has become an urgent issue: it has been presented as one of the few
options left for Eurozone countries faced with dire fiscal, unemployment, and
competitiveness problems.

5
A. Fiscal Devaluation—In Principle
The basic argument2
The idea that tax changes can, to some degree, mimic the effect of a devaluation is not new.
In 1931, Keynes noted that the combination of an import tariff and an export subsidy has
much the same effect, raising the domestic price of importables and reducing the foreign
price of exportables.3 But explicit taxes on trade—in any event clearly ruled out for most
countries by trade commitments—are not needed to have this effect: discussion of the
appropriate regime for commodity taxation in the European Union prompted a recognition
that moving from the taxation of final goods, at a uniform rate, on an ‘origin’ basis—that is,
according to where they are produced—to their taxation on a ‘destination’ basis—according
to where they are consumed—is essentially equivalent to an exchange rate devaluation: such
a shift brings imports into tax, and takes exports out.4 With such shifts in commodity taxation
ruled out by adoption of the destination base as the international norm for commodity
taxation, the next device that suggests itself is to shift away from production-based taxes
effectively levied on an origin basis, offsetting the revenue loss as need be by increasing
broad-based destination-based taxes, the most obvious (but not only) candidate for the latter
role being the VAT. This is the essence of a ‘fiscal devaluation’
The classic form of fiscal devaluation as it has been discussed in Europe combines a
reduction in the SCR with an increase in the VAT sufficient to at least preserve government
revenue. The focus on the employers’ contribution—rather than the employee’s, or even
personal taxes on labor income—reflects a view that the relevant rigidity comes from
contracts specified in terms of payment net of the SCR. 5 The reduction in the SCR is
assumed to be fully passed on in producer prices, so that, with the exchange rate fixed, the
foreign currency price of exports falls correspondingly; the increased VAT does not dampen
this effect, since—as a destination-based tax—it simply does not apply to exports. The
reduced SCR also reduces the producer price of domestically produced goods sold in the
home market, while leaving the producer price of competing imports unaffected; but since
the increased VAT applies equally to both imports and domestically produced goods, the
combined effect is an increase in the relative consumer price of imported goods. Thus
exports become cheaper abroad and imports more expensive at home. The effect is not

2

A brief account of the basic argument, and an assessment, can also be found in ECB (2011).

3

Laker (1981) provides an early review of the literature on fiscal measures to replicate a nominal devaluation.

4

Calmfors (1998) recognized long ago the potential for countries adopting the euro to engineer effective
devaluations in this way.

5

If instead the net wage received by the worker were supposed fixed, a cut in the employee’s contribution
(SCE) or personal income tax (PIT) would do just as well.

6
precisely equivalent to an exchange rate depreciation:6 there is no change, for instance, in the
foreign currency value of assets denominated in the domestic currency, and the fiscal
devaluation is likely to affect relative producer prices (reflecting differing labor intensities) in
a way that a nominal devaluation would not. Nonetheless, the direct impact on the trade
balance could be expected to be much the same.
The effectiveness of this strategy, it should be stressed, requires rigidity in both the exchange
rate and the nominal wage. With a flexible exchange rate, the increased demand for exports
and reduced demand for imports prompted by this tax shift would cause an appreciation of
the nominal exchange rate that undoes its competitiveness impact. And even if the exchange
rate is fixed, a fiscal devaluation will have no real effect if—or when—domestic wages
adjust, as one would expect them to do: as workers find their real wage reduced by the
increased VAT rate, they (or their unions) will aim to increase their nominal wages, moving
the real producer wage back towards the pre-reform equilibrium (a process that any wage
indexation, of course, would accelerate). In the meantime, a fiscal devaluation would be
expected to reduce unemployment and improve the trade balance; but, because of this wage
adjustment, to have no long run impact on product or labor market outcomes.
That the effects of a fiscal devaluation are likely to be largely temporary does not mean they
must be unimportant. Temporary effects could last some time. Moreover, the case for fiscal
devaluation may be especially strong when the economy, owing to downward rigidities in
nominal wages, is initially in marked disequilibrium, with a highly overvalued real exchange
rate and extensive involuntary unemployment. A fiscal devaluation could then accelerate
needed adjustments. The end result—the point to which the real exchange rate and the
unemployment rate converge in the long run—may not be much affected by the fiscal
devaluation but the convergence could be much faster. Quick improvement and adjustment is
critical in countries where doubts may otherwise arise on the sustainability of the adjustment
process under a pegged exchange rate.
A Closer Look
To explore further the analytics of a fiscal devaluation and guide the later empirics, this
section considers the impact of a tax shift away from the SCR towards the VAT in the setting
of a small, two-period open economy with a representative consumer, with features key to
,
the argument above. Production in period t is characterized by a revenue function
7
defined on and homogeneous of degree one in the N-vector of world prices (exogenous
and fixed throughout) and labor use L; For simplicity, the discount rate is assumed to be zero,
6

Fahri et al. (2011) establish conditions under which tax shifts of this kind can precisely replicate a nominal
devaluation; with foreign holding of domestically-denominated assets of this kind, these include a partial
default.

7

Vectors are row vectors, a prime indicating transposition. Derivatives are indicated by subscripts for functions
of many variables, by a prime for functions of just one.

7
′
so that the 2N-vector of present value producer prices over the two periods is
, ′ ′.
Labor supply in each period is inelastic in amount .. In period 2 there is (for simplicity) no
taxation of labor, and the labor market clears. In period 1, however, there is a fixed nominal
wage W and a tax
(thought of as the SCR) levied on top of this, with the two leaving the
price of labor above the market-clearing rate
is then
, . Employment
determined from

,
so that (suppressing P here and elsewhere)

2.1

1

0,

2.2

meaning that a cut in the SCR increases employment in the first period. Though in practice
levied in ad valorem form, it is convenient to characterize the VAT as a vector of specific
taxes, ,
,
. Consumer prices,8 assumed fully flexible to changes in VAT rates,
. Preferences are characterized by an expenditure function
, ,U
are then
denoting utility; compensated demands are thus
, .
Revenue from the SCR and VAT is assumed to be returned to the consumer as a lump sum.9
Since these are not the only taxes levied in practice, for structuring the empirics it is useful to
allow for another tax instrument, the simplest way being to suppose that a lump sum tax in
amount 1
is levied in period t but returned to the consumer only in amount , with
0 being an ad hoc characterization of some associated inefficiency. With perfect capital
markets, the consumer’s budget constraint thus implies
′

,

,

2.3

. The value at world prices of net exports in period 110 is thus (recalling
where
that outputs are given by the price derivatives of the revenue function)
′

,

The question of interest is how N is affected by a shift from

.
to

2.4
.

8

With the fixed nominal wage, there is no need for an additional normalization of consumer prices.

9

Having revenues instead finance the provision of some good that enters preferences adds only complexities.

10

No assumption is made on the sign of net exports in period 1. Used in (2.3), linear homogeneity of the
expenditure and revenue functions implies that trade is balanced over the two periods (aside from the λ term,
since this is pure waste.)

8

For this, it is shown in Appendix A that, for arbitrary small changes in the available tax
instruments,
′

Ω 1

where
′

′

/

′

2.6

′
′

′

′
′
and Ω

2.5

0

′
′

2.7

2.8

0 denotes the elasticity of labor demand.

To interpret the effects in (2.6)-(2.8), it is helpful to begin with the effect of an increase in the
un-modeled ‘other’ tax A. The distortionary impact of this lowers lifetime consumer welfare
by , leading to reduced demand and so tending to increase net exports; how much of this
reduced demand occurs in period 1, however—and so increases the value of net exports
then—depends on the proportion of that reduced expenditure which occurs in period 1, given
by ′
/ ′
; loosely, the improvement in period 1 net exports is greater the larger is
the marginal propensity to consume in that period.
Turning to , an increase in the employers’ contribution tends to reduce period 1 net
exports, and, as one would expect, by a larger amount the more elastic is the demand for
labor. The effect is smaller, however, the greater is the marginal propensity to consume in
period 1; this is because the distortionary effect of such an increase leads to a reduction in
welfare that triggers demand effects of the kind just described, which tend to increase net
exports. Under the very weak assumption that the marginal propensity to consume in period
2 is strictly positive, however, the direct effect through the demand for labor dominates, so
0: a higher SCR unambiguously reduces net exports in period 1.
that
affects net
Equation (2.7) shows that an arbitrary change in the 2N-vector of VAT rates
exports in two ways. The first is the direct impact on period 1 demand, which, through the
2 )-matrix
, reflects not only within-period effects from changes in period 1
but also substitution effects from the change in period 2 prices
prices (through
(through
. The second channel is the impact on first period demand, again reflecting
relative marginal propensities to consume, of the welfare loss from the distortions induced by
the change in . Unsurprisingly, the impact of a change
in the VAT structure thus
depends on the details of that change and on the structure of demand responses. Raising the
tax on items with highly elastic compensated demand, for instance, will do more to reduce
net exports than doing so on those in inelastic demand; and intertemporal substitution effects

9
will come into play when consumer prices are raised by differing proportionate amounts in
the two periods.
There is, however, one special case in which the effect of a VAT reform is unambiguous.
, for some scalar ; that is, in which the effect is to increase
This is that in which
all consumer prices by the same proportion. Since linear homogeneity of the expenditure
function implies that
0, in this case ′
0; there is then no effect on net
exports, the reason being that such a tax change is equivalent to a lump sum tax. And the
most obvious case in which a VAT reform cause an equi-proportionate increase in all
consumer prices is when it is levied at a uniform (tax-exclusive) rate, , in both periods, so
that
/ 1
. This result—that increasing the rate of a VAT applied to all
commodities has no impact on net exports—is elegant, but its practical relevance is open to
doubt: most VATs are from being levied at a uniform rate.
What then is the effect of a fiscal devaluation, in the sense of a reduction in
combined
with a change in
that maintains revenue unchanged? No general results appear to be
available, in that while the cut in the employers’ contribution increases net exports, simply
imposing on
the further requirement of maintaining overall revenue does not remove the
dependence on the complexities of design and demand responses just discussed. In the
special case of a uniform VAT (or more generally a reform that raises all consumer prices by
the same proportion), however, the ambiguity vanishes, since then
0: only
the effect of the cut in the employer’s contribution remains, and a fiscal devaluation—indeed
any shift towards the VAT, even if not revenue-neutral—increases period 1 net exports. It is
also, as shown in Appendix A, welfare-improving.11
Other considerations
There are other important features of reality ignored in the model. Some affect the purposive
design of tax shifts, and these are taken up in subsection C below; others impact the positive
analysis of tax changes that may be reflected in the empirics.
Prominent amongst the latter is the neglect of non-tradables. Feldstein and Krugman (1990)
argue, for instance, that tradables are generally taxed more heavily under the VAT than are
non-tradables; and indeed nine EU Member States currently make use of special provisions
enabling the application of reduced rates to specified non-tradable labor–intensive services.
11

This analysis is greatly simplified, it should be noted, by the assumption of inelastic labor supply: this means
that the labor supply effects have no impact on employment not only in period 1, when this is demanddetermined, but in period 2 as well. Suppose, for instance, that labor supply is instead assumed sensitive (only)
to the period 2 wage and consumer prices. Introducing a small, uniform rate VAT in the presence of a pre0 will then tend to reduce both labor supply in period 2 and, because of the increased
existing labor tax
efficiency cost of the labor tax, lifetime welfare. Net exports in period 2 would then be expected to fall, with a
corresponding increase in period 1 net exports that reflects the income effect on commodity demands.

10
In these circumstances, a higher standard VAT rate will reduce the relative consumer price of
non-tradables, encouraging substitution out of tradables.12 This is not the only possibility,
however. In some cases, reduced VAT rates apply to tradables, such as zero-rated food in the
U.K. The net direction of the impact of an increase in the VAT rate on net exports is then
unclear. The presence of non-tradables also complicates the impact of the SCR cut. If, as
could plausibly be the case, the production of these is relatively labor-intensive, then the
reduction in the SCR will differentially promote their production. This then limits the
tendency for an improved trade balance
More generally, just as the VAT is far more complex than a tax applied at a single rate to all
consumption (a point explored in more detail in section III), so the structure of the
employer’s social contribution is often more complex than can be described, as the theory
above presumes, by a single parameter. There may be an upper limit on contributions, for
instance, and, still more fundamentally, to the extent that payment is required by the
expectation of future benefits, the incentive effects of social contributions may be quite
different from those of a tax on labor (Disney, 2004).
It should be stressed too that the VAT, although it has been the focus of debate, is not the
only way in which the revenue lost by a cut in SCR can be recouped without necessarily
offsetting the impact on net exports. Broadly, any tax that does not directly affect labor costs
would have the same effect, such as excises on the consumption of some particular
commodity or taxes on residential property. At the most general level, a wide range of taxes
potentially affect net exports, though in some cases theory suggest that these may be
complex: as, for example, with the corporate income tax (as discussed in Keen and Syed
(2006)). The wider issue raised by the fiscal devaluation debate—on which the empirical
results will also be reported below—is that of how the full range of tax instruments may
affect export performance.
B. Tax Effects on Net Exports--Empirics
There is substantial evidence that reductions in labor taxation can increase employment. But
there is almost no empirical evidence bearing on the likely trade impact of a fiscal
devaluation, or on trade impacts of tax reforms more generally.
Several papers do though bear on some aspects of the issue. Poterba et al. (1986) explore
how the mix between taxes on producers and consumers affects prices and wages, as a way
of testing for the presence of nominal rigidities. They find these rigidities to be important,
suggesting that assumptions underlying the case for a fiscal devaluation may indeed be—or
at least did—hold reasonably good in practice. Alesina and Perotti (1997) find that labor tax
variables increase unit labor costs in a panel of OECD countries, thus also supporting the
12

To the extent that non-tradables tend to be labor-intensive services, this will amplify the effect through the
lower SCR.

11
presence of real wage rigidities. The effect, however, is only found to be significant in
countries with an intermediate level of wage bargaining, as opposed to centralized or
decentralized bargaining where the effect is insignificant. Neither paper looks at the trade
effects of the tax mix. Lane and Perotti (1998; 2003) estimate net export equations using
cross-country panels, but look only at total labor taxes and not at all at consumption taxes.
Keen and Syed (2006) explore the impact of corporate taxes and the VAT on net exports,
finding that the structure between the two matters significantly for the trade balance in the
short run. But they do not include social contributions in their analysis. Franco (2011)
estimates a number of VAR equations with Portuguese data and then simulates the impact of
an SCR reduction and an offsetting increase in the VAT on both exports and imports. The
analysis here is similar, but focuses on the full set of OECD countries, differences between
exchange rate regimes, and a wider range of tax instruments.
Methodology
The aim in what follows is to look to the data for signs of whether tax changes appear to
affect net exports in ways consistent with the rationale offered for fiscal devaluations, as set
out above.
Allowing for the potentially complex dynamics, the analysis above suggests regressions of
the single equation error correction form:
∆

Δ

,
′

Δ

,

Δ
′

,

2.9

where i and t index respectively countries and time, N again denotes net exports, SCR
indicates the employer’s social contribution and VAT the value added tax (both variously
measured, as described below), and and are country and time fixed effects. Among the
controls in X are the revenue from other taxes, denoted A, and the government balance
(positive for a surplus) Bal.13 This structure allows for a rich dynamic pattern of responses to
tax changes.14 The contemporaneous impact of an increase in some tax variable k is given by
the coefficient on the differenced tax variable,
, and the long run impact is given by the
coefficient on the lagged tax variable relative to that on the lagged dependent variable,
/
(unless
0, in which case the short and long-run run effects are the same).

13

The real exchange rate is not included in the regressions, since this is the route through which tax changes are
expected, at least in part, to take effect.
14

Tax changes may also have indirect effects on net exports by affecting future values (endogenous but
predetermined) variables in X: they might induce a reduction in growth, for instance, that leads, indirectly, to a
future effect on net exports. These are not captured here.

12
The arguments in subsection A above give reason to expect both SCR-related coefficients,
and
to be negative; the immediate impact of a VAT increase,
, could be small or
zero, while the longer term impact
reflecting the unwinding of effects in the labor
market, might be negative. The earlier arguments also imply that
be positive but perhaps
small. While the model above allows no role for Bal, it is included in the empirics to allow
for non-Ricardian effects: empirical studies generally report a positive effect of the
government balance on the current account (see for example chapter 4 of IMF (2011)).
Including the government balance means that the coefficients on the tax terms are to be
interpreted as identifying effects conditional on other measures to maintain the government
balance unchanged. Also included among the controls X are variables that have become fairly
standard in the international trade literature,15 such as the dependency ratio (DEP, the
population over 65 relative to that between 15 and 65), the growth rate of GDP (GROWTH)
and, in some regressions, unemployment (UNEMPL).
Following Lane and Perotti (1998; 2003), we allow responses in (2.9) to differ according to
the exchange rate regime. Given the particular interest in fiscal devaluation in Eurozone
countries, we distinguish between country-years of Eurozone membership and its
complement. Coefficients related to the SCR and VAT, and on the lagged dependent variable
are estimated separately for euro and non-euro observations by interacting them with
respective dummies.16 To check the importance of the restriction imposed by this approach,
of identical coefficients for euro and non-euro observations for all other variables (including
other taxes and the fiscal balance), Appendix B reports results where the sample is split into
Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries, allowing all coefficients to vary between the two sets:
the results are somewhat less robust than those in the text below.
The dataset, described in Appendix C, is an unbalanced panel of 30 OECD countries between
1965 and 2009. For the net export series, the Im-Pesaran-Shin statistic suggests that not all
countries have a unit root. Looking at the individual time series, a unit root cannot be rejected
for 18 countries, including many of those currently in the euro zone; for non-euro countries,
however, the unit root is typically rejected. This is as one might expect—shocks to net
exports are more persistent when the nominal exchange rate cannot move—and allowing the
coefficient on the lagged dependent variable to differ across the two regimes provides room
for this effect. These time series properties also suggest that wages are not flexible enough to
offset the effect of a rigid exchange rate, providing tentative indication of scope for a fiscal
devaluation to have some effect.

15

16

See for example Chin and Prasad (2003), Gruber and Kamin (2007) and Lee et al. (2008).

We also ran regressions for an alternative classification of exchange rate regimes, based on Ilzetzki et al.
(2008). The results are partially consistent with larger effects in fixed exchange rate regimes, but not for all
regimes. However, the sample size for some categories is rather small so that results might be less reliable.

13
In estimating (2.9), two alternative measures of the tax variables of central interest, SCR and
VAT, are used. First, we use data on the shares of their respective revenues in GDP, based on
either actual or cyclically adjusted data. This has two significant advantages. The first is that
the revenue raised by some tax instrument is a summary indicator of the whole range of
complex features of its rate and base. The second is that the impact on net exports of a shift
between revenue sources that leaves total revenue unchanged can be seen easily by
combining coefficients. The short run impact of reducing the employers’ social contribution
by one percent of GDP and recovering the revenue from increasing the VAT, for instance, is
simply the difference in the coefficients on the changes in tax revenues from these sources:
,

,

,

2.10

while the long run effect, from the lagged terms, is:
,

,

.

2.11

The second approach is to use statutory rates of SCR and VAT. These do not capture changes
in the base of either the VAT or the SCR, or in other than the standard rates at which they are
charged, that might be expected to have effects similar to those set out in the model above.
Moreover, the impact of a shift between revenue sources on net exports cannot be read
directly from the regressions; instead, assumptions must be made on the expected revenue
from changes in tax rates and impacts inferred from combinations of rate changes that would
be expected to be revenue-neutral.
Endogeneity is a pervasive and well-known problem in macro regressions of the kind
explored here, calling for great caution in interpreting causalities. The ratio of actual tax
revenue to GDP, in particular, may well be correlated with the error term u, leading to biased
and inconsistent estimators: shocks that cause export demand to fall, for instance, might also
result in lower social contributions as employment falls. We cannot claim to have resolved
the problem, but do seek to mitigate the endogeneity bias in several ways. First, the inclusion
of GDP growth as a control should to some degree reduce biases from this source. Second, so
should estimation by the system GMM method of Arellano and Bover (1995) and Blundell
and Bond (1998), which uses a system comprising both the first-differenced equation and the
model in levels to estimate (2.9); this also addresses potential inconsistency arising from
correlation of the lagged dependent variable with the fixed effects. The standard rate of VAT
and the marginal SCR rate are used as external instruments in these regressions. Third, we
use in our preferred regressions cyclically adjusted revenue data, reported in the OECD
Economic Outlook, as an alternative to actual revenue data. By filtering revenues for cyclical
effects, this corrects for one important source of endogeneity in the independent variable. It
does not entirely remove the possibility of endogeneity, however, since policy responses that
affect the cyclical balance may be made in light of expected developments in net exports. For

14
this reason, as well as for comparability with the results using actual revenue data, 17 we again
report results from using the system GMM estimator. However, in this case we also report
fixed effects regressions in which tax variables are not instrumented (but in which GDP
growth is instrumented with its lagged value). Finally, using tax rates, rather than revenues,
may be the best way to avoid endogeneity since it eliminates effects working directly though
common shocks affecting tax bases (though the issue of endogenous policy responses
remains). This potential advantage of using tax rates must be weighed, however, against their
potential inadequacy in summarizing policy or administrative measures affecting these
instruments.
Results
Table 1 reports estimates of (2.9). Regressions using raw revenue data are presented in
column (1), those using cyclically adjusted revenue data in columns (2), (3) and (4) and those
using statutory rates (5). 18 The Sargan test for over-identification and Arellano-Bond statistic
for second order serial correlation are encouraging, except for the raw data in column (1)
where the Sargan test cannot reject over-identification. In all cases, and despite efforts to
minimize the number of instruments, the very high Hansen statistic points to weak
instruments, and potential finite sample bias (toward the least squares results), although the
Hansen falls noticeably below 1 in column (5). This is likely a lesser concern in columns (2)
– (5) in so far as these alternative revenue measures seem inherently less prone to
endogeneity issues.
Control variables contribute little to the regressions in Table 1. One might expect a higher
dependency ratio to be associated with lower net exports as a result of net dissaving by the
elderly. The coefficient is indeed negative, but insignificant. Perhaps more surprising is that
GDP growth is insignificant. Revenue from sources other than the SCR and VAT is
insignificant in changes, but in column (1) enters positively in lag—broadly consistent with
the prediction above of a lasting positive effect to the extent that these other sources are
distortionary. Perhaps surprisingly, but consistent with the simple model above, the
government balance has no significant impact in any of the regressions.
Interest centers, of course, on the coefficients related to VAT and SCR. On this, the results in
column (1) are strikingly different for Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries.19 For the nonEurozone, no significant effects emerge, either in change or lagged; and the F-test does not
reject the null that both coefficients on the tax changes are zero. For the euro countries, in
17

This though may not be too great a concern given the fairly long time dimension.

18

Time effects are not included in the results reported. As the inclusion of GDP growth picks up the common
trends, time fixed effects hardly change the results..
19

For brevity we speak here and below as if the sample were partitioned by country; current Eurozone
members, however, are of course in the ‘non-euro’ subsample prior to their entry.

15
Table 1. Fiscal devaluation and net exports 1
Tax-GDP ratios
(1)
L.N × Euro
L.N× Non-E
ΔSCR × Euro
L.SCR × Euro
ΔVAT × Euro
L.VAT × Euro
ΔSCR × Non-E
L.SCR × Non-E
ΔVAT × Non-E
L.VAT × Non-E
ΔUNEMPL
L.UNEMPL
ΔSCR
×UNEMPL
L.SCR ×
UNEMPL
ΔDEP
L.DEP
ΔBal
L.Bal
ΔA
L.A
ΔGROWTH
L.GROWTH
Number of obs
AB AR (1)
AB AR (2)
Sargan
Hansen
F-test Euro
F-test Non-Euro

-0.18***
-0.27*
-2.97*
-0.22**
0.47
0.10
-2.49
0.03
-0.01
-0.11

-26.2
-6.06
0.11
0.12
0.22
0.18**
-0.18
-0.07

(0.07)
(0.15)
(1.59)
(0.10)
(0.92)
(0.14)
(1.56)
(0.14)
(0.92)
(0.23)

53.4
7.63
0.17
0.11
0.24
0.08
0.16
0.13

337
0.00
0.06
0.02
0.99
0.13
0.27

(2)
-0.10**
-0.21*
-3.42***
-0.13
0.56
0.05
-2.84**
-0.06
-0.05
-0.03

-31.9
-11.63
-0.09
-0.13
0.16
0.18
-0.16
-0.09

Cyclically Adjusted Series
(3)
(0.05)
(0.12)
(1.26)
(0.10)
(1.00)
(0.17)
(1.30)
(0.11)
(0.94)
(0.17)

(52.8)
(8.11)
(0.23)
(0.09)
(0.39)
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.11)

369
0.02
0.22
0.18
0.99
0.02
0.09

-0.09***
-0.13
-2.66***
-0.23
-0.04
0.09
-2.11***
-0.17
-0.62
0.05
0.79
-0.10

(0.03)
(0.09)
(0.78)
(0.19)
(0.49)
(0.10)
(0.81)
(0.23)
(0.54)
(0.14)
(0.72)
(0.20)

-0.02

(0.08)

0.01

(0.02)

-12.6
-5.03
0.24
0.00
-0.00
0.11
0.02
0.09

(40.5)
(4.40)
(0.16)
(0.05)
(0.44)
(0.09)
(0.16)
(0.14)

Tax Rates
(5)

(4)

-0.15***
-0.22***
-0.75*
-0.16
-0.39
0.07
-0.65**
-0.06
-0.49***
-0.01

(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.44)
(0.13)
(0.27)
(0.13)
(0.27)
(0.08)
(0.13)
(0.06)

-0.24
-0.25
-0.11
-0.08
0.23**
0.10
0.03
-0.02
0.01
0.01

(0.28)
(0.21)
(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.16)
(0.12)
(0.03)
(0.09)
(0.08)

-21.1
1.60
0.11
-0.00
-0.18
0.07
0.06
-0.07

(30.3)
(6.10)
(0.10)
(0.05)
(0.12)
(0.06)
(0.26)
(0.17)

-5.7
-15.5
-0.37
-0.15
0.83
0.30
-0.15
-0.14

(43.6)
(13.5)
(0.35)
(0.16)
(0.95)
(0.21)
(0.32)
(0.25)

349
0.02
0.31
0.21
1.00
0.00
0.02

638

0.00
0.00

0.00

0.35
1.54
0.15
0.21
0.71

369
0.04
0.35
0.19
0.84

Fiscal devaluation
Euro
Euro
Non-Euro
Non-Euro
F-test E=Non-E
1

3.44**
1.80*
2.48
-0.52
0.01

(1.72)
(0.92)
(1.66)
(1.23)

3.98***
1.92
2.80*
0.18
0.00

(1.55)
(2.05)
(1.58)
(1.11)

(0.66)
(1.43)
(0.26)
(0.43)

0.90*
3.81
-0.05
-0.22

Single equation error correction model, controlled for country fixed effects. Estimation is by one step robust system GMM, except
in column (4) where it is by fixed effects with only growth instrumented with its own lagged values. Treating lagged and tax-rate
variables as predetermined and with rates for VAT and SCR as external instruments in (1) – (3). Laglimits (2,3) and instruments
collapsed. *, **, *** reflecting statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent (heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in brackets).
The F tests report the p-value for F statistic on the null hypotheses that the coefficients on both ΔSCR and ΔVAT are zero (F-test
Euro and F-test Non-Euro) and the null that the short-term effect of a fiscal devaluation in the euro is equal to that in the non-euro

(0.52)
(5.87)
(0.48)
(1.91)
0.00

16
(F-test Anon-E), Calculation of ’s in column (5) based on point estimates multiplied by a factor to translate into a change of 1
percent of GDP.

contrast, both the change in and the lags of the SCR variable show a significant negative
effect on net exports, consistent with the theory. And the effects are quite large: a reduction
in the share of GDP taken in the employers’ social contribution—offset by other (non-VAT)
measures to keep the government balance unchanged—increases net exports, in the shortterm, by almost 3 percent of GDP. The differenced VAT variable has a positive impact for
the euro observations, but this effect is far from significant. Indeed the VAT is rarely
significant in any of the results in Table 1, reminiscent of the theoretical implication of no
short run impact of an increase in the VAT if applied uniformly to all commodities—
strikingly so, indeed, given how non-uniform VATs are in practice.
The difference in coefficients for ΔSCR and ΔVAT suggests that a fiscal devaluation in euro
countries would indeed increase net exports. As reported at the bottom of the table, the point
estimate of implies that a shift of one percent of GDP from SCR to VAT would increase
net exports by 3.44 percent of GDP, and the effect is statistically significant at 5 percent. For
non-euro observations, the point estimates suggest an effect that is not only smaller but also
statistically insignificant. The long run impact of a fiscal devaluation, , is positive for euro
countries—contrasting with the theoretical presumption of no permanent effect—but this is
significant only at 10 percent. For non-euro countries, it is insignificant. The F-test firmly
rejects the null that is the same for Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries.
The results point to a fairly complex time profile of effects, which differs between the
Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries. In particular, the smaller coefficient for lagged net
exports in Eurozone countries suggests that the adjustment toward the new equilibrium is
more sluggish—any impact from the fiscal devaluation lasts longer—than in non-Eurozone
countries. For instance, the coefficients imply a half life for euro countries of 3.5 years, while
for non-euro countries it is 2.2 years: so, for instance, 3.5 years after a fiscal devaluation in a
Eurozone country, net exports still remain higher than they would otherwise have been by
around 1¾percent of GDP.
The second column of Table 1 reports results using the cyclically adjusted revenue data. The
diagnostics are more reassuring than when using raw revenue data. For the euro countries,
the coefficient on the change in SCR is somewhat larger and noticeably more precise, being
significant at 1 percent, while that on the lag becomes insignificant. Now, the coefficient for
the change in the SCR variable is also significantly negative for non-euro countries. For the
VAT, there is again no significant effect, for either change or the lag, in either group. The Ftest rejects that both tax coefficients are zero for Eurozone countries, but cannot reject this
for non-Eurozone observations at 5 percent (but can do so at the 10 percent level).
Point estimates of the short-run impact of a pure fiscal devaluation suggest an increase in net
exports of 4 percent of GDP in Eurozone countries, significant at1 percent. For nonEurozone observation the effect is smaller at 2.8 percent of GDP and significant only at 10

17
percent. The implication is that while a fiscal devaluation might also have an impact outside
the Eurozone, the effect seems smaller and more uncertain. Also, adjustment is more sluggish
for the Eurozone, with a lagged net export coefficient of -0.10, compared to -0.21 for noneuro countries (implying half lives of 6.6 years in the Eurozone and 2.9 years in the non-euro
countries). The estimates of indicate that a fiscal devaluation has no long run effect in
either euro or non-euro countries.
Column (3) in Table 1 adds to the regression in column (2) unemployment as a control
variable, as well as the interaction of the SCR variables with unemployment. The latter is
intended to capture the possibility, raised above, that changes in the SCR may have a bigger
effect on trade if unemployment is high, perhaps because wages adjust less rapidly. There is,
however, little support for this: the interaction term is insignificant. Other results are
qualitatively unaffected.20
Column (4) is the same as column (2), but adopts a standard fixed-effects regression in which
only growth is instrumented with its lagged value. The regression thus differs primarily in the
instruments used: it neither uses tax rates as external instruments nor the lagged internal
variables used in system GMM. The results indicate that the instruments matter greatly. The
coefficient for the differenced SCR variable is much smaller and only significant at 10
percent for Eurozone countries. For non-euro countries, the coefficient is small too, but
significant at 5 percent. There is now also a significant negative coefficient on the lagged
VAT variable, but only in non-eurozone countries. The effects of a fiscal devaluation are
now all insignificant, both in the short run and in the long run, and the F-test cannot reject the
null that the effects of a fiscal devaluation are the same for euro and non-euro countries. This
qualitative pattern of results is hard to explain, and, with the diagnostics, one (perhaps
charitable) interpretation is that endogeneity is indeed a real issue, and system GMM goes a
good way towards addressing it.
The last column of Table 1 shows results using statutory tax rates, rather than revenue
ratios.21 The diagnostics provide support for the choice of instruments and the Hansen
statistic is no longer close to 1. All tax effects are in this case insignificant, however, except
for a positive impact of the differenced VAT in the Eurozone. It is of some interest,
nonetheless, to combine the coefficient point estimates with information on tax bases to
gauge the implied impact of a revenue-neutral fiscal devaluation of one percent of GDP. The

20

Note that the SCR variables for Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries should be interpreted differently, since
the total impact of changes in the SCR also depend on the coefficient of the interaction between unemployment
and the change in SCR. We therefore do not report effects of a fiscal devaluation in column (3).
21

We have also explored using the average tax wedge (including SCR and employee social contributions as
well as personal income tax, evaluated at 67 percent of the average wage) instead of the SCR rate. This variable
consistently shows a significant positive coefficient, contrary to the theory. However, the inclusion of employee
contributions and PIT makes this variable less suitable for regressions on fiscal devaluation.

18
implied VAT base22 in non-euro countries is 38 percent of GDP, and the implied SCR base
35 percent. A shift from SCR to VAT by 1 percent of GDP would therefore require raising
the VAT rate by 2.5 percentage points and reducing the SCR rate by 2.9 percentage points.
For euro observations, a VAT increase of 2.7 percentage points and a SCR reduction of 2.6
percentage points would be needed. The point estimates then imply that a fiscal devaluation
in the Eurozone would generate a short-run increase in net exports of about 0.9 percent of
GDP and this effect is significant at 10 percent. The estimated long-run effect is larger, but
statistically insignificant. The effects for non-Eurozone countries are of opposite sign but
very small and insignificant. The F-test rejects the null of equal effects between euro and
non-Eurozone countries, largely consistent with the result in column (2), except that now the
effects are smaller and fiscal devaluation has no effect outside the Eurozone.
As stressed earlier, the VAT is not the only way in which an SCR reduction might be
financed, so that a range of alternative forms of fiscal devaluation could be envisaged. Table
2 addresses this, and the wider issue of how a variety of tax instruments appear to affect net
exports. It reports the results of estimating a specification along the lines of column 2 in
Table 1, using cyclically adjusted data, but including, in addition to SCR and VAT, the
personal income tax (PIT), employee’s social contribution (SCE) and corporate income tax
(CIT). For brevity, only the coefficients for the differenced tax variables are reported,
capturing the short-term impact of a tax change. The regression reported also makes no
distinction between Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries.
Table 2 Short-term effects of a wider range of taxes /1

SCR
PIT
CIT
SCE
VAT
1

ΔTax-coefficient
-1.74
(1.14)
-0.52
(0.57)
1.44
(0.86)
0.89
(1.69)
0.81
(1.69)

Impact on net exports of
SCR-cut financed by
1.22
3.18**
2.64
2.56*

(1.21)
(1.64)
(1.82)
(1.57)

Specification and estimation as in column (2) of Table 1, but no distinction between euro and non-euro coefficients.

A relatively strong negative effect from the SCR term again emerges, but it now lacks
significance. The effect from the VAT is positive, but also insignificant. Increases in PIT
have an adverse effect on net exports, but less marked than those for SCR. For both the SCE,
and the CIT, the coefficient is positive but insignificant The final column of Table 2 then
shows the impact of cutting the SCR rate and preserving revenue by increasing one of the
other four taxes: the analogue, that is, of above. Financing the SCR reduction by either a
higher SCE or a higher PIT does not significantly increase net exports. Doing so by a higher
VAT, however, increases net exports by 2.56 percent of GDP, with statistical significance of
22

Meaning VAT revenue in percent of GDP divided by the standard rate; and for the SCR, revenue by the SCR
rate.

19
10 percent. A conventional form of fiscal devaluation thus appears both to have a marked
effect and, in terms of net exports, do so more than some alternatives. But even better for
short-term net exports, the results in Table 2 imply, is financing the SCR cut by increased
reliance on corporate taxation. This is consistent with Keen and Syed (2006), who also find
positive short-term effects of such a tax shift on the trade balance. Intuitively, the higher CIT
rate may reduce the inflow of foreign direct investment in the short run, which comes along
with higher net exports. In the long-run, however, these effects will likely disappear.
What, then, is one to conclude from these results? Although in some respects problematic,
the empirics do tend to confirm that, at least for countries in the Eurozone, domestic tax
reforms can have significant effects, of broadly the kind that the theory set out above
predicts, on trade performance. Some of the results imply a quite sizable effect, with the short
run increase in net exports from a shift of one percent of GDP ranging between 1 and 4
percent of GDP. There is also good reason to suppose, however, that any effects of a fiscal
devaluation will be temporary.
C. Policy implications
Both analytics and empirics thus suggest that judicious tax shifts can have a noticeable
impact on trade performance. In building on this to derive policy prescriptions, however,
several issues arise that are not captured in the analytical framework above.
First, the assumption of a representative consumer masks important distributional impacts
from such tax shifts and the likely need for accompanying measures. The increased VAT
component of the fiscal devaluation reduces the value to consumers of their non-labor
income, whether from transfers or capital income. To the extent that out-of-work benefits to
the unemployed are not updated to reflect the increased VAT, most labor market models
suggest a long-term fall in structural unemployment. This suggests still stronger effects on
employment and output. But there will also be a reduction in the real value, for instance, of
pensions. And increasing the VAT may also give rise to other equity concerns, perhaps
especially so if—as the analysis in the next section suggests would be the best approach in
many countries—it took the form of an increase in reduced rates, since these are often (albeit
unwisely) motivated by distributional concerns. This means that there is likely to be pressure
to increase some social benefits to address equity concerns, diluting the net revenue raised by
the VAT increase and so allowing only a smaller reduction in the SCR and hence a smaller
gain in employment and labor supply. The distributional impact of the reform will also
depend on the precise way in which the SCR is cut: on whether or not, for instance, the upper
limit on contributions that some countries impose is also reduced.
Second, across-the-board cuts in SCRs are expensive, and more targeted measures may give
a larger ‘bang-for-buck’ in output and employment effects. In the job plans proposed or
implemented in OECD countries, SCR relief is often targeted to specific jobs or workers.
Lower labor costs for low wage earners may be particularly attractive to relax constraints
induced by minimum wage legislation or by sectoral minimum wages agreed by trade unions

20
and employers. Moreover, employment of this group tends to be relatively sensitive to tax
considerations. Targeting SCR relief to low-wage earners may thus reinforce the impact of a
fiscal devaluation on employment, output and the trade balance. Two other common forms of
targeting SCR cuts (or equivalent financial incentives to employers)—on new employment,
and on small firms—are more problematic: see Box 1.
Box 1. Should social contribution cuts be targeted on new employment and small firms?
A number of schemes—including the Obama jobs plan—limit SCR cuts (or provide analogous
financial incentives to employers) to ‘new’ employment. This has the intuitive appeal of
avoiding a revenue loss on inframarginal employees; and maintains the impact on producer
prices to the extent that these are driven by marginal rather than average cost. But such
schemes are not without difficulty. Deadweight loss still arises to the extent that new
employment would have also emerged without the relief. Moreover, targeting to new
employment may have displacement effects: newly hired employees may replace existing
employees. Some studies report that these effects can be as large as 65 percent (Dahlberg and
Forslund, 2005). These schemes can also create perverse incentives (for instance, in laying off
workers in any period between announcement and reference date relative to which increased
employment is measured. They can also have high transaction costs, and are inevitably
somewhat complex, provision being needed to ensure that enterprises do not relabel
themselves so as to count all employment as ‘new’. Experience has been that take-up rates can
be low, especially among smaller firms: Chirinko and Wilson (2011) provide an extensive
analysis of the impact of such schemes operated by the U.S. states, where they have been quite
common, and conclude that the net employment effects are positive, but very small.
Some countries target SCR relief to small firms. There is widespread belief among policy
makers that small companies are the main source of job growth. Early writers indeed report
evidence supporting this claim for the US (see for example Birch, 1987). This has led
governments to introduce special tax relief measures for small companies. However, more
recent evidence casts doubt on these claims. David et al. (1996) discuss statistical and
measurement problems and stress the need to distinguish between gross and net job creation.
Accounting for such pitfalls, Neumark et al. (2009) find that small firms actually contribute less
to net job growth than do large firms. Haltiwanger et al. (2011) find that, when one controls for
firm age, there is no systematic relationship between firm size and employment growth in the
US. Instead, job growth comes more than proportionally from young firms and start-ups.

Third, the payment of social contributions is generally linked—albeit in many cases very
weakly—with entitlement to benefits. If the value of the latter is to be maintained while the
SCR is cut, two options arise. One is to decouple the two, and move toward tax-based
finance of social benefits: this risks worsening labor supply distortions, if contributions are
indeed seen as a form of forced savings (but has been advocated for the UK, for instance, in
the recent Mirrlees review23). The alternative—feasible if cumbersome—is to maintain the
link and make transfers from general revenue to provide workers with explicit credits for the

23

Mirrlees and others (2011).

21
SCR not directly paid (as done, for instance, with the social security holiday in the United
States).
Fourth, it is important to remember that other taxes can also have a role in recouping revenue
lost from cutting the SCR. One particular possibility beyond those noted earlier—not
included in the empirical exercise of Table 1 in the absence of cyclically adjusted revenue
data—is residential property taxation,24 the appeal of which in this context is that this has
little direct impact on production costs. There is indeed some evidence that this is a relatively
growth-friendly source of finance (Arnold, 2008), with untapped revenue potential in many
countries, often non-Anglophone.
Finally, the analysis may suggest a coordination problem. A fiscal devaluation could indeed
appeal simultaneously to many countries; but if all or many undertake it, the impact on the
net exports of each is diminished. There may thus seem to be a risk of competitive fiscal
devaluations as a form of international tax competition. One important reason for adoption of
the euro was to eliminate the opportunity for countries to pursue such a competitive
devaluation. There is an important difference, however, from standard results on the harm
suffered, for instance, from tax competition to attract mobile capital. There damage arises
from the under-taxation of a base that is much less mobile from the collective perspective
than from the national: the outcome of the consequent game between countries, in which all
ultimately set lower tax rates on capital than is collectively optimal, leaves them all worse
off.25 For a fiscal devaluation, however, the end-point is an increase in the rate of
consumption taxation and a reduction in the taxation of labor. Empirically, there is evidence
that, at least in the OECD, heavier reliance on consumption rather than income taxation is
associated with faster growth (Kneller et al, 1999). In this respect, the downside of fiscal
devaluation is limited: even a fiscal devaluation that has no effect on net exports, perhaps
because of the adoption of similar reforms elsewhere, may ultimately lead to a more efficient
tax structure.
This somewhat optimistic view of fiscal devaluation does not mean, of course, that tax policy
is the only way to address the problems caused by underlying wage rigidities: it is not. The
point is rather that it can perhaps provide some albeit temporary mitigation, and smooth the
impact of more fundamental reforms.

III. THE ROLE OF THE VALUE-ADDED TAX IN FISCAL CONSOLIDATION
The VAT has already played a prominent part in fiscal consolidation efforts in Europe.
Between 2009 and 2011, 13 of the 27 EU member states raised their standard rate of VAT; in
24

Property taxes are excluded from the exercise in Table 2 because cyclically adjusted data are unavailable
(and the adjustment made to other items does not seem appropriate in this case).

25

This over-simplifies: some countries, particularly small ones, may benefit from tax competition of this kind.

22
the two years to 2008, in contrast, only one did so.26 And the increases are in several cases
substantial: Greece and Portugal, for instance, raised their standard rates by 4 and 3
percentage points respectively, to 23 percent. Further increases in standard VAT rates now
look problematic for many European countries, including in terms of increased risk of noncompliance, and there is a general agreement between EU Member States (though not a
legally binding one) not to go beyond a maximum of 25 percent.27
In other prominent fiscally challenged countries, however, the situation is the converse. The
possibility of substantially increasing revenue from the VAT is technically clear in both
Japan and the U.S.: at 5 percent, the former has almost the lowest VAT rate in the world,28
and the latter remains the only OECD country without a VAT. But attempting to realize this
potential has proved close to politically suicidal.
This section considers the place of the VAT in fiscal consolidation, and how the very
different obstacles in Europe and the no/low VAT countries could be overcome.29
A. The Case for the VAT
There is a large literature on the comparison between consumption and income-based
taxation, which need not be reviewed here.30 To some extent, it is for present purposes beside
the point: almost all countries have both, and—even leaving aside standard optimal tax
theoretic considerations—do so for good practical reasons: to diversify compliance risks and
exploit economies of scope in application.31
But the case for the VAT over alternative forms of consumption taxation—notably the retail
sales tax (RST)—is still sometimes questioned, at least in the US. When each functions
26

As a stimulus measure, the U.K. preannounced a temporary reduction in the standard rate from 17.5 to 15
percent in 2009; it was subsequently raised to 20 percent. The exception noted is Germany, which increased the
standard rate by 3 points in 2006.
27

Some have found evidence of Laffer-type effects for the VAT: Matthews (2003), for instance, reports an
estimated revenue-maximizing VAT rate in the EU of around 19 percent.
28

Iran has the lowest, at 3 percent.

29

More issues of design and implementation arise than can be discussed here. For a sense of these, see: on
general design issues arising under EU VAT rules, Crawford et al (2010) and Cnossen (2003); on Japan, Keen
et al (2011); on the U.S., the papers in Tax Law Review (2010), Vol. 28
30

31

See for instance Auerbach (2006) and Banks and Diamond (2010).

Boadway and Pestieau (1994) show that with imperfect compliance it is generally optimal to deploy both a
sales tax and a wage tax even under circumstances under which, with full compliance, they would be
equivalent. A further practical consideration is that information obtained from one tax can be used to help
enforce the other: opposition against the VAT in many countries often comes from small traders whose primary
fear is that it improves the effectiveness of the income tax.

23
perfectly, they are equivalent in taxing only final consumption; and both then have the appeal
of excluding intermediate transactions from tax, consistent with the Diamond-Mirrlees
(1971) result that production efficiency is a necessary condition for Pareto-efficiency.32 The
difference arises when enforcement is imperfect. Suppose, for instance, that some retailer
fails to remit tax. Under an RST, no tax is collected at all; under a VAT, however—the
essence of which is that tax is payable on the entirety of every firm’s sales, but with a credit
of refund of tax it has itself been charged on its inputs—the tax collected on purchases by the
retailer remains. In this sense revenue is more secure under the VAT. This comes at some
potential cost to production efficiency, of course, but with a presumption that the consequent
input-taxation is not too bad a substitute for the missing taxation on value-added at the final
stage.33
The structure of the VAT also introduces an element of self-enforcement into the system: if
firm A’s supplier is VAT-complaint, that reduces A’s gain from not being VAT compliant
itself (because registering for the VAT enables it to reclaim that tax); and if A’s customer is
VAT-compliant, A has an incentive to register and charge tax (because that customer will be
able to reclaim the tax A charges them, and along the way A can reclaim the tax it has been
charged on its own inputs). The point should not though be over-stated: if A’s customer is
not VAT-complaint, then A has an incentive not to comply either.34 Nonetheless, given also
other haphazard features of RSTs in practice—including particular difficulty in taxing
services (largely excluded from most state VATs in the US) and a tendency to levy
substantial charges on business inputs35—the technical superiority of the VAT, at least when
substantial revenue must be raised,36 seems clear. A rule of thumb has been that noncompliance difficulties make RSTs at rates of more than 10 percent seriously problematic.37
There are signs that these theoretical merits of the VAT have to some extent been realized in
practice. If the VAT is indeed a particularly efficient form of taxation, as these and other
32

The conditions for the Diamond-Mirrlees theorem are strong—including perfect competition and the ability
to tax rents at any rate—but few simple rules emerge when they fail, leaving it as the practicable first guide to
policy design.
33

Newbery (1986) shows that it may be optimal to tax intermediate goods when not all final goods can be
taxed.
34

The possibility of ‘bad’ VAT chains forming is analyzed by de Paula and Scheinkman (2006), who find
evidence of such an effect in Brazil.
35

Ring (1989) found that around 40 percent of revenue from state sales taxes in the U.S. was collected from
sales to businesses.
36

37

A fuller account of the comparison between the VAT and RST is in Cnossen (1987).

While figures cited for a federal VAT in the U.S. are often lower than this (6.5 percent for the DomeniciRivlin plan (Bipartisan Policy Center, 2010), for instance), state and local sales taxes (ranging from around 4 to
12 percent where present) need to be added in order to arrive at effective RST rates.

24
considerations suggest, one would expect countries with a VAT—since they have a lower
marginal social cost of raising revenue—to collect more total tax revenue, all else equal, than
these without. The evidence is that, for high income countries, this is indeed be the case
(Keen and Lockwood, 2006 and 2010).
B. Diagnosing the VAT
In practice, VATs differ widely in their design and implementation, as can be seen from
Table 3 summarizing key features of those current in the OECD. The final column reports an
handy indicator for assessing the performance of a VAT. This is its ‘C-efficiency,’ ,
defined as the ratio of the revenue it yields to the product of consumption and the standard
rate of VAT, :
.

3.1

For a perfectly enforced VAT levied at a single rate on all consumption, C-efficiency would
be 100 percent. But this is no more than a convenient benchmark. A VAT, for instance, that
did not refund exporters the tax charged on their inputs could score a very high
even
though it consequently acts in part as a tax on exports rather than on consumption.
Despite these and other conceptual limitations,38 the C-efficiency ratios reported in Table 3
are suggestive. Two observations stand out. First, C-efficiency in many European countries is
very low, with the example of New Zealand—held in the highest esteem by VAT
specialists—showing scope for a significant increase. That means that considerably more
revenue could be raised from the VAT even without increasing the standard rate. If Italy, for
instance, were to increase its C-efficiency to the level found in France, it would increase its
VAT revenue by about 1.2 percent of GDP. Second, C-efficiency is, in contrast, rather high
in Japan: so a significant increase in revenue is likely to require increasing the standard rate.
But low C-efficiency can arise from either poor implementation, poor policy design, or both.
While, as in the case of Italy above, it can quickly indicate scope for improvement—in the
sense of increasing revenue without raising the standard rate—in itself a low C-efficiency
ratio gives little clue as to how to do it. For this, more is needed. To this end, it is shown in
Appendix D that C-inefficiency can be decomposed as
1

1

3.2

where (formal characterization of these terms being in the appendix) the ‘compliance gap’
reflects the difference between actual VAT collected and that theoretically due, while the
‘policy gap’ relates to aspects of design, and can in principle be further decomposed as

38

These are discussed in Ebrill et al. (2001) and OECD (2011).

25
1

1

1

3.3

where the first term on the right reflect departures from a uniform rate structure and the
second the impact of exemptions.39
Table 3. Key features of OECD VATs 1
Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada2
Chile
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom3

Standard
Rate
10.0
20.0
21.0
5.0
19.0
20.0
25.0
22.0
19.6
19.0
19.0
25.0
25.5
21.0
16.0
20.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
16.0
19.0
12.5
25.0
22.0
20.0
19.0
20.0
16.0
25.0
7.6
18.0
17.5

Reduced
Rates
0.0
10.0/12.0
0.0/6.0/12.0
0.0
10.0
0.0
0.0/8.0/13.0
2.1/5.5
7.0
4.9/9.0
5.0/18.0
0.0/7.0
0.0/4.8/13.5
4.0/10.0
0.0
3.0/6.0/12.0
0.0
6.0
0.0
0.0/8.0/14.0
0.0/7.0
5.0/12.0
10.0
8.0/8.5
4.0/7.0
0.0/6.0/12.0
0.0/2.4/3.6
1.0/8.0
0.0/5.0

Revenue
(percent of GDP)
3.4
7.8
7.0
2.7
8.9
7.1
10.1
8.4
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.7
9.1
7.1
7.8
6.0
2.5
4.3
5.8
3.8
7.2
8.6
7.3
7.9
8.4
6.9
8.5
5.3
9.3
3.7
4.9
6.4

C-efficiency
49
61
49
74
75
59
62
58
49
55
46
57
54
55
68
41
67
65
93
35
60
98
57
49
51
54
68
46
58
77
35
46

Source: OECD (2011).

39

Some VAT terminology is needed here. Under both ‘exemption’ and zero-rating, no VAT is charged on sales;
the difference is that input tax can be recovered under zero-rating but not under exemption (sometimes referred
to for this reason as ‘input taxation’). Exemptions levied other than at final sale tend to increase tax revenue,
since the unrecovered tax cascades into the tax paid on the further sales, so that the exemption effect in (3) may
in principle be negative.

26
1

Rates applicable on 1 January 2010. Special rates applying to regions are not shown. Revenue and C-efficiency refer to 2008.

2

Newfoundland and Labrador, new Brunswick, and Nova Scotia have harmonized their provincial sales taxes with the federal
Goods and Services Tax and levy a rate of GST/HST of 13 percent. Other Canadian provinces, with the exception of Alberta,
apply a provincial tax to certain goods and services. these provincial taxes apply in addition to GST.
3
The standard rate of VAT was temporarily reduced from 17.5 percent to 15.0 percent for the period 1 December 2008 - 31
December 2009 inclusive and reverted to 17.5 percent with effect from January 2010.

Equations (3.2) and (3.3) in principle provide an elegant decomposition of C-efficiency that
could be a powerful tool for diagnosing VAT performance. They also have the convenient
feature that independent estimates of all gaps are not needed: in principle, any one can be
estimated as a residual given information on all the others. In practice, however, and perhaps
surprisingly, the information required to decompose C-efficiency in this way is rarely
available. By way of illustration, Table 4 assembles information from disparate sources on
the situation in several European countries in around 2005 that at least provides an
illustration of the method.40
Table 4. Decomposing C-efficiency
Country

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom

C-efficiency

61
50
63
60
51
54
44
67
41
89
58
52
57
55
48

Compliance gap

13
12
7
5
7
14
29
4
27
2
6
8
8
4
15

Policy gap

30
43
33
36
45
37
38
30
44
9
38
43
38
43
44

Decomposing the policy gap:
Rate
differentiation

Exemptions

14
19
0
10
22
8
21
28
25
26
17
22
32
14
22

19
30
33
29
30
31
22
3
26
-23
26
27
10
34
28

Sources: C-efficiency (for 2004) from Table 5.14 of European Commission (2011); Compliance gap (for 2006) from Reckon (2009); Rate
differentiation from Table 5 of Mathis (2004). Incompleteness of coverage reflects gaps in the last of these.

40

Note that the C-efficiency figures in Table 4 differ from those in Table 3: they for an earlier year (so as to be
roughly synchronous with such information on other items needed for the decomposition as is available).

27

What emerges is that the primary issue in most of these countries is (or at least was) in
design, rather than implementation—which to some extent runs counter, for instance, to the
emphasis often placed on issues of ‘carousel’41 and other forms of fraud and evasion in the
EU. There are some cases, most notably Greece and Italy, in which noncompliance seems far
higher than in peer groups, and so naturally attracts attention as an area for improvement.
Mostly, however, it is the scope for improving the uniformity and coverage of the VAT that
stands out.
As between the two elements of the policy gap, the significance of exemptions suggested in
Table 4 is both striking and surprising. Being calculated as a residual, it seems in part to
reflect estimated noncompliance that in many countries seems almost implausibly low. The
calculations of the rate differentiation effect also require closer evaluation. Other estimates
for the U.K. for example, suggest that the statutory rate dispersion effect is 48 percent and
the exemption effect is 8 percent. It is thus the rate structure—and above all the zero-rating
of food and other items, which takes almost half of consumer spending out of the VAT
base—that should be the focus of attention in considering any further increase in revenue
from the VAT. What is perhaps most shocking, however, is that—with few exceptions,
among which the U.K. is prominent—the information needed for this kind of exercise is
generally not available, even, it seems, within government,
C. Obstacles
There is then clearly a case for many advanced economies to look at the VAT for a
substantial part of their consolidation needs. While significant changes have been made in
Europe, these have focused largely on raising the standard rate, tending if anything to reduce
C-efficiency rather than increase it.42 And in Japan and the United States, no changes have
yet been made.43 This section considers some of the key obstacles to realizing VAT reforms
of the kind that the analysis above points to.
Distributional issues and rate differentiation
One obstacle common to both European circumstances and those of Japan and the U.S. is the
perception that the VAT is a particularly regressive tax. This is much less true, of course, if
regressivity is assessed relative not to current income but to current expenditure, the latter
41

Frauds of this kind are explained and discussed, along with VAT noncompliance issue more generally in
Keen and Smith (2009), one aspect being that the revenue loss is, in some cases, in principle unbounded. The
publicity such schemes have attracted is, in part, an aspect of administration’s compliance strategies,
42

Items have also in some cases been moved from standard to reduced rates, amplifying the departure from
uniformity.
43

Japan did however a\nnounce in January 2012 its intention to raise the VAT rate to 8 percent in 2014, and to
10 percent in 2015.

28
being a better indicator of lifetime welfare to the extent that it reflects permanent income: see
for instance Metcalf (1994). More fundamentally, however, it is the distributional effect of
the tax-spending system as a whole, not of any individual component, that ultimately matters.
And advanced economies generally have much better instruments with which to pursue their
distributional objectives than differential rates of commodity taxation. The best way to help
the poor and vulnerable is not by setting a low tax rate on, say, food—the largest monetary
benefit from that goes to the rich, since they spend a larger absolute amount on food than the
poor even though it is a smaller share of their budget—but by supporting them through
targeted transfers.
Take, for example, the U.K. Figure 3 shows the distributional impact of eliminating zero-and
reduced rates (unifying them at 17.5 percent) but at the same time increasing a range of
social benefits. The three lowest income deciles are winners from the package. Moreover,
revenue—net of the increased social support costs—is increased by about £11 billion, which
is around 14 percent of initial VAT revenue.
Figure 3: Distributional impact of a VAT reform package in the U.K.
£10.00
Average Tax Gains/Losses

3.00%

£5.00

1.50%

£0.00
(£'s p.w.)
-£5.00

Average Tax Gains/Losses
(% of disposable income)

0.00%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
-1.50%

-£10.00

-3.00%

-£15.00

-4.50%

-£20.00

-6.00%

-£25.00

-7.50%

-£30.00

-9.00%
Income deciles

Average Tax Reductions (£'s p.w.)

Average Tax Reductions (% of disposable income)

Source: Crawford et al (2010).

As in this example, dealing with the distributional implications of VAT reform may well
reduce the net revenue finally available for consolidation or other purposes. In Japan too, for
instance, the revenue gain from increasing the VAT rate would be reduced by automatic
indexation of pension benefits. The key point, however, is that the basic hesitancy in raising
or eliminating reduced VAT rates for fear of the distributional consequences—and, by the
same token any inclination to include such reduced rates in a new VAT--is essentially
misplaced for most advanced economies.

29
While the reform shown in Figure 3 addresses the distributional concerns associated with a
VAT reform of this kind, it does raise marginal effective tax rates on earned income—
reflecting the impact of the full tax-benefit system—in the lowest deciles: tighter targeting of
social support has a cost. And it does alter relative consumer prices and hence demand
patterns. The question then is whether rate differentiation might have serve a useful
efficiency role in reconciling revenue needs with work incentives.
Broadly, a reduced rate of taxation on some commodity or activity can be justified on
efficiency grounds if it is a substitute for untaxed work effort, whether in the home or
marketplace.44 Existing empirical knowledge gives little reason, however, for confident
differentiation on these grounds. Food itself (eaten at home), for example, seems from results
in Crawford et al. (2010) to be, if anything, a candidate for higher rather than lower taxation.
An argument can be made for some reduced rates on these grounds: for child care, for
instance, due to its complementarity with working and—an argument that has led the
European Commission to allow reduced rates for a few such items—labor-intensive services.
But these are minor items, and experience in the EU is that the reduced rates have done little
to increase compliance or employment.45 The presumption for uniformity under the VAT
seems strong on efficiency grounds as well as distributional ones.
Aggregate Demand Effects
Especially when countries are experiencing unemployment at the levels many show in Figure
2, a natural concern in raising the VAT, whether by widening the base or increasing the
standard rate, is that there will be an adverse impact of on the level of activity through
aggregate demand effects. This worry may, however, be over-stated—even leaving aside any
beneficial confidence effects through an improved fiscal position.
First, a pre-announcement of future VAT increases would be to expected stimulate current
consumption, with the expectation of a jump in the price level leading consumers to bring
forward their consumption, especially of large durables. In effect, the expected increase in
the price level tends to reduce the real return on saving, and so, though an intertemporal
substitution effect, to increase current consumption. There is indeed now substantial evidence
of such frontloading of consumption in advance of moderately sizable VAT increases. Ito
and Mishkin (2006), for instance, find that before Japan increased its VAT rate in 1997 from
3 to 5 percent, consumers accelerated their spending in the preceding quarter before by about
1½ percent. In 2009, the U.K. temporarily reduced its VAT rate from 17.5 to 15 percent,
before raising it to 20 percent in 2010. Though there has as yet been no ex post study of this
event, Crossley, Low, and Wakefield (2009) estimated a likely boost in consumer spending
in 2009 of 1.25 percent. Also, German consumers who were anticipating a 3 percentage point
44

Crawford et al (2011) provide a summary of the theory on commodity tax differentiation and an analysis of
the efficiency arguments for rate differentiation.
45

Copenhagen Economics (2007).

30
VAT increase in 2007 brought forward their consumption by one year. To some extent this
effect may be mitigated as firms adapt their pricing policies: Carare and Danninger (2008)
show that the rise in demand in 2006 allowed German firms to increase their prices well
before the actual VAT increase took place. The impression, nonetheless, is that intertemporal
shifting of consumption can be significant, albeit largely confined to particular durable
sectors.
Indeed some have suggested deliberately using a phased VAT increase to stimulate
consumption. Feldstein (2002) in particular argued that a phased increase in the VAT
accompanied by a gradual cut in the income tax—to render the increase revenue neutral—
could raise demand through this intertemporal substitution effect, advocating this for Japan in
particular. However, simulations suggest that these effects are likely small and would not
substantially accelerate an exit from deflation (Auerbach and Obstfeld, 2004).
Second, the evidence suggests that any lasting impact on aggregate demand—beyond
reversal of the bring forward of some consumption noted above—is likely to be small. In
Japan, for instance, resistance to a further increase in the rate of the consumption tax largely
reflects a perception that the increase in the rate from 3 to 5 percent in 1997 contributed to
her falling back into recession later. But consumption picked up only one quarter after the tax
increase. Looking at the household level data, moreover, Cashin and Unayama (2011) find
only a very modest impact on spending levels beyond the shifting noted above. Other factors,
notably the onset of the Asian financial crisis, seem to have played a much bigger role.
And measures can of course be taken to limit aggregate demand effects. Indeed,
accompanying VAT reform with targeted protection of the poorest consumers, of the type
discussed around Figure 4, will automatically limit the impact on those likely to have the
highest marginal propensity to consume.
Political economy
Despite the strong counterarguments sketched above, the popular perception of the VAT as
inherently regressive persists, impeding both base-broadening in Europe and rate-raising or
introduction in Japan and the US, and fostering a willingness to deploy reduced rates. It
would be comforting to believe that resistance of this kind will be overcome by good analysis
communicated effectively. But these points have been well-known, to key policy makers at
least, for many years and yet no real progress has been made.
Quite why resistance is so deep remains somewhat mysterious. Perhaps it is the very
costliness of supporting the poor through reduced rates that makes doing so a means by
which politicians can signal the depth of their concern for the vulnerable. In any event,
something more than enlightenment seems needed if VAT policies are to be improved.
Part of the difficulty may be that of credibly presenting reform as a package: in the U.K.
example above, for instance, consumers may doubt whether support through the tax-benefit

31
system to offset the impact of eliminating zero-rating really would be forthcoming or
sustained. One recurrent suggestion for addressing such doubts is to earmark the proceeds of
a reformed VAT to some valued purpose. Burman (2009), for instance, proposes earmarking
the proceeds of a VAT in the US to health care costs; and in Japan it has been suggested to
earmark the proceeds from an increased rate to social security spending. Earmarking is,
however, unattractive in standard public financial management terms: either it genuinely
constrains spending on the favored item, in which case it impedes efficient resource
allocation, or it does not, in which case it risks being “An exercise in ….misleading taxpayers
rather than expanding democracy” (IFS, 1993) These disadvantages may in principle be
outweighed if earmarking does indeed secure approval for some tax measure that would
otherwise be blocked by voters distrustful of government.46 Empirically, however, little is
known about the causes or consequences of earmarking. Simple correlations for the U.S.
states—the only case, it seems, in which good data on the extent of earmarking are
available—raise more questions than they answer: Panel A of Figure 4, for instance, shows
that revenue is lower in states that earmark more (so that earmarking does not seem to be
used to squeeze out an increase in already high revenues). And panel B shows—contrary to
the idea that “The prevalence of earmarking indicates a lack of confidence in the
governmental system and the budgetary process”47—that earmarking is actually more
extensive where trust in the state government is higher.

0

-2 0

0

20

20

40

40

60

60

80

80

Figure 4: Correlates of Earmarking in the U.S. States
A. With state revenue
B. With ‘trust’

8

10

12

14

.1

.2

.3

trpi97
95% CI
ear97

.4

.5

.6

trust
Fitted values

95% CI
ear97

Fitted values

Notes: Earmarking data, for 1997, from Pérez (2008); state revenues (in percent of personal income), for 1997,
from Tax Policy Center http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/; trust indicator from Uslaner (undated).
46

Brett and Keen (2000).

47

Goode (1984).

32

These are clearly issues on which understanding remains very limited. There are certainly
examples of tax systems that have become harmfully fragmented through excessive
earmarking, as in Korea for instance. At a minimum, labeling may be important, as with the
Domenici-Rivlin Commission naming their proposed VAT a ‘Debt Reduction Sales Tax.’ If,
however, earmarking is ultimately the only way in which fundamental resistance to
inherently sensible tax measures can be overcome, it may be a pragmatic price worth paying.
The most powerful force overcoming resistance to deep VAT reform, however, is likely to be
dire fiscal need. In this setting, the (informal) EU agreement on a maximum VAT rate—
which may have seemed misplaced some years back, when the more evident concern was the
risk of downward tax competition—has come to seem a useful commitment device for
ensuring that, beyond some point, increased revenue needs will be met not by raising the
standard rate but by base-broadening and improving implementation.
In the particular context of the United States, there is, it should be noted, a particular
technical and political challenge that would need to be faced in introducing a federal VAT:
that of determining its interaction with existing state- and local-level sales taxes.48 It might
seem natural to convert those taxes into VATs too, but the VAT is not well-suited to
implementation at lower levels in federal systems. This is because the zero-rating of exports
(and bringing into tax of imports) commonly relies on border controls not desired within
federations.49 It is no coincidence that the other prominent late-comers to the VAT—
Australia and India—are both federal states. Technical solutions can be found, for instance in
the form of a ‘VIVAT,’ under which all sales between registered businesses are taxed at a
common, federation-wide rate, while lower levels add on an additional charge for sales to
final consumers.50 The massive variation in the bases and structures of current state and local
sales taxes in the U.S., however, make this much more easily said than done.
But the U.S. also has an advantage to exploit. This is the possibility of learning from both the
experiences of earlier VAT-adopters and from intellectual advances made in understanding
of the VAT and its potential. Perhaps the most prominent example of the latter being that the

48

Another striking feature of the political debate on VAT adoption in the US is the concern that it would prove
a ‘money machine.’ This is explored in Keen and Lockwood (2006) who find some evidence that the VAT has
indeed looked like an innovation leading to government growth, rather than a consequence of an increase in
desired government size. Fiscal rules, however, seem a better way to impose aggregate constraints than
foregoing the use of efficient tax instruments.
49

These difficulties have come to the fore in the EU since the removal of internal fiscal frontiers, a prominent
example being the ‘carousel fraud’ mentioned above; which, a thought developed furthest in Aujean (2011) the
VIVAT described below could also go a long way to resolve.

50

Keen (2001) proposes such a scheme operating across all states, McLure (2010) one operating across
localities within states.

33
increasingly problematic exemption of financial services51 now entrenched in the EU seems
unlikely needed (or acceptable) in the U.S. Perhaps the most important lesson to learn,
however, is again political: fundamental design features of a VAT can be very hard to
change, so that, for instance, reduced rates introduced on equity grounds may be difficult to
replace by other and more efficient ways of achieving essentially the same distributional
objective.
IV. CONCLUSION
The deep fiscal challenges that many advanced economies face will require adjusting a wide
range of tax and spending instruments, and the appropriate mix will vary widely across them.
This paper has focused on just two broad issues within this much wider set. But they are ones
that are already to the fore in almost all of these economies, and likely to be of continuing
importance.
The first is a very immediate focus of concern in many Eurozone countries: the possibility of
adjusting to an over-valued real exchange rate not by a nominal depreciation or painful and
sluggish price adjustment but, at least in part, by a fiscal devaluation. The empirical evidence
presented here, though by no means entirely robust and subject to lingering endogeneity
concerns, suggests that revenue-neutral shifts from the employers’ social contribution
towards the VAT in Eurozone countries could indeed improve the trade balance, with quite
sizable short-run effects. As expected, the effects disappear in the long run, so that the case
for such shifts rest largely on their potential to accelerate adjustment to deeper underlying
problems. What is important, however, is that the data do seem to show evidence of the
effects that theory predicts.
The second issue addressed here is the scope for more effective deployment of the VAT as an
instrument for fiscal consolidation, not least where—as in many EU members—the standard
rate is now so high that further increases are problematic. A simple diagnostic tool has been
set out that could help identify where the scope for improvement is most likely to lie—but,
surprisingly and depressingly, the information needed to apply this, while very basic, is
generally unavailable. Clearly there is potential for substantially improving understanding of
where the weaknesses of VAT design and implementation lie. Reviewing such evidence as is
available, however, the VAT in many countries—and not just those which currently have low
rates, or no VAT at all—still appears to have considerable untapped potential. Indeed this
(and not least the particularly strong case in advanced economies for a single rate VAT on a
broad base) is widely recognized, including by many policy-makers. The difficulty is
51

Exemption results in over-taxation of business use of financial services (from unrecovered VAT on purchases
by financial institutions) and under-taxation of use by final consumers (because of the exclusion of the value
added by financial institutions). It is now understood how, at least in principle, to bring financial services more
fully into the VAT: Crawford et al (2010) outline the issues and possible solutions, and IMF (2009) proposes a
Financial Activities Tax (on the sum of wages and profits of financial institutions) that could go some way to
mitigate the problems created by exemption.

34
overcoming the political resistance to such reforms that nonetheless persists. For that,
something more than technically compelling arguments seem to be needed,

35
Appendix A: Derivation of (2.5)-(2.8)
1 gives

Perturbing (2.3), normalizing

′

′

′

Recalling (2.3) and noting that (since
function)

′

1

′

′

.

A. 1

by linear homogeneity of the expenditure
′

, this implies that
′

′

.

A. 2

Perturbing net exports in (2.4):
.

′

A. 3

Substituting from
from (A.2) into (A.3), the result follows on using (2.3), the implication
of linear homogeneity of the revenue function that ′
(because ′
and
noting that
′

′

′

′

′

.

That a reform combining in a cut in
with an increased uniform VAT rate is welfareimproving follows from (B.2), since then
/ 1
0.

B. 4

36
Appendix B Separate regressions for Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries
Table B1. Taxation and net exports /1
Cyclically Adjusted data
Non-Euro
-0.21** (0.106)

Euro
-0.03 (0.05)

ΔSCR

-2.52 (1.62)

L.SCR

L. Net exports

Tax rate data
Non-Euro

Euro

-0.30* (0.16)

-0.23 (0.24)

-2.81* (1.64)

-0.08 (0.14)

-0.11 (0.67)

-0.07 (0.11)

-0.06 (0.07)

0.00 (0.05)

-0.09 (0.07)

ΔVAT

0.10 (0.96)

-0.78 (0.88)

-0.09 (0.09)

0.28 (0.17)

L.VAT

0.02 (0.21)

-0.45*** (0.09)

0.03 (0.12)

-0.14 (0.12)

ΔDEP

-0.38 (0.69)

0.23 (0.45)

-51.63 (66.56)

5.78 (47.55)

L.DEP

-0.12 (0.09)

--.07 (0.07)

28.20 (42.08)

-11.1 (15.53)

ΔA

0.49 (0.77)

-0.49 (0.36)

1.21 (1.08)

-0.25 (0.81)

L.A

0.21 (0.16)

0.11*** (0.03)

-0.22 (0.40)

0.31 (0.29)

ΔGROWTH

-0.13 (0.13)

-0.06 (0.12)

L. GROWTH

-0.11 (0.14)

-0.03 (0.06)

ΔBAL

0.00 (0.35)

0.11 (0.28)

0.31 (0.47)

-0.14 (0.20)

L.BAL

-0.08 (0.10)

-0.25*** (0.10)

0.28 (0.21)

-0.07 (0.19)

No. of obs.
AB AR(1)
AB AR(2)
Sargan
Hansen
Short-run
Long-run

265
0.03
0.33
0.44
0.91
2.62 (1.83)
1.39 (1.21)

94
0.01
0.97
0.16
1.00
2.03 (2.34)
-11.26 (16.67)

0.29

0.00

F-test

232
0.04
0.54
0.13
0.25
-0.01

94
0.04
0.31
0.65
0.99
1.04

1/ Single equation error correction model, controlled for country fixed effects. Estimation is by one step robust system GMM, including
fixed effects. Treating lagged and tax-rate variables as predetermined and with tax rates as external instruments. Laglimits (2,3) and
instruments collapsed. *, **, *** reflecting statistical significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent. F test reports the p-value for F statistic on the null
hypothesis that the coefficients on both ΔSCR and ΔVAT are zero.

37

Appendix C. Data
The data on net exports are from the world development indicators of the World Bank. Data
on tax revenues in percent of GDP are from the OECD Revenue Statistics. The key variables
of interest are the series for ‘employer social security contributions’ (number 2200 in the
OECD classification) and ‘Value-added taxes’ (5111 in the OECD classification). The data
on total tax revenue, GDP growth, and the government balance are also from the OECD, as
are the population data used to compute old-age dependency ratio. Data on the standard VAT
rate and the employer social contributions are from various sources.
The cyclically adjusted revenue data, however, are not available on as disaggregated a basis
as the raw revenue data. For instance, there is only one cyclically adjusted series for social
contributions and one for indirect taxes. Under the assumption that the same adjustment
applies to sub-components of these series, we create cyclically adjusted series for the SCR
and VAT by dividing the cyclically adjusted by the non-adjusted series for total social
contributions and total indirect taxes (respectively, OECD classification 2000 and 5000) and
using the result to scale the raw revenue data for the SCR and VAT (respectively, OECD
classification 2200 and 5111). Although the adjusted and non-adjusted series try to capture the
same set of taxes, the cyclically adjusted series contains a slightly broader set than the non-cyclically
adjusted series, implying that the ratio between them is a bit larger than 1. This explains why we

observe somewhat higher numbers for the tax-to-GDP ratios of the cyclically adjusted series
in Table B1, as compared to the non-adjusted series. The variation in the cyclically adjusted
series, however, should properly reflect the variation in the underlying data.
Table B1 shows some descriptive statistics. Net exports are zero on average across countryyear observations, ranging from -34 percent of GDP to 33 percent of GDP positive. The
government balance is – 2 percent of GDP on average, with a standard deviation of 4.2
percent. Substantially fewer observations are available, however, for the government balance
than for total tax and net exports. The tax-to-GDP ratio lies between 9 and 52 percent, with
an average of 32. Excluding revenue from VAT and SCR, the average declines to slightly
less than 23 percent of GDP. The statutory SCR rate varies between 0.9 percent and 51
percent, with an average of 22.38. VAT rates vary from 3 to 30 percent, while the average is
17.2 percent.
The PIT on average raises most revenue, at more than 9 percent of GDP. The VAT raises
almost 5 percent of GDP, while SCR on average raises 4.6 percent of GDP. The
corresponding averages for the cyclically adjusted series are somewhat higher for reasons
explained above.

38

Table C1 Summary statistics of data
Variable

No. obs Mean

Std. Dev.

Minimum

Maximum

-.00
35.99
-1.99
32.44
23.89
37.84
35.83

6.635
22.84
4.166
8.898
5.715
8.591
32.43

-34.681
5.206
-15.593
9.278
7.964
0
10.957

33.240
179.77
19.087
52.246
40.767
70.541
50.700

Revenue in percent of GDP
1177
9.370
1080
2.518
1192
2.629
1192
4.600
1181
4.856

4.848
1.672
1.977
3.347
3.239

0
-.463
0
0
0

26.545
12.954
11.445
14.005
11.282

-.107
11.24
2.607
3.380
6.195
6.636

2.963
5.127
1.340
2.125
3.526
3.167

-15.298
2.384
-.497
0
.0003
0

7.4704
29.181
6.5574
11.878
14.219
13.445

22.38
17.20
32.39
40.97

12.270
5.148
11.246
13.560

.87
3
7
7

51
30
51.37
71.311

3.13
18.68

3.083
5.050

-11.615
5.596

14.787
35.592

In percent of GDP
Net exports
1241
Gross Exports
1241
Gov balance
754
Total tax
1248
Tax ex vat/scr
1126
VAT base
865
SCR base
521

PIT
CIT
ESC
SCR
VAT

Cyclically adjusted series
Government balance
779
PIT
732
CIT
668
ESC
715
SCR
715
VAT
734
Statutory tax rates
SCR rate
583
VAT rate
914
Average tax
330
Marginal tax
330
Other
GDP growth
Dependency ratio

1197
1340

39
Appendix D: Decomposing C-efficiency
Denote by and
respectively the values of the true consumption of commodity i and the
part that is brought into tax, the difference between the two being imperfect implementation;
and by and
the statutory and effective rates of tax on final consumption of i, the latter
reflecting not only of tax levied directly on i but also of indirect effects through exemptions
on intermediate inputs (mediated by the input-outputs structure, as described for instance in
Ebrill et al (2001). Total revenue, for instance, is thus ∑
. Equations (3.2) and (3.3) then
follow on writing
∑
∑

∑
∑

∑
∑

∑

.1

∑

which bears the interpretation in the text with:
∑

.2

∑
∑

.3

∑
1
where

∑

∑

∑
∑

.4

.

The impact of exemptions is thus measured by the loss of revenue from taxing at effective
rather than statutory rates—which may be negative, given the cascading effect of exempting
intermediate transactions (an instance of poor design that leads to higher C-efficiency). The
compliance gap is measured simply as the revenue loss (at nominal tax rates) from failing to
bring some final consumption into tax. And the rate differentiation effect reflects the extent
to which the weighted average VAT rate is lower than the standard rate—which could also in
∑
principle be negative, though (since
, ) is sure to be
positive if reduced rates are prevalent (so that non-standard rates are average lower than
standard) and positively correlated with budget shares.

40

References
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti, 1997, “ The Welfare State and Competitiveness”
American Economic Review, Vol. 87, pp. 921-39.
Arnold, Jens, 2008, “Do Tax Structures Affect Aggregate Economic Growth? Empirical
Evidence from A Panel of OECD Countries,” OECD Working Paper No. 643.
Auerbach, Alan J. (2006), “The Choice between Income and Consumption Taxes: A Primer,”
mimeo (Berkeley: University of California).
Aujean, Michel, 20110, “Towards a Modern EU VAT system: Associating VIVAT and
Electronic Invoicing,” EC Tax Review, 2011/5, pp. 211-216.
Banks, James and Peter Diamond, 2010, pp. 275–362 in James Mirrlees and others (eds),
Dimensions of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review, Oxford: Oxford University Press
for Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2010.
Bassanini Andrea, and Romain Duval, 2006, “Employment Patterns in OECD Countries:
Reassessing the Role of Policies and Institutions,” OECD Social, Employment and
Migration Working Paper No. 35.
Bipartisan Policy Center, 2010, Restoring America’s Future, Report of the Debt Reduction
Task Force, Co-Chairs Pete Domenici and Alice Rivlin (Washington, DC).
Birch, David L., 1987, Job Creation in America: How our Smallest Companies put the Most
People to Work (New York: The Free Press).
Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand and Pierre Pestieau, 1994¸ “Toward a Theory of the
Direct-Indirect Tax Mix,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 55, pp.71–88.
Brett, Craig and Michael Keen, 2000, “Political Uncertainty and the Earmarking of
Environmental Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 75, pp. 315–40.
Burman, Leonard E., 2009, “Blueprint for Tax Reform and Health Reform,” Virginia Tax
Review, Vol. 28, pp. 287–323.
Carare, Alina and Stephan Danninger, 2008, Inflation smoothing and the modest effect of
VAT in Germany, IMF Working Paper no. 08/175.
Calmfors, Lars, 1998, Macroeconomic Policy, Wage Setting, and Employment―What
Difference does the EMU Make? Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 14,
pp. 125–51.

41
Chinn, Menzie. D. and Eswar S. Prasad, 2003, Medium-Term Determinants of Current
Accounts in Industrial and Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration, Journal
of International Economics 59, 47–76.
Cnossen, Sijbren, 1987, “VAT and RST: A Comparison,” Canadian Tax Journal, Vol. 35,
No. 3, pp. 559–615.
Cnossen, Sijbren, 2003, “Is the VAT’s Sixth Directive Becoming an Anachronism?”
European Taxation, pp. 434–42.
Copenhagen Economics, 2007, “Study on reduced VAT applied to goods and services in the
Member States of the European Union,” prepared for DG Taxud, European
Commission.
Cottarelli, Carlo and Michael Keen, 2012, “Fiscal Policy and Growth: Overcoming the
Constraints,” pp. 87-133 Oliviano Canuto and Danny Leipziger (eds), Ascent after
Decline: Regrowing Global Economies after the Great Recession (World Bank:
Washington DC), 2011
Crawford, Ian, Michael Keen and Stephen Smith, 2010, “VAT and Excises,” pp. 275–362 in
James Mirrlees and others (eds), Dimensions of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review,
Oxford: Oxford University Press for Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Crossley, Thomas, Hamish Low and Matthew Wakefield, 2009, The Economics of a
Temporary VAT Cut, Fiscal Studies 30(1), pp. 3-16.
Dahlberg Matz and Anders Forslund, 2005. “Direct Displacement Effects of Labor Market
Programs,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, pp. 475–94.
Daveri Francesco, and Guido Tabellini, 2000, “Unemployment, Growth and Taxation in
Industrial Countries,” Economic Policy 15(30), pp. 47–104.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh, 1996, “Small Business and Job
Creation: Dissecting the Myth and Reassessing the Facts,” Small Business
Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 297–315.
de Paula, Áureo and José A. Scheinkman, 2006, “The Informal Sector” (mimeo, Princeton
University).
Desai, Mihir and James R. Hines, 2002, “Value-added Taxes and International Trade: The
Evidence,” mimeo, University of Michigan.
Diamond, Peter and James A. Mirrlees, 1971, “Optimal Taxation and Public Production I:
Production Efficiency, II: Tax Rules,” American Economic Review, Vol. 61, pp. 8–
27, 261–78.

42
Disney, Richard, 2004, “Are Contributions to Public Pension Programs a Tax on
Employment?” Economic Policy, Vol. 19, pp. 267–311.
Ebrill, Liam, Jean-Paul Bodin, Michael Keen and Victoria Summers, 2001, The Modern VAT
(International Monetary Fund: Washington, D.C.).
European Central Bank, 2011, Monthly Bulletin, Box 12, p.101, December 2011.
European Commission, 2009, “The 2009 Ageing Report: Economic and Budgetary
Projections for the EU-27 Member States (2008–60),” European Economy 2, April
2009.
European Commission, 2011, “Tax Reforms in EU Member States,” Taxation Papers,
Working Paper No. 28.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Gita, Gopinath and Oleg Itskhoki, 2011, “Fiscal Devaluations,” Harvard
and Princeton, mimeo.
Feldstein, Martin, and Paul Krugman, 1990, “International Trade Effects of Value-added
taxation,” pp. 263–82 in: A. Razin and J. Slemrod (eds.), Taxation in the Global
Economy, Chicago University Press.
Franco, Francesco, 2011, “Adjustment to External Imbalances within the EMU, the Case of
Portugal,” mimeo, University of Lisbon.
Goode, Richard, 1984. In: Government Finance in Developing Countries, Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC.

Gruber, Joseph and Steven Kamin, 2007, “Explaining the Global Pattern of Current Account
Imbalances,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 26, 500–22.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda, 2011, “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs.
Large vs. Young,” NBER Working Paper No. 16300.
Ilzetzki, Ethan O., Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2008, “Exchange Rate
Arrangements into the 21st Century: Will the Anchor Currency Hold?” mimeo,
University of Maryland.
International Monetary Fund, 2010a, “From Stimulus to Consolidation: Revenue and
Expenditure policies in Advanced and Emerging Economies,” April 2010.
______, 2010b, “Macro-fiscal Implications of Health Care Reform in Advanced and
Emerging Economies,” December 2010.
______, 2011, World Economic Outlook, September.

43

Keen, Michael, 2001, “States’ Rights and the Value-added Tax: How a VIVAT would Work
in the US,” Proceedings of the National Tax Association, pp. 195–200.
______, and Ben Lockwood, 2006, “Is the VAT a Money Machine?” (with Ben Lockwood),
National Tax Journal, Vol. 59. pp. 905–28.
______, and Stephen Smith, 2006, “The Future of Value-added Tax in the European Union”
(with Stephen Smith), Economic Policy, Vol. 23, 373–411, 419–20.
______, and Stephen Smith, 2006. “VAT Fraud and Evasion: What Do We Know and What
Can Be Done?” National Tax Journal, Vol. 59, pp. 861–87.
______, and Murtaza Syed, 2006, “Domestic Taxes and International Trade: Some
Evidence,” IMF Working Paper 06/47 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
______, Yitae Kim and Ricardo Varsano, 2008, “The Flat Tax(es): Principles and
Experience” International Tax and Public Finance, Vol. 15, pp. 712–51.
______, and Ben Lockwood, 2010, “The Value-added Tax: Its Causes and Consequences,”
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 92, pp. 138–51.
______, Mahmoud Pradhan, Kenneth Kang and Ruud de Mooij, 2011, “Raising the
Consumption Tax in Japan: Why, When and How?” Staff Discussion Note 11/13,
Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Kneller, Richard, Michael F. Bleaney and Norman Gemmell, 1999, “Fiscal Policy and
Growth: Evidence from OECD Countries,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 74,
pp. 171–90.
Laker, John F., 1981, “Fiscal Proxies for Devaluation: A General Review,” Staff Papers,
International Monetary Fund, Vol. 28, pp. 118–43.
Lane, Philip and Roberto Perotti, 1998, "The Trade Balance and Fiscal Policy in the OECD",
European Economic Review 42, 887-895
Lane, Philip and Roberto Perotti, 2003, "The Importance of Composition of Fiscal Policy:
Evidence from Different Exchange Rate Regimes" , Journal of Public Economics 87,
pp. 2253—2279.
Lee, Jaewoo, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Jonathan D. Ostry, Alessandro Prati and Lucca
Ricci, 2008, “Exchange Rate Assessments: CGER Methodologies,” IMF Occasional
Paper No. 261, Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Mathis, Alexandre, 2004, “VAT Indicators,” Taxation Papers, Working Paper No. 2.

44
Matthews, Kent, 2003, “VAT evasion and VAT avoidance: Is there a European Laffer curve
for VAT?” International Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 17, pp.105-114.
McLure, Charles, 2010, “How to Coordinate State and Local Sales Taxes with a Federal
Value Added Tax,” Tax Law Review Vol.60.
Metcalf, Gilbert, 1994, “Lifecycle vs. Annual Perspectives on the Incidence of a Value-added
Tax,” Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 8, pp. 45–64.
Mirrlees, James and others, 2011, Tax by Design (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
Nickell, Stephen and Richard Layard, 1999, “Labor Market Institutions and Economic
Performance”, in Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, (eds.) Handbook of Labor
Economics. Vol. 3C, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Neumark, David, Brandon Wall and Jurfu Zhang, 2009, “Do Small Businesses Create More
Jobs? New Evidence for the United States from the National Establishment Time
Series,” Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).
Newbery, David M., 1986, “On the Desirability of Input Taxes,” Economics Letters, Vol. 20,
pp. 267–70.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 2010, Consumption Tax Trends
(Paris: OECD)
______, 2011, Taxation and Employment, OECD Tax Policy Studies No. 21.
Pérez, Arturo, 2008, Earmarking State Taxes (National Conference of State Legislatures
(Washington DC).
Reckon LLP, 2009, Study to Quantify and Analyze the VAT Gap in the EU-25 Member States
(Reckon LLP, London).
Ring, Raymond J. Jr., 1989, “Proportion of Consumers’ and Producers’ Goods in the General
Sales Tax,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 42, pp. 167–79.
Uslaner, Eric M., undated, “The Civil State: Trust, Polarization, and the Quality of State
Government” mimeo, University of Maryland.

