NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT WILL MY ACCOUNT REALLY BE WORTH? AN EXPERIMENT ON EXPONENTIAL
GROWTH BIAS AND RETIREMENT SAVING
Gopi Shah Goda
Colleen Flaherty Manchester
Aaron Sojourner
Working Paper 17927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17927

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

We are grateful to Jackie Singer and Shelly Wymer for their assistance with administering this project.
The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration
(SSA) funded as part of the Financial Literacy Center. The authors also acknowledge additional support
provided by the TIAA-CREF Institute and the University of Minnesota Carlson School of Management.
The authors thank John Beshears, Jeff Brown, Wandi Bruine de Bruin, Katherine Carman, James Choi,
Courtney Coile, Adeline Delavande, Maria Fitzpatrick, Damon Jones, Amit Kramer, Ron Laschever,
Annamaria Lusardi, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, Dayanand Manoli, Olivia Mitchell, Enrico Moretti, Victor
Stango, Robert Willis, Joanne Yoong and seminar participants at the University of Illinois and at the
University of Chicago for comments. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those
of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government,
the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated.
c2012 Goda, Manchester and Sojourner. All rights reserved.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Gopi Shah Goda, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, and Aaron Sojourner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Will My Account Really Be Worth? An Experiment on Exponential Growth Bias and
Retirement Saving
Gopi Shah Goda, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, and Aaron Sojourner
NBER Working Paper No. 17927
March 2012
JEL No. H3,J14
ABSTRACT
Recent findings on limited financial literacy and exponential growth bias suggest saving decisions
may not be optimal because such decisions require an accurate understanding of how current contributions
can translate into income in retirement. This study uses a large-scale field experiment to measure how
a low-cost, direct-mail intervention designed to inform subjects about this relationship affects their
saving behavior. Using administrative data prior to and following the intervention, we measure its
effect on participation and the level of contributions in retirement saving accounts. Those sent income
projections along with enrollment information were more likely to change contribution levels and
increase annual contributions relative to the control group. Among those who made a change in contribution,
the increase in annual contributions was approximately $1,150. Results from a follow-up survey corroborate
these findings and show heterogeneous effects of the intervention by rational and behavioral factors
known to affect saving. Finally, we find evidence of behavioral influences on decision-making in that
the assumptions used to generate the projections influence the saving response.

Gopi Shah Goda
Stanford University
SIEPR
366 Galvez St.
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
gopi@stanford.edu
Colleen Flaherty Manchester
Human Resources and Industrial Relations
University of Minnesota
Room 3-300R
321 - 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
cmanch@umn.edu

Aaron Sojourner
University of Minnesota
Carlson School of Management
321 19th Ave S, 3-300
Minneapolis, MN 55455
asojourn@umn.edu

1

Introduction

With the shift toward deﬁned contribution (DC) retirement plans, Americans’ retirement
security increasingly requires individuals to make responsible, informed wealth accumulation
decisions over their working years (Hacker 2006; Even and Macpherson 2007; Skinner 2007).
Among Americans with pensions, the share with only a traditional deﬁned beneﬁt pension
fell from 60 to 10 percent between 1980 and 2003. Over the same period, the share with
only a DC plan rose from 17 to 62 percent (Buessing and Soto 2006). Because individuals
only have one shot at saving for retirement, the stakes are high and the consequences of
suboptimal choices for ﬁnancial well-being are potentially large.
Economists debate the extent to which Americans save too little, too much, or just the
right amount for retirement (Ameriks et al. 2007; Lusardi and Mitchell 2011; De Nardi et
al. 2010). In standard models of retirement saving, individuals with low levels of saving
are interpreted as responding optimally given a strong taste for present rather than future
consumption, anticipation of steep earnings growth, or binding liquidity constraints.
However, a growing body of work raises concerns about how well-equipped individuals
are to make optimal saving decisions. They may be cognitively constrained, as evidenced by
low rates of ﬁnancial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007). Many are aﬀected by behavioral
factors outside standard models, such as procrastination or inertia (e.g., Thaler and Benartzi
2004, Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Metrick 2004), default rules (e.g., Madrian and Shea
2001; Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian 2006; Mitchell, Mottola, Utkus and Yamaguchi
2009; Goda and Manchester 2010), peers (e.g., Duﬂo and Saez 2003), and how information
is conveyed or framed (Bernheim, Fradkin and Popov 2011; Choi, Haisley, Kurkoski and
Massey 2012).
A key requirement for optimal saving decisions is an accurate understanding of both
University of Chicago for comments. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the
authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or any
c
other institution with which the authors are aﬃliated. ⃝2012
Goda, Manchester and Sojourner. All rights
reserved.

1

the accumulation of retirement saving contributions to assets at retirement, and the decumulation of assets to income in retirement. Many individuals systematically underestimate
the returns to saving that accrue from compound growth (Eisenstein and Hoch 2007; Stango
and Zinman 2009). By distorting one’s view of intertemporal budget constraints, exponential
growth bias could lead to sub-optimal saving decisions.
Past research on exponential growth bias has either used observational data on credit card
use to show evidence consistent with its eﬀect (Stango and Zinman 2009), or experiments in
labs showing that learning about exponential growth aﬀects the accuracy of subjects’ survey
responses to hypothetical ﬁnancial scenarios (Eisenstein and Hoch 2007). There is little
evidence on the extent to which exponential growth bias aﬀects retirement saving relative
to the standard rational and behavioral factors described above. Nor is there much evidence
on whether learning about exponential growth, or ﬁnancial concepts more generally, aﬀects
actual saving decisions.
This study makes several contributions to improving understanding of how exponential
growth bias aﬀects retirement saving decisions. First, we show theoretically how exponential
growth bias aﬀects both the accumulation and the decumulation phase of retirement saving.
While past work on exponential growth bias has focused on the accumulation phase, we
construct a simple model of optimal saving behavior where individuals have biases in their
perceptions of both phases of retirement saving. We establish new results by showing that
exponential growth bias aﬀects the accumulation and decumulation of retirement wealth in
the same direction, and that the eﬀect of reducing bias on optimal saving behavior depends
on the initial direction of the bias and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS).
Second, we conduct a large-scale ﬁeld experiment designed to inform individuals about
exponential growth and measure changes in their saving choices, which prior work has not
done. Our mail and online intervention provided projections of how contributions today
would map into future account balances at retirement and income in retirement. Using
administrative data prior to and following the intervention, we measure the eﬀect of our in-

2

terventions on contribution levels for discretionary tax-deferred retirement savings accounts
by employees at the University of Minnesota.1 We ﬁnd that providing income projections
along with general plan information and materials assisting people through the steps of
changing contribution rates resulted in a 29 percent higher probability of a change in contributions relative to a control group over a six-month period. In addition, individuals sent this
treatment increased their annual contributions by $85 more than the control group during
the study period. This treatment eﬀect is economically meaningful in that this increase is
more than double that experienced by the control group. Because only a small portion of the
sample changed contribution levels, the magnitude of the increase among those who made
a change was much larger, approximately $1,150 dollars per year. Additional features of
the experiment yield insights into which components of the treatment generate the observed
eﬀects. In particular, our ﬁndings suggest that both the provision of retirement planning
materials and projections contribute positively to the treatment eﬀect, although there is
not strong evidence that either the planning materials or the projections alone induced a
signiﬁcant increase in contributions.
Third, by supplementing administrative records on saving with a follow-up survey administered after the intervention, we have rich data on individual characteristics and behaviors.
We utilize responses from the survey to provide corroborative evidence regarding the effectiveness of the intervention by exploring the impact of our interventions on additional
aspects of the saving decision-making process. Among survey respondents, those sent full
income disclosures were more likely to report having recently engaged in and being more informed about retirement planning, having higher certainty about the amount of income they
expect to have in retirement, and greater satisfaction with their overall ﬁnancial condition
relative to the control group. While the fact that the survey respondents are a non-random
subsample of the population warrants caution when interpreting these results, these ﬁndings
1

In concurrent work, Song (2012) reports ﬁndings from an experiment that aimed to educate rural Chinese farmers about exponential growth through home visits and personal ﬁnancial counseling and which
led to increased saving. The two studies diﬀer in sample, setting, and treatment, and the ﬁndings are
complementary.

3

reinforce our earlier evidence that the intervention inﬂuenced saving decisions and that the
results are not driven by chance alone.
Fourth, in light of our theoretical model, our empirical ﬁndings contribute new evidence
on the EIS, a critical preference parameter in saving decisions. When EIS < 1, optimal
saving would go down in response to an increase in the returns to saving because the income
eﬀect is larger than the substitution eﬀect. When EIS > 1, the substitution eﬀect dominates and optimal saving would rise. Most estimates of the EIS are between zero and one,
with more recent evidence providing estimates closer to one (e.g., Engelhardt and Kumar
2009; for review, see Attanasio and Weber (2010) and references therein). If, as the literature suggests, individuals have negative exponential growth bias (Wagenaar and Sagaria
1975; Eisenstein and Hoch 2007; Stango and Zinman 2009), then our ﬁnding of a positive
eﬀect of the intervention on saving levels implies an EIS greater than 1 in our sample, i.e.
the substitution eﬀect dominates on average. This approach answers recent calls to use
experimental designs to better understand theoretical parameters (Card, DellaVinga and
Malmendier 2011; Charness and Kuhn 2011; List 2011).
Fifth, elements of our study design allow us to evaluate the interaction of this ﬁnancial
education intervention with standard economic and behavioral economic factors. In terms
of factors that inﬂuence optimal saving decisions, we ﬁnd that, among survey respondents,
individuals who display higher rates of time discounting, as well as those who report tighter
liquidity constraints, are signiﬁcantly less likely to respond to the intervention. Heterogeneity
in optimal retirement saving decisions underscores a virtue of policies like this one that
provide information rather than subsidizing or mandating particular behaviors.
We also ﬁnd evidence that behavioral economic factors aﬀect individuals’ response to the
intervention. We analyze the interaction between measures of time-inconsistent preferences
and treatment and ﬁnd that, among survey respondents, individuals who report a tendency to
procrastinate are signiﬁcantly less likely to respond to the intervention. This ﬁnding implies
that ﬁnancial literacy interventions may not be as eﬀective without addressing the behavioral

4

forces that may undermine the success of the intervention. In addition, a unique feature of
our study design is that we randomize the assumptions used to generate the projections across
employees, which allows us to test for framing eﬀects on our outcomes of interest. We ﬁnd
that a higher assumed retirement age has a signiﬁcant positive impact on the propensity
to change one’s contribution amount. We also ﬁnd that both higher assumed retirement
ages and higher assumed hypothetical contribution amounts induce larger increases in the
level of saving; however, we ﬁnd no evidence that the assumed rate of investment return
aﬀects saving behavior. The results from the follow-up survey indicate no evidence that
the assumptions used in the projections aﬀect beliefs regarding one’s expected retirement
age or expected rates of return. Thus, our evidence suggests that assumptions used in
the projections operate through framing, rather than aﬀecting underlying beliefs about the
likelihood of future events.
Lastly, our ﬁndings are relevant for public policy, employers in general, and ﬁnancialservice ﬁrms in particular. The U.S. Congress is considering the Lifetime Income Disclosure
Act (S. 267; HR. 1534), which would require DC plan administrators to annually provide
income disclosures that would project the value of a lifetime annuity that a plan participant
could purchase at retirement given her current retirement savings. The eﬀects of such a
policy have never before been tested. Investment managers and ﬁrms oﬀering DC retirement
plans want to understand the eﬀects of providing such projections, which can be provided
with minimal marginal cost rather than changing the default contribution level which could
be costly to ﬁrms that oﬀer saving matches. Our ﬁndings suggest that on average, individuals
save more when provided with information about how current saving translates into income
in retirement, suggesting the mapping is not fully understood absent the intervention. The
results also suggest that care should be taken in the choice of projection assumptions used,
as they may aﬀect outcomes. The heterogeneity in our results implies that among those who
display time-inconsistent preferences, high discount rates, or high liquidity constraints, the
intervention is unlikely to signiﬁcantly change saving behavior.

5

The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. We model how the potential for biases
in the understanding of exponential growth aﬀect saving decisions in Section 2. Section
3 describes our experimental design, including details regarding our treatment groups and
randomization procedure, and Section 4 explains our analytic approach. Section 5 presents
and discusses results on the eﬀect of the intervention on saving behavior, the saving process,
and heterogeneous eﬀects of the intervention. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2

Model of Saving Decision Under Exponential Growth
Bias

Exponential growth (EG) bias distorts understanding of both the accumulation and decumulation phases of retirement planning. We develop a simple model of how EG bias aﬀects
subjective understanding of the intertemporal budget constraint and, consequently, optimal
saving choices. The eﬀect of EG bias on the accumulation phase of retirement saving is intuitive. If the power of EG is underestimated, then potential returns to retirement saving are
under-appreciated. How EG bias aﬀects the decumulation phase is more subtle but operates
in the same direction. We show that reducing EG bias would have an ambiguous eﬀect on
optimal saving, with a sign that depends on both the initial direction of the bias and the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS).
We consider a simple two-period model in which a worker must decide how much to
consume now versus how much to save for future retirement. Our model diﬀers from a
standard intertemporal budgeting model in allowing people to misperceive the functions
by which assets accumulate leading up to retirement and by which assets at retirement
decumulate into retirement income. We parameterize EG bias by θ > 0 (Wagenaar and
Sagaria 1975; Eisenstein and Hoch 2007; Stango and Zinman 2009). The perception is
unbiased if θ = 1, negatively biased if θ < 1, and positively biased if θ > 1.
Given current wealth A1 , current income Y1 , and degenerate beliefs about the number of
6

years of accumulation before retirement (K), the subjective saving problem is to choose A2
to maximize:
U (C1 ) + β K U (C2 )
subject to:

A2 + C1 = Y1 + A1
C2 = f (A2 ; K, θ)

(1)

where f (A2 ; K, θ) represents the subjective mapping from today’s saving choice to perceived
retirement income given years until retirement K and EG bias θ.
We separately analyze the eﬀect of θ on the perception of the accumulation and decumulation phases of retirement planning and examine how changing θ would impact optimal
saving.2 EG bias distorts understanding of the accumulation phase in a straightforward way.
Given degenerate beliefs about the rate of return (Ra ) during accumulation, assume that an
individual with EG bias θ believes A2 will generate retirement balance Bθ ≡ RaKθ A2 . Those
with negative EG bias underestimate the returns to saving and have an overly-pessimistic
view of its payoﬀ during accumulation.
EG bias also impacts perception of the decumulation phase. The analysis here is novel,
more subtle, and connects to how EG bias aﬀects borrowing decisions (Stango and Zinman
2009). To illustrate the impact of EG bias on decumulation in a tractable, intuitive way,
consider how EG bias aﬀects perception of the ﬁxed retirement income stream (I) over a
given number of years (T ) that can be purchased with retirement asset balance B. Assuming
assets earn gross rate of return Rd > 1, perceived income (Iθ ) would be determined implicitly
by:

(
B = Iθ

1
1
1
+ 2θ + ... + T θ
θ
Rd Rd
Rd

)
.

This implies a perceived ﬂow price (or annuity price), pθ ≡
2

(2)
Iθ
.
B

To index the bias in

Adding more periods or uncertainty to the model add complexity but do not change the main ideas.

7

decumulation perception, we deﬁne the ratio of this EG-biased price to the unbiased price
as g(θ) ≡

pθ 3
.
p1

Negative EG bias leads to over-pessimism in understanding how large a stream of income
[ θ]
[d I ]
θ
can be supported by a given asset balance. Note that sign [g ′ (θ)] = sign dp
= sign dθ
dθ
B
and that
dpθ
d
(
=
dθ
dθ

1
1
Rdθ

(

=

lnRd
(

1
Rdθ

1
Rd2θ

+
1
Rdθ

+

+

1
Rd2θ

+ ... +

2
Rd2θ

1
RdT θ

+ ... +

+ ... +

1
RdT θ

)

T
RdT θ
)2

)

> 0.

Under negative EG bias (θ < 1), the amount of income that is supported by a given balance
at retirement is underestimated (g(θ) < 1 ⇒ Iθ < I1 ).
Given this structure, the perceived contribution of saving to retirement income can be
expressed as f (A2 ; K, θ) = g(θ)RaKθ A2 , which can be substituted into the subjective budget
constraint in equation (1). Increases in θ raise the perceived retirement income that can be
generated from a given level of saving.
How should optimal saving respond to changes in EG bias (θ)? The ﬁrst-order condition
for optimal saving is
A∗2 : U ′ (C1∗ ) = g(θ)pU ′ (C2∗ )[βRaθ ]k .

(3)

An increase in the value of θ raises the perceived marginal beneﬁt of saving in both accumulation and decumulation. This is qualitatively similar to an increase in expected rate of
return (Ra ) in a standard saving model, although the factors enter the decision diﬀerently
in the current model. Because these equations hold for each (Ra , Rd , K, T ), they are true
3

Dependence on Rd and T is suppressed to keep notation simple.

8

given uncertainty over these variables.
An increase in the subjective marginal beneﬁt of saving has two countervailing eﬀects:
an income and a substitution eﬀect. The substitution eﬀect encourages people to reduce
working period consumption and to save more because the marginal beneﬁt of each dollar
saved is higher. On the other hand, the increase in the subjective value of saving raises
the subjective value of a person’s endowment and encourages her to consume more in both
periods, thereby reducing saving through the income eﬀect. Therefore, the eﬀect on optimal
saving is ambiguous and depends on which eﬀect dominates.
To understand how the optimal saving decision responds to changes in bias, we develop
U ′ (C ∗ )

U ′ (C ∗ )

2
2
comparative statics. Let ϵ(θ) ≡ − U ′′ (C ∗ )g(θ)pR
kθ A∗ = − C ∗ U ′′ (C ∗ ) . In a model where there is
2

2

2

2

no EG bias (θ = 1), this expression is analogous to the standard elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (EIS). As in the standard model, the EIS governs whether the increase in θ
increases or decreases optimal saving.
Proposition 1. Given U ′′ < 0, β > 0, and R > 1,
[

]
∂A∗2
sign
= sign [ϵ(θ) − 1]
∂θ

(4)


Proof in Appendix A.
The consensus in the literature is that θ < 1 (Wagenaar and Sagaria 1975; Eisenstein and
Hoch 2007; Stango and Zinman 2009), which implies individuals have an overly-pessimistic
view of the returns to saving, both in accumulation and decumulation. Assuming that our
intervention reduces bias (i.e., increases θ towards 1), if we observe an increase (decrease)
in saving on average, this suggests that EIS > 1 (EIS < 1).4 While unlikely, it is possible
that our intervention increased bias by reducing θ; an observed higher (lower) rate of saving
would then imply that EIS < 1 (EIS > 1). Another possibility is that the intervention
4

While the population is likely characterized by a distribution of values for ϵ(θ), the implications for ϵ(θ)
and thus the EIS would be for the population mean.

9

inadvertently shifts beliefs regarding one’s retirement age or expected retirement return; we
examine this possibility in Section 5.4.

3

Experimental Design

3.1

Setting and Sample Characteristics

The setting of our study is the University of Minnesota. Nearly all employees at the University participate in Social Security and a retirement plan that mandates relatively high levels
of retirement saving.5 In addition to these mandatory plans, most employees are also eligible
to participate in Voluntary Retirement Plans (VRPs), which allow them to make additional
tax-deferred contributions of up to $33,000 per year if they desire. Participants can choose
to make a ﬂat dollar amount election each pay period or contribute a percentage of their
salary.6
For our experiment, we consider employees eligible to participate in the VRPs who were
under age 65 at the time of our intervention. Our sample consists of 16,881 employees
dispersed among 1,385 departments across 5 diﬀerent campuses and extension oﬃces who
were employed by the University in both October 2010 (Period 1, prior to intervention)
and May 2011 (Period 2, following the intervention). We obtain administrative data from
the Oﬃce of Human Resources with the assistance of an independent third party in order
to protect employee anonymity. We observe each employee’s VRP contribution decision in
5

Civil servants and non-faculty bargaining unit employees participate in the Minnesota State Retirement
System (MSRS), while faculty, academic professionals, and administrators participate in the Faculty Retirement Plan (FRP). MSRS participants receive a deﬁned beneﬁt pension equal to 1.7 percent of the average of
their ﬁve-highest salaries for each year of service starting at age 65 and reduced beneﬁts for early retirement.
Employees hired before July 1, 1989 are governed by a slightly diﬀerent set of rules. The employee and
employer each contribute 5 percent of the employee’s gross salary to the retirement plan. FRP is a deﬁned
contribution plan in which eligible participants make a required tax-deferred contribution of 2.5 percent of
their covered salary, matched by a 13 percent contribution by the University.
6
There are two choices of VRP, the Optional Retirement Plan (ORP) and the Section 457 Plan. Participants must choose between several diﬀerent vendors and investment options within each plan. Employees
face a maximum annual tax-deferred contribution of $33,000 ($16,500 in each plan). Contributions automatically cease once a $16,500 annual plan limit is reached. Individuals age 50 and above are allowed to make
additional catch-up contributions of $5,500 in the ORP plan annually.

10

each period.7
Table 1 describes the administrative data for our study sample. In Period 1, 24.1 percent
participate in a VRP while 24.9 percent participate in Period 2. Including contributions of
zero for non-participants, the average contribution rate is 3.19 percent of salary prior to the
intervention, equivalent to $2,324 per year. In Period 2, the average contribution rate is 3.33
percent of salary, equivalent to $2,450 per year.
Table 1 also includes a summary of the demographic characteristics of our sample. The
majority of the sample is female (55.7 percent) and the average age is just under 45 years.
Average employment tenure at the University is 12.3 years and average salary is nearly
$60,000. Employees eligible for the faculty retirement plan make up approximately 41 percent
of the sample. The majority of the sample works at the Twin Cities campus, followed by
the coordinate campuses of Duluth, Morris, Crookston, and Rochester. Approximately 6
percent of the sample works in oﬀ-campus locations. The age and gender composition of
the sample is similar to a nationally-representative sample employed at ﬁrms with pension
beneﬁts, though more highly educated and more likely to be married and more likely to be
white. We discuss the diﬀerences between our sample and a nationally-representative sample
in greater detail in Appendix B.

3.2

Treatment Groups and Intervention

We randomly assign employees to four groups, a control group and three treatment groups,
to examine the role of diﬀerent aspects of the intervention. Table 2 provides a summary
of the diﬀerent informational interventions and treatment group sizes. The control group
received no intervention. The most basic treatment, the planning treatment, provides general
information on saving for retirement, steps to sign up for or change contributions to a VRP,
and a chart describing VRP options. This planning treatment reduces transaction and
7

We never observe VRP account balances or values of mandatory retirement accounts. This prevents us
from oﬀering total retirement income projections, as laid forth in the Lifetime Income Disclosure Act. We
therefore focus our interventions on providing projections of additional retirement balance and income from
hypothetical additional contributions while working, a marginal decision relevant for everyone.

11

cognitive costs of saving but includes no projection component meant to aﬀect understanding
of exponential growth.
The other two treatments add components of the income disclosure meant to reduce
individuals’ EG bias. The balance treatment adds a customized projection of how hypothetical additional contributions would translate into additional assets at retirement. This
is intended to improve individuals’ understanding of the accumulation phase. To the balance treatment, the income treatment adds a customized projection of the additional annual
retirement income that would be generated. By adding information regarding the decumulation phase, the income treatment aims to help people understand the full mapping from
current contributions to retirement income. The balance treatment provides only partial information because it only shows the projected relationship between contributions and savings
at retirement.
The treatment materials consist of a four-page color brochure sent through internal mail.
The ﬁrst page was designed to prompt individuals to think about their retirement goals
(see Figure C-1 in Appendix C). The brochure was designed not to encourage people to
save more or to save less, but to encourage them in a neutral manner to reﬂect on whether
they are on target to achieve their retirement income goals. For individuals in the balance
and income treatment groups, the second page contains the customized account balance
projection (balance group) or both the balance and income projections (income group). The
left-hand side of Figure C-2 shows an example second page for an employee in the income
group. The top graphic contains the customized conversion of additional contributions to
additional account balance at retirement, while the bottom graphic contains the customized
conversion of additional contributions to additional annual income in retirement. This page is
omitted for the planning treatment group. Enrollment requires choosing a VRP, deciding on
a contribution election (i.e. either an amount or rate), selecting an investment company, and
ﬁnally allocating the contribution to diﬀerent investment options. This process is described
step-by-step in an attempt to reduce the cognitive costs associated with enrollment in the

12

third page of the brochure (Lusardi, Keller and Keller 2009), and is on the right-hand side
of Figure C-2. This is page 2 for the planning treatment group. Figure C-3 reproduces the
brochure’s ﬁnal page, a side-by-side comparison of the features of the two VRP options.
All groups that received a mailing also received a postcard to request a VRP enrollment
kit from the Oﬃce of Human Resources. In addition, all individuals who participated in a
VRP as of Period 1 were provided with a contribution change form to reduce the transaction
costs involved with making a change in their election. Finally, individuals in the balance
and income treatment groups were also provided with access to an online customization tool
designed to mimic the information provided in the printed materials. Online tools of this
type are readily available via investment companies’ websites and would serve as complementary tools to any policy initiative surrounding income disclosure by plan sponsors. The
online tool had the added ability to adjust assumptions regarding marital status, expected
retirement age, and expected investment returns. Those in the income group could also add
in other sources of retirement income and expected Social Security beneﬁts to get a more
comprehensive picture of their retirement savings portfolio.8 Figure C-4 provides an example
screenshot of the online tool for a member of the income treatment group.

3.3

Randomization

We perform the randomization of our four treatment groups by department in order to
mitigate possible contamination across groups, as the main intervention was delivered via
department-based mail. We use matched-quad randomization (matched-pair randomization
with four treatment groups) for the assignment to ensure that the groups are balanced on
observable characteristics that may be related to changes in plan participation. To form the
matched quads, we ﬁrst block departments on quartiles of VRP participation rate, quartiles
of average age, and quartiles of average salary. Within block, the largest 4 departments
forms one quad, the ﬁfth to eighth largest forms another quad, and so on, and treatment
8

Projections on the printed materials were in nominal dollars. Individuals could input expected rate of
inﬂation using the online tool.

13

assignment is randomized within quad. This process ensures each treatment group contains
a similar number of individuals and that only very small departments were in “quads” of
less than 4.
This process resulted in a total of 1,396 departments assigned to treatment groups from
374 quads. Department size ranges from 1 to 225. Because our analytic sample drops
individuals no longer employed in Period 2, it includes slightly fewer departments in total.
The number of departments and individuals in each treatment group is listed in that last two
rows of Table 2. Unsurprisingly, the randomization procedure produced treatment groups
balanced on observable characteristics. Further details are available in Appendix D.

3.4

Projections and Assumptions

We create customized projections of the additional account balance at retirement and the
additional annual income in retirement that additional hypothetical contributions c would
generate. We observe each individual’s current age a and assume a retirement age g. We also
assume a gross annual rate of return during accumulation, R. The projection of additional
per-period contributions c into additional account balance at retirement b is performed as
follows:
b=

cR(g−a−1+1/26)
R1/26−1

(5)

Additional contributions c are assumed to begin immediately and continue once per pay
period, or every two weeks, for a total of 26 times per year until retirement at age g.
The translation of additional balance at retirement b into additional income in retirement
y is simply:
y = pg b

(6)

where pg represents the price of a joint annuity that pays $1 each year from retirement at age
g until death for a married couple. The values pg were retrieved from the Income Solutions
Annuity Calculator for married males and females of diﬀerent ages. Married individuals are
14

assumed to be the same age and receive joint life annuities that pay the survivor 100% of
the beneﬁt after the ﬁrst member of the couple dies.9
Each individual in the balance treatment receives intervention materials with age-speciﬁc
balance projections only, not income projections. Those in the income treatment receive
both age-speciﬁc balance and income projections. In order to avoid creating a false sense
of precision, projected balances were rounded to the nearest $1,000 and annual retirement
incomes to the nearest $100.
The intent of this kind of disclosure intervention is to help people improve their understanding of the relationships in equations (5) and (6), not for the arbitrary values of (c, g, R)
used in the projections to inﬂuence behavior. However, assumptions are inherent in the
policy of oﬀering projections and a policy of providing projections could reduce welfare if
these assumptions themselves aﬀect saving behavior. This could happen in either of two
ways. First, projection assumptions may inadvertently shift beliefs about the appropriate
or likely values of these variables. Second, the assumptions may have framing eﬀects in that
individuals may respond diﬀerently to larger-valued projections relative to smaller-values, or
be inﬂuenced by the hypothetical contribution amounts. To assess how using these assumptions in projections aﬀects saving behavior and beliefs, we randomly assign alternative values
of the 3 parameters among individuals in the balance and income treatment groups. Each
person is randomized into one of 12 groups at the individual level, assigning one of three
diﬀerent rates of return, one of two diﬀerent retirement ages, and one of two diﬀerent sets
of hypothetical additional contribution levels. The assumed net investment return is either
3, 5, or 7 percent and retirement age is either 65 or 67. The set of hypothetical additional
contribution values displayed on the horizontal axes of the projection graphs is either {$0,
$50, $100, $250} or {$0, $100, $200, $500}.10 By holding the relative magnitude of the contribution amounts in each set constant across the two versions (e.g., 50/100 = 100/200), the
9
The calculator is available at https://www.incomesolutions.com/AnnuityCalculator.aspx. The values
used in this study were obtained September 14, 2010.
10
For instance, the example in Figure C-2 uses {$0, $100, $200, $500}.

15

graph itself remains ﬁxed for everyone within treatment. Only the hypothetical contribution
amounts printed under the axes, the projected balance or income amounts printed on top of
the bars, and the text of the assumptions printed on the brochure vary between parameter
treatments.
To obtain a single, comprehensive measure of the assumptions’ impact on the projections
that accounts smoothly for the fact that the impacts depend on an employee’s age, we
construct a ratio for each individual in the balance and income treatment groups of the
realized projection printed on that individual’s brochure and the corresponding value that
would be shown if the assumptions that generate the lowest projection (3 percent return,
retirement age of 65, and the lower-valued contribution axes) had been used. This measure
normalizes the diﬀerent eﬀects of the assumptions by age. For instance, for older employees,
increasing the retirement age has a larger eﬀect on projections than does increasing the
investment return. For younger employees, investment return aﬀects the projected values
more. We label this ratio the “Relative projection magnitude” (RPM). The range of values
for RPM is between 1 and 9.

3.5

Supplemental Follow-Up Survey

We supplement administrative data with data collected from a web-based, follow-up survey.
This data allows us to analyze heterogeneity in the eﬀects of the treatment with respect to
characteristics not available in the administrative records, such as time preferences, barriers
to saving, and ﬁnancial literacy. In addition, we investigate the eﬀect of the interventions
on the saving process to provide corroborative support for the treatment eﬀect. Finally, the
survey asks about beliefs regarding expected retirement income, expected rates of return,
and expected retirement ages in order to assess the eﬀects of the interventions on these
beliefs.11
11

To the extent possible, we use validated survey questions from tested sources, such as Lusardi and
Mitchell (2007); the National Financial Capability Study led by FINRA and designed by a multi-disciplinary
team, including Annamaria Lusardi and Robert Willis; the Health and Retirement Study; and the General
Social Survey as described in Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011).

16

In order to eliminate the possibility that the survey itself aﬀected saving behavior, the
survey was administered after the second administrative data pull. An independent, third
party matched survey responses to administrative data and provided de-identiﬁed data for
analysis. The overall response rate of the follow-up survey was approximately 22 percent.12
While this response rate is similar to response rates found in many research studies,
there is concern that survey responders may diﬀer somewhat from the overall population of
employees at the University of Minnesota. We ﬁnd that while survey responders are more
likely to be female, comprise a greater proportion of faculty, and are more likely to be VRP
participants, the survey sample appears balanced on observable demographics across treatment groups. In addition, the observed treatment eﬀects are substantially higher among the
sample of follow-up survey responders. Additional details regarding the representativeness
of the survey population are provided in Appendix D.

4

Empirical Methods

We examine both the propensity to make any change in one’s saving behavior as well as the
magnitude and direction of the change using two primary outcomes. Our ﬁrst outcome is
an indicator that the employee made any active change in his or her contribution between
periods: 1(∆ Contribution). This includes changes in participation status as well as changes
in contribution election among participants. Second, we measure the change between periods
in the level of elected annual contributions, ∆ Contribution Amount.13
Figure 1 depicts the means of the outcomes by group along with 95 percent conﬁdence
12

To encourage response, all individuals were sent a letter explaining the survey’s purpose prior to being
sent the email invitation with link. A $2 monetary non-conditional incentive was provided to a random
subsample at the outset of the experiment; however, no additional monetary incentive was provided for
completing the survey. The incentive subsample’s letter describing the survey also included a hand-written,
“Thank you, [name]!” printed on their letter. This subsample had 9 percentage points greater response rate.
All individuals who had not answered the survey after approximately two weeks were sent an email reminder.
13
The majority of participants elect a dollar amount per pay period. A minority elect contributions as a
share of pay, which induces a mechanical increase in contribution amount following a salary increase absent
an active change. These two kinds of participants are randomly assigned across treatment groups. We
exclude mechanical changes in 1(∆ Contribution) and ∆ Contribution Amount. Including both active and
mechanical changes or using saving rates relative to salary rather than amounts produce very similar results.

17

intervals. The percentage of the sample that changes their contribution is 5.60 percent
overall, but ranges from 4.09 in the control group to 5.30 in the income group. The average
change in the contribution amounts is +$122.08 per year and is highest among those sent the
full income projections: +$157.29. The change in amount increases with each additional layer
of treatment. These descriptive measures provide suggestive evidence that each component
of the income disclosure inﬂuences saving behavior.
We generate formal estimates of treatment eﬀects on saving behavior in a regression
framework. Given the experimental methodology, analysis is straightforward. We estimate
the following equation:
Si = α + Ti δ + Xi β + ηq + ϵi,d

(7)

where Si is one of our two outcome measures, Ti is a vector of treatment group dummy variables with control omitted, Xi is a vector of demographic controls, and ηq are randomizationquad ﬁxed eﬀects. The error term (ϵi,d ) is clustered at the department-level (d), the unit of
primary randomization. The individual covariate vector Xi contains quadratics in baseline
individual age and tenure, log salary, percent change in salary between periods, and indicators for gender, faculty, and campus location. We also estimate the eﬀect of the assumptions
used in the projections by restricting the sample to individuals in the balance and income
groups and estimating eﬀects of the randomly-assigned projection assumptions on the same
saving outcomes.

5
5.1

Results
Eﬀects on Saving Behaviors

We ﬁrst evaluate the eﬀect of the interventions on the propensity to change one’s contribution
election. Results are reported in the ﬁrst three columns of Table 3. Column (1) reports
treatment eﬀects relative to the control group when using only the three treatment indicators.

18

This simply tests for mean diﬀerences across groups. Column (2) adds randomization-quad
ﬁxed eﬀects to control for observed and unobserved diﬀerences within quad. Column (3)
adds individual covariates.
In column (1) the percentage of the planning group that changes their contribution
election is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that in the control group, though the balance and
income group propensities are signiﬁcantly higher. The estimated eﬀects with additional
covariates (columns (2) and (3)) are very similar in magnitude to column (1), though more
precise and statistically signiﬁcant. The results in column (3) indicate that the planning
group is 0.8 percentage points more likely than the control group to change contributions,
a marginally signiﬁcant eﬀect. The balance and income groups are 1.4 and 1.2 percentage
points more likely to change respectively, with both eﬀects statistically signiﬁcant at the one
percent level. Given the control group’s propensity to change of 4.77 percent, these eﬀects
are economically meaningful. For instance, the income treatment raises the propensity to
1.2
= 0.29) and the balance treatment by 34 percent.
change one’s election by 29 percent ( 4.09

In order to understand the magnitude and direction of the changes, we repeat the analysis
using ∆ Contribution Amount as the outcome. Results analogous to columns (1)–(3) are
reported in columns (4)–(6) of Table 3. Only the income treatment produces a signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent mean change in contributions, as reported in column (4). The results are robust to
adding quad ﬁxed eﬀects and individual covariates in columns (5) and (6). Compared to the
control group, individuals in the income treatment increased their saving by an additional
$85.42 annually. The standard deviation of ∆ Contribution Amount in the control group is
$1,849; therefore, our intervention produced a 0.046 eﬀect size.
The increase is economically meaningful. Compared to the control group mean change of
+$83.40, the income treatment more than doubled the average change. Further, the average
changes contain zeros for the vast majority of employees who made no changes. Among employees who made an active change, those in the income treatment group increased saving by
$1,152 more per year than did control-group changers. When examining initial participants

19

and initial non-participants separately, the point estimates suggest that this eﬀect is driven
by changes among initial participants rather than diﬀerences in the amount contributed
between new participants in each treatment group (results available upon request).
To better understand what features of the full intervention contribute to this increase in
contributions, we can compare the treatment eﬀects among the income group to those in the
planning and balance groups using the estimates from Table 3. Relative to the control group,
neither the planning nor balance treatment displayed a statistically signiﬁcant increase in
contributions. Each part of the income treatment (i.e. planning materials and balance
and income projections) seemed to contribute positively to the positive treatment eﬀect
on saving changes as the point estimates increase with each additional layer of treatment.
There is not strong evidence that any layer nor any two layers alone induced a signiﬁcant
increase in contributions. These ﬁndings suggest that the mailing induced a response in
part by reducing the transaction costs associated with changing participation status and
contribution levels (planning treatment). Furthermore, they suggest that the relationship
between current contributions and income in retirement was not completely understood prior
to the intervention, as the information contained in the income treatment led individuals to
change their rate of saving on average.
We can interpret the ﬁndings in the context of our model in Section 2 under certain
assumptions. First, we assume, based on evidence from the literature, that individuals suﬀer
negative EG bias on average. This assumption implies that the average θ in the control
and planning groups is less than 1 (θC = θP < 1). Second, because the projections we sent
provided accurate information by construction and because the income treatment provided
more information than the balance treatment, we assume that the treatments did not increase
bias (θC ≤ θB ≤ θI ≤ 1). Under Proposition 1, given that we observe an increase in saving
as a result of our intervention, our ﬁndings suggest EIS > 1 in the sample.
Past studies have used a variety of macroeconomic and microeconomic techniques and
contexts to estimate the EIS. Many estimates to date have ranged between zero and one,

20

with the most recent estimates being closer to one (e.g., Attanasio and Weber 1993; VissingJorgensen 2002; Guvenen 2006; Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun 2006; Engelhardt and
Kumar 2009).14,15 Interestingly, in the realm of retirement savings, studies have found that
individual contributions respond positively to employer match rates in 401(k) plans (e.g.,
Choi, Laibson and Madrian 2006; Engelhardt and Kumar 2007) and IRA contributions
increase with the Saver’s Credit (Duﬂo, Gale, Liebman, Orszag and Saez 2006), suggesting
that the EIS may in fact be greater than one. Engelhardt and Kumar (2009) use variation
in employer match rates for individuals in the Health and Retirement Study and estimate
the EIS to be 0.74, with a conﬁdence interval that includes values greater than one. In other
words, our results are consistent with other studies in the retirement saving literature that
saving rates increase with the return to saving, but diﬀer in that we use an experimental
design to identify whether the EIS is larger or smaller than one.

5.2

Eﬀects on the Saving Process

Changes in saving behavior must occur through a multi-step process. We test whether the
interventions aﬀected engagement in steps and attitudes that are likely part of this process
using data from our follow-up survey described in Section 3.5.
The survey provided respondents with the following statements:
• “It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd information that will help me decide how much to save for
retirement.”
• “I am better informed about retirement planning than I was 6 months ago.”
• “In the last 6 months, have you tried to ﬁgure out how much you need to save for
retirement?”
• “I understand how savings today could aﬀect my retirement income.”
• “How certain are you about the amount of annual retirement income you expect your
household to have?”
One exception is Gruber (2006) which estimates an EIS ≈ 2 using variation in the capital income tax
rate across individuals.
15
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) and Guvenen (2006) note heterogeneity in the EIS across households based on
asset holdings and evidence that households with higher assets have larger values of the EIS.
14

21

• “Overall, thinking of your assets, debts and savings, how satisﬁed are you with your
current personal ﬁnancial condition?”
Respondents were asked to rate their agreement, level of certainty, or satisfaction level on
a 7-point scale with the exception of the third question which required a simple Yes/No
response.16,17 To conduct our analysis, we construct Z-scores of the scaled responses for each
item by subtracting the sample mean and dividing by the sample standard deviation.
Table 4 displays the results of estimating Equation 7 on the outcome measures described
above, including quad ﬁxed eﬀects and the same individual covariates. The dependent
variables in Columns 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 are speciﬁed as Z-scores; therefore, the interpretation
of a coeﬃcient δ on a particular treatment group dummy indicates that that treatment
increased the outcome measure by δ standard deviations relative to the control group. The
dependent variable in Column 3 is a simple binary measure with Yes coded as 1.
The income treatment had a statistically signiﬁcant impact on almost all measured aspects of the retirement saving process. Speciﬁcally, the point estimates indicate that, relative
to the control group, the income group’s diﬃculty in ﬁnding information to decide how much
to save for retirement is 0.12 standard deviations lower; they are 0.20 standard deviations
higher in their informedness about retirement planning relative to 6 months prior; they are
5.1 percentage points (or 12 percent) more likely to have ﬁgured out how much to save for
retirement; they are 0.10 standard deviations more certain about their retirement income;
and 0.078 standard deviations higher in their ﬁnancial satisfaction. None of the treatment
groups diﬀered signiﬁcantly in their reported understanding of how savings today can aﬀect
income in retirement. However, responses to this question are heavily concentrated in the
“strongly agree” bin (see Figure E-1 in Appendix E for detail).
These results are interesting for a number of reasons. First, they provide evidence that the
income disclosures have important implications for various steps in the retirement planning
16

The distributions of responses to all survey items are provided in Figures E-1 to E-4 in Appendix E.
All survey questions oﬀered respondents the ability to answer “Don’t know” and “Prefer not to say” in
order to maintain comparability with the validated survey questions and improve the quality of the provided
responses. These responses were coded as missing in this and subsequent analysis.
17

22

process. There are signiﬁcant eﬀects on steps that would conceivably occur prior to making
changes in retirement contributions (ﬁnding information, being informed about retirement
planning, and ﬁguring how much to save for retirement) as well as outcomes that may be more
apparent later in the process (being more certain about their expected retirement income and
more satisﬁed with their ﬁnancial condition). Second, these results show that individuals in
the planning and balance groups, who were sent either no income projections or incomplete
income projections, generally do not have statistically diﬀerent outcomes relative to the
control group, suggesting that full income projections drive the observed eﬀects. Finally, the
results suggest that the treatment eﬀects on saving behaviors are not spurious or driven by
a small group of outliers and are the result of more informed saving decisions.

5.3

Heterogeneity of Eﬀects on Saving Behaviors

We investigate the presence of heterogeneity in the eﬀect of our interventions by measuring
characteristics believed to inﬂuence saving decisions. In particular, we investigate the degree
to which treatment eﬀects interact with factors that would matter in a standard rationalactor model (time preference and liquidity constraints), measures of time-inconsistent preferences (self-control and procrastination), and measures of limited cognition (comfort using
retirement planning aides and ﬁnancial literacy). For each measure, we convert individuals’
survey responses into Z-scores and then investigate the impact of interactions between the
Z-score and treatment indicators on ∆ Contribution Amount. The interpretation of the
coeﬃcients of these interactions is the change in the treatment eﬀect for someone with a one
standard deviation higher Z-score on the measure.

5.3.1

Standard factors: time preference and liquidity

Importantly, it may be optimal for some individuals not to respond to the intervention. In
particular, even if the intervention increased understanding of exponential growth, individuals with high time discounting or high liquidity constraints may not ﬁnd it optimal to save
23

more, especially in our context which is characterized by high rates of mandatory saving.
In fact, a potential beneﬁt of a ﬁnancial literacy intervention as opposed to forced saving is
that it allows for heterogeneous response to the information, which we can investigate using
the rich data from our survey.
Our measure of time preference comes from respondents rating how much they agree or
disagree with the following statement on a 7-point scale: “Nowadays, a person has to live
pretty much for today and let tomorrow take care of itself.”18 The average sample respondent
agrees with this statement. To measure liquidity constraints the survey asks, “In a typical
month, how diﬃcult is it for you to cover your expenses and pay all your bills?” with options,
“Not at all,” “Somewhat,” and “Very.” The average respondent is not liquidity constrained.
The ﬁrst two columns of Table 5 display the results of estimating Equation 7 on the change
in contribution amount among our survey subsample, including the Z-score of the response
to the statement indicated in the column heading along with the Z-score interacted with our
treatment dummies, and our standard set of control variables. Here, we are interested in
whether the eﬀects of our interventions vary across diﬀerent survey responses, conditional
on completing the survey.
There is evidence of heterogeneity in the treatment eﬀects with respect to both factors
predicted by the standard model. Speciﬁcally, a one standard deviation increase in our
measure of time discounting is associated with a $208 reduction in the change in contribution
amount for the income group, suggesting that individuals with higher discount rates are less
likely to respond to the income treatment. Liquidity constraints also seem to matter as
theory would predict. Those who report being more constrained increase their saving less
in response to both the balance and income treatments. Speciﬁcally, a standard deviation
increase in one’s response to the diﬃculty in covering expenses reduces the income treatment
eﬀect by $181 and the balance treatment eﬀect by $198. Therefore, these ﬁndings conﬁrm
that this intervention had at least some scope for individuals to react rationally to the
18

The General Social Survey has long used this item and Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011) discuss its value
as a measure of time preference.

24

information.

5.3.2

Time-inconsistency

As opposed to rational economic factors, the role of behavioral inﬂuences, such as timeinconsistency and tendencies to procrastinate, on retirement saving is now well-known. To
measure these factors, the survey asks how strongly respondents agree or disagree with the
following statements:
• “When I make a plan to do something, I am good at following through.”
• “I tend to put oﬀ thinking about how much money I need to save for retirement.”
As reported in column (3), a one standard deviation increase in one’s self-reported ability
to follow through with plans is associated with a $320 increase in the income treatment’s
eﬀect on changes in saving. As reported in column (4), a one standard deviation increase in
putting oﬀ thinking about saving for retirement leads to a $233 decrease in the eﬀect of the
income treatment.
These results point to an interaction between informational and behavioral factors, which
are often treated as separate, alternative explanations for lack of saving. In particular, the
ﬁndings suggest that policies that seek to inform individuals about the return to saving will
be most eﬀective among those without tendencies to procrastinate.

5.3.3

Limited Cognition

Cognitive barriers are the other set of factors hypothesized to inﬂuence retirement saving
decisions. We can evaluate how our treatment, which is designed to target one aspect of
limited cognition (i.e. understanding of exponential growth) interacts with other cognitive
limitations. To do this, we provide two statements regarding cognitive barriers and ask for
respondents’ agreement on a 7-point scale:
• “I ﬁnd most retirement planning information easy to use.”

25

• “I ﬁnd it overwhelming to think about how much I need to save for retirement.”
We also measure ﬁnancial literacy. We present results using a composite ﬁnancial literacy
measure that combines both self-assessed and objective measures based on responses to a
standard set of ﬁnancial literacy questions.19
As the last three columns of Table 5 show, we ﬁnd no evidence that cognitive barriers
to saving mediate the estimated treatment eﬀects. We also examine whether there are nonlinear interactions between cognitive limitations and our interventions, as theory may predict
that those with low cognitive ability would be overwhelmed by the treatment and those with
high cognitive ability would already know the content of the interventions. However, we ﬁnd
no evidence of these non-linear interactions. These results suggest that the intervention was
equally eﬀective on individuals who are more and less cognitively capable. One possibility
for this ﬁnding is that our sample is more educated and more ﬁnancially savvy (as well as
more homogenous in these two dimensions) as compared to most Americans (see Tables B-1
and B-2).
We also explored interactions with available demographic and administrative variables,
such as age and income but did not ﬁnd evidence of statistically signiﬁcant interactions.
These ﬁndings imply that while these characteristics may inﬂuence one’s level of saving,
they do not aﬀect the response to the treatment in terms of changes in saving amounts.
19

The ﬁrst measure of self-assessed ﬁnancial literacy comes from the answer to, “On a scale from 1 to 7,
where 1 means very low and 7 means very high, how would you assess your overall ﬁnancial knowledge?”
The second measure is a composite of the following statements:
• “I regularly keep up with economic and ﬁnancial news.”
• “I am pretty good at math.”
• “I am good at dealing with day-to-day ﬁnancial matters, such as checking accounts, credit and debit
cards, and tracking expenses.”
The questions which test actual ﬁnancial literacy are provided in Appendix F. The distribution of responses
is provided in Figure E-3. Survey respondents tend to score themselves highly on self-assessed ﬁnancial
literacy measures and answer, on average, approximately four out of six ﬁnancial literacy questions correctly.
We construct Z-scores for each of the four self-assessed ﬁnancial literacy questions and for the number of
questions correctly answered on the ﬁnancial literacy quiz. The composite measure is simply the sum of
the Z-scores across these components. Analysis based on any of these dimensions of ﬁnancial literacy alone
yields similar results.

26

5.4

Eﬀects of Projection Assumptions on Outcomes

As discussed earlier, an important part of any policy aimed at requiring the disclosure of retirement income projections is the decision about what assumptions to use in the calculation.
Assumptions regarding the rate of investment return and retirement age aﬀect the magnitude
of the projected values and could aﬀect one’s response to the information or beliefs about
those future values. In addition, any hypothetical contribution amounts used to illustrate
the projections may aﬀect the behavior of individuals due to framing eﬀects. Restricting the
sample to individuals in either of these two treatment groups, we study the eﬀect of the different projection assumptions — rate of investment return, retirement age, and hypothetical
additional contribution amounts — on our two measures of saving behaviors.
The results in columns (1), (2), and (3) in Table 6 show the eﬀect of each assumption
separately on the propensity to make a contribution change, 1 (∆ Contribution). Column
(4) includes the natural log of the relative projection magnitude, described earlier. The
coeﬃcient on ln(RPM) is the estimated eﬀect of a one-unit increase – corresponding to an
approximate doubling of the balance and income projections – has on one’s propensity to
make a change. Column (5) shows the results of including all of the assumptions and the
ln(RPM) simultaneously.
The results suggest only the retirement age assumption had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the
propensity to make any change. In column (4), we see that the relative magnitude projection,
as captured by the ln(RPM), has no signiﬁcant direct eﬀect. In column (5), when all factors
are included, the eﬀect of the higher retirement age persists, suggesting the retirement age
assumption aﬀects the response through a channel other than the size of the projection.
Table 7 repeats the speciﬁcations described above with the continuous outcome measure,
∆ Contribution Amount. The results suggest that a higher assumed retirement age and
higher-valued axes both lead to larger positive changes in saving, as does the relative projection magnitude. For instance, presenting individuals with the higher-valued axes instead of
the lower-valued axes increased annual contributions by $104 on average, or by an additional
27

$1,233 per year among changers. However, we ﬁnd no evidence that the assumed rate of
investment return aﬀects saving behaviors. In addition, the eﬀect of the relative projection
magnitude disappears after retirement age is controlled for.
Theoretically, the fact that assuming a later retirement age leads to increased retirement
saving is diﬃcult to reconcile with an economic model of shifting beliefs. If the higher retirement age assumption shifted beliefs towards a later retirement age, standard consumptionsmoothing models would predict reduced saving as later retirement would lead to more labor
income available to save and fewer years of decumulation during retirement to ﬁnance. However, we ﬁnd the opposite eﬀect, which is consistent with larger projections producing higher
levels of saving, rather than operating through beliefs.
We use the survey to further substantiate this conclusion. In particular, the survey asks
respondents to report the age at which they expect to claim retirement beneﬁts as well as the
average annual real rate of investment return they expect to earn until retirement.20 First,
we ﬁnd that the average expected retirement age among the control and planning groups
(who were not sent any projections) were 65.63 and 66.01 (see Figure E-4 in Appendix E),
very close to our average retirement age assumption of 66. Similarly, the average expected
investment return among the control and planning groups is 5.29 and 5.42, only slightly
higher than our average investment return assumption of 5 percent. The value of these
beliefs, which were independent of our intervention, suggest that our assumptions are not
likely to have shifted mean beliefs about these values among individuals sent the projections.
Second, we regress beliefs regarding expected retirement age and expected rates of return on treatment dummies. We then restrict attention to the balance and income treatment
groups and investigate whether the brochure assumptions, which were randomly assigned,
inﬂuence the mean expected retirement age and expected rate of return reported. Table 8
shows the results. We ﬁnd no evidence that either the interventions or the assumptions used
for the balance and income groups had a systematic eﬀect on beliefs about these assump20

We winsorize the top and bottom 1 percent of the expected retirement age distribution and the top 5
percent of the expected return distribution to guard against sensitivity to outliers.

28

tions.21
These results suggests that employee response is sensitive to psychological framing eﬀects
that operate through the magnitude of the projection, consistent with prior work (e.g.,
Bernheim and Rangel 2009; Bernheim et al. 2011; Choi, Haisley, Kurkoski and Massey
2012). While we interpret our results as framing eﬀects in that we do not see evidence that
the contribution amounts were focal (i.e. no increased prevalence of elections at exactly
$200 or $500 among those assigned the high-valued axis nor at $50 among those assigned
the low-valued axis, nor changes of those amounts), they are also consistent with the most
basic deﬁnition of anchoring in which respondents tend toward the arbitrary anchor value
(Tversky and Kahneman 1974). These ﬁndings illustrate that care must be taken in the
design of disclosures to avoid unintended consequences as they have the capacity to nudge
individuals’ decisions.

6

Conclusion

The shift toward DC retirement plans has placed much of the responsibility and risk for
retirement security in the hands of individuals rather than institutions. Optimal retirement saving behavior in this current landscape requires an understanding of the relationship
between current contributions and income in retirement, but requires a level of ﬁnancial
sophistication that many Americans may lack. The fact that individuals sent income projections changed their contributions relative to a control group suggests that this relationship
is not universally well-understood. Based on the evidence in the literature on exponential
growth bias and the theoretical model we develop, our empirical ﬁndings suggest that, on
average, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is greater than one, i.e. individuals save
21

We also investigate the impact of the interventions and assumptions on certainty about retirement age
and future investment returns. We ﬁnd the income treatment had a positive, statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect
on certainty about these assumptions, suggesting the treatment reduced the variance of beliefs. This result
could be welfare-enhancing if it occurred via the induced planning behavior and learning. However, it could
also reﬂect an unintended, welfare-reducing eﬀect of the interventions if it reﬂects a collapsing of subjects’
prior beliefs towards assumed levels used in the projections.

29

more in response to a higher perceived return to saving.
The results of our follow-up survey provide corroborative evidence that the intervention
inﬂuenced saving decisions. On the one hand, we ﬁnd that higher discount rates and liquidity
constraints mitigate the eﬀects of our interventions, which is consistent with known tradeoﬀs in saving decisions and supports the under-appreciated fact that not responding to an
intervention may be optimal. On the other hand, we ﬁnd that the eﬀect of the intervention
was dampened by procrastination tendencies suggesting that policies designed to increase
ﬁnancial literacy will interact with other behavioral considerations. Furthermore, those
sent full income projections report less diﬃculty ﬁnding information regarding retirement
planning, are better informed about retirement planning, and are more likely to have ﬁgured
out how much to save. They are also more certain about their expected retirement income,
and rate themselves higher in overall ﬁnancial satisfaction.
This study provides proof of concept for a policy that requires no additional mandate on
individuals or subsidy for saving. Providing retirement income projections – an extremely
low-cost intervention – can actually aﬀect individuals’ saving behavior. The eﬀects manifested were not large on average and were found in only in a small share of the sample; thus,
this policy is not likely to lead to a saving revolution. However, among those who made
changes, eﬀects were substantial and suggest that similar policies may help some individuals
move closer to their retirement goals.
The ﬁndings from the study also pose a policy challenge by demonstrating the sensitivity of saving behavior to projection assumptions. The concern is that individuals may be
susceptible to any overly-optimistic assumptions and induced to oversave, or, analogously,
to undersave from overly-pessimistic projections. Supplementing simple projections with
accessible tools that give people a richer chance to explore how outcomes depend on saving
choices under a wide range of assumptions and uncertainty may counteract the eﬀect of
framing.
The study oﬀers the ﬁrst direct evidence of the potential value of the kind of intervention

30

recently proposed by Congress. The policy intervention is still under debate and the ﬁndings
from this study may be informative. However, the intervention tested here diﬀers in some
dimensions from the current congressional proposal. First, the intervention was a one-time
mailing sent via an employee’s work mail, while the proposed initiative would likely include
information in a quarterly statement sent to one’s home. Second, while the proposed policy
would only require projections be sent to those with active DC accounts, this intervention
was also sent to individuals not currently contributing. Third, we did not have access to
current account balances and therefore could not provide total projected retirement income.
Fourth, the sample of employees at the University of Minnesota is more highly educated,
more ﬁnancially literate, and engaged in higher levels of mandatory retirement saving than
Americans generally. While there is room for debate, there are reasons to think each of
these factors would lead these study results to understate the true eﬀects of the policy in
the national population.

31

References
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, John Leahy, and Tom Tyler, “Measuring SelfControl Problems,” American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 966–972.
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber, “Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate,
and Aggregation,” Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 631–49.
and
, “Consumption and Saving: Models of Intertemporal Allocation and Their
Implications for Public Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2010, 48 (3), 693–751.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel, “Beyong Revealed Preference: ChoiceTheoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (1), 51–104.
, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov, “The Welfare Economics of Default Options:
A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of 401(k) Plans,” NBER Working Paper 17587,
National Bureau of Economic Research 2011.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “The
Importance of Default Options for Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the
United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 12009, National Bureau of Economic Research 2006.
Buessing, Marric and Mauricio Soto, “Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders
Increase Saving,” Technical Report, Cetner for Retirement Research at Boston College
February 2006.
Card, David, Stefano DellaVinga, and Ulrike Malmendier, “The Role of Theory in
Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 39–62.
Charness, G. and P. Kuhn, “Lab Labor: What Can Labor Economists Learn from the
Lab?,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 2011, 4, 229–330.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Reducing the Complexity
Costs of 401(k) Participation Through Quick Enrollment,” NBER Working Paper 11979,
National Bureau of Economic Research 2006.
,
,
, and Andrew Metrick, “For Better or For Worse: Default Eﬀect and
401(k) Savings Behavior,” in David A. Wise, ed., Perspectives in the Economics of
Aging, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
, Emily Haisley, Jennifer Kurkoski, and Cade Massey, “Small Cues Change
Savings Choices,” NBER Working Paper 17843, National Bureau of Economic Research
2012.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John B. Jones, “Why Do the Elderly
Save? The Role of Medical Expenses,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (1),
39–75.
32

Duﬂo, Ester, William Gale, Jeﬀrey Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez,
“Saving Incentives for Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R Block,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1311–1346.
Duﬂo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions
in Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 815–842.
Eisenstein, Eric M. and Stephen J. Hoch, “Intuitive Compounding: Framing, Temporal
Perspective, and Expertise,” Working Paper, Cornell University 2007.
Engelhardt, Gary V. and Anil Kumar, “Employer Matching and 401(k) Saving: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey,” Journal of Public Economics, 2007, 91,
1920–1943.
and
, “The Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: New Evidence from 401(k)
Participation,” Economics Letters, 2009, 103, 15–17.
Even, William and David Macpherson, “Deﬁned Contribution Plans and the Distribution of Pension Wealth,” Industrial Relations, 2007, 46 (3), 551–581.
Goda, Gopi Shah and Colleen Flaherty Manchester, “Incorporating Employee Heterogeneity into Default Options for Retirement Plan Selection,” NBER Working Paper
16099, National Bureau of Economic Research 2010.
Gruber, Jonathan, “A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution,” NBER Working Paper 11945, National Bureau of Economic Research 2006.
Guvenen, Fatih, “Reconciling Conﬂicting Evidence of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53,
1452–1472.
Hacker, Jacob S., The Great Risk Shift, Oxford University Press, 2006.
List, J.A., “Why Economists Should Conduct Field Experiments and 14 Tips for Pulling
One Oﬀ,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 3–15.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell, “Financial Literacy and Retirement Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education,” Business Economics,
2007, 42 (1), 35–44.
and Olivia S. Mitchell, “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for Retirement Wellbeing,” NBER Working Paper 17078, National Bureau of Economic Research
2011.
, Punam Anand Keller, and Adam M. Keller, “New Ways to Make People Save:
A Social Marketing Approach,” NBER Working Paper 14715, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.

33

Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4),
1149–1525.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus, and Takeshi Yamaguchi,
“Default, Framing, and Spillover Eﬀects: The Case of Lifecycle Funds in 401(K) Plans,”
NBER Working Paper 15108, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.
Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes, “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Beneﬁts of
Schooling,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (1), 159–184.
Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun, “Are Americans
Saving ‘Optimally’ for Retirement?,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (4), 607–
643.
Skinner, Jonathan, “Are You Sure You’re Saving Enough for Retirement?,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (3), 59–80.
Song, Changcheng, “Financial Illiteracy and Pension Contributions: A Field Experiment
on Compound Interest in China,” mimeo., University of California, Berkeley 2012.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman, “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance,” Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (6), 2807–2849.
Thaler, Richard and Shlomo Benartzi, “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (1),
S164–S187.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases,” Science, 1974, 185, 1124–1131.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110, 825–253.
Wagenaar, William M. and Sabato D. Sagaria, “Misperception of Exponential
Growth,” Perception & Psychology, 1975, 18 (6), 416–422.

34

Table 1: Summary Statistics: Administrative Data
mean
sd
min
max
1(VRP Participant, pre)
0.241
0.428
0
1
1(VRP Participant, post)
0.249
0.432
0
1
VRP Contr. Rate, pre
3.189
8.933
0
100
VRP Contr. Rate, post
3.334
9.157
0
100
VRP Contr. Amount, pre
2323.9 6407.7
0
38500
VRP Contr. Amount, post 2450.1 6589.2
0
38500
1(Female)
0.557
0.497
0
1
Age
44.89
11.16
19
64
Tenure
12.34
9.387 0.301
46.64
Salary, pre
58386.9 32527.5 480.7 686587.5
Salary, post
59227.1 33348.7 480.7 686587.4
1(Faculty Ret. Plan)
0.412
0.492
0
1
1(Twin Cities campus)
0.810
0.393
0
1
1(Crookston campus)
0.0129
0.113
0
1
1(Duluth campus)
0.0890
0.285
0
1
1(Morris campus)
0.0206
0.142
0
1
1(Rochester campus)
0.00427 0.0652
0
1
1(Oﬀ-campus)
0.0636
0.244
0
1
Observations
16881

35

Table 2: Treatment Group Summary

General information on saving for retirement and signing up for VRP
Customized information regarding conversion of hypothetical additional contributions to additional account balance at retirement
Customized information regarding conversion of hypothetical additional contributions to additional annual income in retirement
Number of departments
Number of individuals

Control Planning
X

Balance
X

Income
X

X

X

X

344
4,063

335
4,334

327
4,353

327
4,131

Notes: VRP stands for Voluntary Retirement Plan and is a tax-deferred savings plan to
which employees in the sample can contribute.

36

Outcome:
1(Planning)
1(Balance)
1(Income)

Table 3: Eﬀect of Interventions
1(∆ Contrib.)
∆ Contrib. Amt.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
∗∗
∗
0.007
0.009
0.008
23.926
35.979
36.322
(0.005) (0.004) (0.004) (43.326) (37.695) (38.473)
0.012∗∗ 0.014∗∗∗ 0.014∗∗∗ 56.074
57.482
59.703
(0.005) (0.004) (0.004) (44.032) (40.768) (40.850)
0.012∗∗ 0.013∗∗∗ 0.012∗∗∗ 73.890∗ 89.363∗∗ 85.424∗∗
(0.005) (0.004) (0.004) (43.465) (36.988) (37.017)

Quad FEs
Controls
Adj. R2

No
No
0.000

Yes
No
0.013

Yes
Yes
0.022

No
No
0.000

Yes
No
-0.002

Yes
Yes
0.000

Control Mean

0.0409

0.0409

0.0409

83.4000

83.4000

83.4000

Departments
Individuals

1,385
16,881

1,385
16,881

1,385
16,881

1,385
16,881

1,385
16,881

1,385
16,881

Notes: 1(∆ Contrib.) is an indicator for whether there was any change in the election and ∆
Contrib. Amt. is Period 2 annual contribution dollar amount minus Period 1 annual contribution
dollar amount. Control group is the excluded category. Sample is restricted to employees present
in both Period 1 and Period 2. Standard errors clustered at unit of randomization (Department)
with unit of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables in columns (3) and (6) include a gender
indicator variable, quadratic in age, quadratic in tenure, ln(salary), percentage change in salary,
faculty indicator, and indicators for diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10% level;
** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.

37

Table 4: Eﬀects of Interventions on Additional Aspects of Saving Process
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Diﬀ. to Better Figured ret. Understand Ret. income Financial
ﬁnd info informed
savings
sav-inc
certainty satisfaction
1(Planning) -0.061
0.067
0.022
-0.002
-0.000
-0.001
(0.044) (0.042)
(0.021)
(0.046)
(0.040)
(0.040)
1(Balance) -0.052
0.084∗∗
0.018
-0.019
0.009
-0.021
(0.048) (0.041)
(0.023)
(0.046)
(0.042)
(0.039)
∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
1(Income) -0.123
0.201
0.051
0.060
0.102
0.078∗
(0.048) (0.045)
(0.021)
(0.052)
(0.040)
(0.040)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Adj. R2
0.026
0.029
0.101
0.016
0.211
0.116
Control Mean 0.0460
Departments
Individuals

984
3,573

-0.0588

0.4356

0.0037

-0.0261

-0.0093

993
3,641

994
3,624

991
3,651

965
3,406

992
3,649

Notes: Dependent variable in Column (3) represents binary response to, “In the last 6 months,
have you tried to ﬁgure out how much you need to save for retirement?” Dependent variables in
remaining columns represent Z-scores of scaled survey responses for diﬃculty in ﬁnding retirement
planning information, improvement in being informed about retirement planning, understanding
the link between saving now and income in retirement, certainty in expected retirement income, and
satisfaction with personal ﬁnancial condition. Control group is the excluded category. Sample is
restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2 who responded to follow-up survey.
Respondents who answer “Don’t know” or “Prefer not to say” were omitted. Standard errors
clustered at unit of randomization (Department) with unit of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control
variables include a gender indicator variable, quadratic in age, quadratic in tenure, ln(salary),
percentage change in salary, faculty indicator, and indicators for diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.

38

39
992
3,663

Departments
Individuals

986
3,604

118.6636

-0.014

995
3,675

120.2792

-0.016

992
3,668

120.5272

-0.016

Time Inconsistency
Follows through Puts oﬀ planning
(3)
(4)
158.047
158.972
(108.731)
(108.019)
157.524
151.808
(128.283)
(128.161)
∗∗∗
383.300
386.044∗∗∗
(113.821)
(114.392)
∗
-137.920
4.925
(76.033)
(72.924)
159.423∗
33.134
(94.861)
(100.055)
108.396
111.631
(118.079)
(116.930)
∗∗∗
320.155
-233.232∗∗
(114.142)
(117.454)
Yes
Yes

979
3,512

125.8465

-0.018

989
3,648

135.0172

-0.020

Limited Cognition
Easy to use Overwhelming
(5)
(6)
135.272
142.515
(111.412)
(108.752)
132.553
135.518
(136.818)
(128.686)
∗∗∗
397.911
374.424∗∗∗
(120.961)
(116.508)
-18.209
-32.877
(72.609)
(89.855)
32.419
86.585
(104.544)
(124.129)
125.195
27.426
(128.355)
(136.601)
151.770
17.821
(120.100)
(128.115)
Yes
Yes

991
3,619

121.5295

-0.016

Fin. Lit.
(7)
115.836
(103.845)
160.858
(128.438)
386.580∗∗∗
(114.769)
2.904
(22.197)
15.819
(30.587)
0.988
(32.733)
45.078
(38.427)
Yes

Notes: The dependent variable is ∆ Contribution Amount, Period 2 annual contribution dollar amount minus Period 1 annual contribution
dollar amount. Z-score represents standardized response to survey question in column header. Control group is the excluded category.
Sample is restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2 and who responded to the follow-up survey. Respondents who
answer “Don’t know” or “Prefer not to say” were omitted. Standard errors clustered at unit of randomization (Department) with unit
of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables include a gender indicator variable, quadratic in age, quadratic in tenure, ln(salary),
percentage change in salary, faculty indicator, and indicators for diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10% level; ** at the
5% level; *** at the 1% level.

108.7115

-0.018

Control Mean

Adj. R2

Rational
High disc. rate Liq. constr.
(1)
(2)
1(Planning)
172.013
146.577
(108.767)
(107.192)
1(Balance)
183.451
173.288
(129.409)
(128.781)
∗∗∗
1(Income)
401.579
401.085∗∗∗
(116.170)
(117.583)
Z-Score
2.394
-26.171
(51.336)
(53.890)
Z-Score X 1(Planning)
-35.523
-43.309
(79.224)
(75.277)
Z-Score X 1(Balance)
-2.977
-180.700∗∗
(84.743)
(83.514)
∗∗∗
Z-Score X 1(Income)
-207.885
-197.623∗∗
(78.986)
(93.474)
Controls
Yes
Yes

Table 5: Heterogeneity in Eﬀect of Interventions on ∆ Contribution Amount

Table 6: Eﬀect of Assumptions on 1(∆ Contribution)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
1(Income)
-0.002 -0.002 -0.002 -0.002 -0.002
(0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)
1(Inv Ret = 5%) -0.002
0.002
(0.006)
(0.007)
1(Inv Ret = 7%) -0.004
0.004
(0.006)
(0.011)
∗∗
1(Ret Age = 67)
0.012
0.016∗∗
(0.005)
(0.006)
1(High Axes)
0.006
0.016
(0.005)
(0.012)
ln(RPM)
0.005
-0.015
(0.006) (0.016)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Adj. R2

0.028

0.029

0.028

0.028

0.029

Balance Mean

0.0526

0.0526

0.0526

0.0526

0.0526

Departments
Individuals

681
8,484

681
8,484

681
8,484

681
8,484

681
8,484

Notes: Dependent variable is 1(∆ Contribution), which is an indicator for whether there was any
change in the election between Periods 1 and 2. Sample is restricted to employees in the Income
and Balance treatment groups who present in both Period 1 and Period 2. Balance group is the
excluded category. Standard errors clustered at unit of randomization (Department) with unit of
stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables include a gender indicator variable, quadratic in age,
quadratic in tenure, ln(salary), percentage change in salary, faculty indicator, and indicators for
diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1%
level.

40

Table 7: Eﬀect of Assumptions on ∆ Contribution Amount
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
1(Income)
23.976
24.504
25.188
25.906
24.459
(32.765) (32.729) (32.711) (32.843) (32.675)
1(Inv Ret = 5%) 19.135
29.815
(53.581)
(76.277)
1(Inv Ret = 7%) -27.962
-6.262
(53.756)
(108.591)
∗
1(Ret Age = 67)
73.612
82.884∗
(43.478)
(49.030)
∗∗
1(High Axes)
103.881
135.058
(44.217)
(122.515)
ln(RPM)
95.017∗∗
-45.441
(48.376) (157.242)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Adj. R2

-0.003

-0.003

-0.002

-0.003

-0.002

Balance Mean

139.4744

139.4744

139.4744

139.4744

139.4744

Departments
Individuals

681
8,484

681
8,484

681
8,484

681
8,484

681
8,484

Notes: Dependent variable is ∆ Contribution Amount, which is Period 2 contribution dollar amount
minus Period 1 contribution dollar amount. Sample is restricted to employees in the Income and
Balance treatment groups who present in both Period 1 and Period 2. Balance group is the
excluded category. Standard errors clustered at unit of randomization (Department) with unit of
stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables include a gender indicator variable, quadratic in age,
quadratic in tenure, ln(salary), percentage change in salary, faculty indicator, and indicators for
diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1%
level.

41

Table 8: Eﬀects of Interventions and Assumptions on Retirement Age and Investment Return
Beliefs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Exp. Ret Age Exp. Return Exp. Ret Age Exp. Return
1(Planning)
0.383∗∗
0.131
(0.162)
(0.119)
1(Balance)
0.281
0.095
(0.184)
(0.122)
1(Income)
-0.086
0.104
-0.336
0.131
(0.174)
(0.119)
(0.208)
(0.134)
Inv Return(%)
-0.033
0.038
(0.061)
(0.040)
1(Ret Age=67)
0.216
0.091
(0.209)
(0.141)
1(Higher axes)
0.141
0.024
(0.213)
(0.135)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Adj. R2
0.090
0.023
0.077
0.010
Control Mean

65.6266

5.2896

Balance Mean
Departments
Individuals

940
3,188

847
2,440

66.0049

5.3682

455
1,537

394
1,151

Notes: Dependent variable is as indicated in column heading. Control group is the excluded
category in Columns 1 and 2; balance group is the excluded category in Columns 3 and 4. Sample
is restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2 who responded to follow-up
survey. Columns 3 and 4 restrict attention to the balance and income groups. Respondents who
answer “Don’t know” or “Prefer not to say” were omitted. Standard errors clustered at unit of
randomization (Department) with unit of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables include a
gender indicator variable, quadratic in age, quadratic in tenure, ln(salary), percentage change in
salary, faculty indicator, and indicators for diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10%
level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.

42

0

.01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07

Figure 1: Outcome Variables by Treatment Group

Control

Planning

Balance

Income

Treatment Group

0

50

100

150

200

(a) 1(∆ Contribution)

Control

Planning

Balance

Income

Treatment Group

(b) ∆ Contribution (Amount): Post - Pre

Notes: 1(∆ Contribution) is an indicator for whether there was any active change in the
election. ∆ Contribution Amount is Period 2 contribution dollar amount minus Period 1
contribution dollar amount. Height of bar equals mean of each variable and brackets indicate
95% conﬁdence interval.

43

Appendix A

Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. Using equations (3) and (1), deﬁne
(
)
G(θ, A∗2 ) ≡ U ′ (Y1 + A1 − A∗2 ) − g(θ)p(βRθ )k U ′ g(θ)pRkθ A∗2 = 0
Applying the implicit function theorem reveals that:
[
][ ′ ∗
]
∂G
θ k ′
′′
∗
kθ ∗
p(βR
)
(g
(θ)
+
g(θ)ln(R)k)
U
(C
)
+
U
(C
)g(θ)pR
A
∂A∗2
2
2
2
∂θ
= − ∂G
=−
∂θ
U ′′ (C1∗ ) + β k [g(θ)pRθk ]2 U ′′ (C2∗ )
∂C ∗
1

The denominator is negative and the leading term of the numerator is positive. Therefore,
the sign of

∂A∗2
∂θ

is the same as that of the bracketed term in the numerator, which follows

the sign of ϵ(θ) − 1.

i

Appendix B

Comparison to National Population

We explore how the study sample compares to the national population. Table B-1 compares
available demographic characteristics of the full administrative sample and the follow-up survey subsample to the Financial Capability Study’s state-by-state, nationally-representative
sample sponsored by FINRA.22 We impose sample restrictions on the FINRA national sample, including working age (18 to 64), employed, and covered by pension plan, to clarify the
extent to which these restriction explain observed diﬀerences between the FINRA and study
samples.
The full sample of University of Minnesota employees is 56 percent female, while the
follow-up survey subsample is 63 percent female (Table B-1). In comparison, the FINRA
national sample is only 48.7 percent female. When we restrict the FINRA sample to the same
ages (18-64) as the study sample, which constitutes 84.8 percent of the national population,
the percent female in FINRA increases to 49.8 percent. When we restrict the national sample
to employed workers, this leaves a subsample that represents 43.8 percent of the national
population and is 54.6 percent female. This reveals that the fraction of the study sample that
is female is similar to the fraction of employed Americans who are female. Finally, when we
add the employer-provided pension plan restriction the FINRA national, which leaves only
28.7 percent of the original FINRA sample, the fraction female remains stable (54.5 percent)
and is comparable to the study sample. Comparing the full study sample to the restricted
FINRA sample also reveals that the age proﬁles are very similar.
The follow-up survey sample, however, is substantially more likely to be white than the
most comparable national subsample (90 versus 68 percent). The follow-up survey sample
is also somewhat more likely to be married (73 versus 64 percent), much more likely to
have a post-graduate degree (52 versus 15 percent), and less liquidity constrained. While
the fractions reporting having tried to ﬁgure how much savings is needed for retirement are
similar, the questions ask about diﬀerent reference periods. In the study survey, 45.2 percent
22

FINRA is the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.

ii

reporting having done this in the last six months, since the Period 1 data pull. In contrast,
the national sample is asked to report having done this ever.
We included select FINRA questions on our follow-up survey to facilitate comparbility
between the follow-up survey sample and the FINRA respodents in terms of ﬁnancial literacy
(Table B-2). The results suggest that, in comparison to the national subsamples, the study’s
follow-up survey subsample is more ﬁnancially satisﬁed, more likely to keep up with economic
and ﬁnancial news, higher self-assessed ﬁnancial literacy, higher score on the ﬁnancial literacy
quiz, and is slightly more willing to take risks. However, they report being about equally
good at day-to-day ﬁnancial matters and equally in agreement with the statement, “I’m
pretty good at math.”

iii

iv
0.185
0.444
0.372
0.304

Liquidity - ease paying monthly bills
Very diﬃcult
0.060
Somewhat diﬃcult
0.282
Not at all diﬃcult
0.657
0.452∗

asks only about last 6 months.

0.336

0.200
0.457
0.344

0.035
0.288
0.421
0.168
0.088

0.159
0.201
0.216
0.231
0.192

0.415

0.153
0.459
0.387

0.019
0.243
0.406
0.217
0.115

0.125
0.234
0.252
0.244
0.146

0.508

0.112
0.435
0.453

0.009
0.193
0.398
0.251
0.149

0.056
0.223
0.278
0.275
0.167

FINRA
+Employed +Empl. Pension
43.8%
28.7%
0.546
0.545
0.644
0.679
0.547
0.641

Notes: In the left panel, “All” refers to the full study sample, while “Survey Resp.” refers to the follow-up survey subsample. In the right panel, “US”
is the state-by-state FINRA nationally representative sample; each subsequent column restricts this sample by the condition listed in the column
header.

∗

1(ﬁgured ret. savings)

0.035
0.293
0.419
0.159
0.094

0.135
0.171
0.183
0.196
0.163

US
Age 18-65
28,146
84.8%
0.487
0.498
0.685
0.649
0.534
0.523

0.000
0.017
0.118
0.346
0.520

Education Indicators
Less than HS
HS Grad
Some College
College Grad.
Post-Grad degree

0.021
0.203
0.246
0.279
0.249

Age Indicators
18-24 years
25-34 years
35-44 years
45-54 years
55-64 years
0.014
0.172
0.205
0.289
0.320

Study
All
Survey Resp.
16,881
21.9%
0.56
0.63
0.90
0.73

Source:
Sample:
Size/Subsample %
1(female)
1(white)
1(married)

Table B-1: Comparison of Study Sample with FINRA Sample: Demographics

v

Study
Survey Resp.
Mean SD
5.5
2.7
5.8
1.4
5.5
1.5
4.4
1.7
4.3
1.5
4.0
1.0
5.4
2.2
US
Mean
4.5
5.6
5.6
4.8
4.9
2.9
4.3
SD
2.8
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.3
1.3
2.6

Age 18-65
Mean SD
4.3
2.7
5.5
1.6
5.6
1.7
4.7
1.8
4.9
1.3
2.9
1.4
4.5
2.6

FINRA
+ Employed + Empl. Pension
Mean SD Mean
SD
4.6
2.6
4.9
2.6
5.5
1.6
5.7
1.6
5.6
1.6
5.8
1.6
4.8
1.7
5.0
1.7
4.9
1.2
5.1
1.2
3.0
1.3
3.2
1.2
4.8
2.5
5.1
2.5

Notes: In the left panel, “Survey Resp.” refers to the follow-up survey subsample of the study. In the right panel, “US” is the state-by-state FINRA
nationally representative sample; each subsequent column restricts this sample by the condition listed in the column header.

Fin. satisfaction
Good at day-to-day
Pretty good at math
Keep up with econ. news
Fin. knowledge (self-assess)
Quiz items correct, of 5
Willing to take risks

Source:
Sample:

Table B-2: Comparison of Study Sample with FINRA Sample: Survey Responses

Appendix C

Intervention Materials

vi

ANS LIKE THE
DIFFERENCES n
OW

E ONLY AVAILABLE
E EMERGENCIES AT
DISCRETION OR IF

OES NOT EXCEED

EN NO PREVIOUS
RIBUTIONS

O CONTRIBUTIONS
S TWO YEARS

A DISTRIBUTION

UM

S PRIOR TO THE
U TURN AGE 
UTE UP TO A
ICE THAT YEARS
IBUTION AMOUNT

RESSIVE GROWTH
CONSERVATIVE
ACCOUNTS WITH
MENT &IDELITY

Figure C-1: Example Brochure: Page 1

Am I on Target to Meet
My Retirement Goals?
Retirement Savings at the University of Minnesota
What sources of income will be available to me in retirement?

How much retirement income will
I want?

s -OST 5NIVERSITY EMPLOYEES PARTICIPATE IN
mandatory retirement plans

0EOPLE TYPICALLY WANT RETIREMENT INCOME TO BE
BETWEEN  AND  OF THEIR EXPECTED INCOME
PRIOR TO RETIREMENT DEPENDING ON THEIR DESIRED
LIFESTYLE

O 4HE -INNESOTA 3TATE 2ETIREMENT 3YSTEM
PROVIDES A TRADITIONAL PENSION TO MOST CIVIL
SERVICE AND NON FACULTY BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEES

My goal is: $____________ per year.

O 4HE &ACULTY 2ETIREMENT 0LAN IS A DElNED
CONTRIBUTION PLAN TO WHICH MOST FACULTY
AND ACADEMIC PROFESSIONALS AND ADMINISTRA
TORS 0! EMPLOYEES CONTRIBUTE

Am I on target to meet my goals?
3OCIAL 3ECURITY AND MANDATORY RETIREMENT PLANS
PROVIDE SOME BUT OFTEN NOT ALL OF THE RETIREMENT
INCOME DESIRED #ONSULT PLAN STATEMENTS 3OCIAL
3ECURITY BENElT STATEMENTS OR ADVISORS FOR ESTI
MATES OF RETIREMENT INCOME FROM THESE SOURCES

s -OST EMPLOYEES ARE ELIGIBLE TO PARTICIPATE IN
Voluntary Retirement Plans WHICH ALLOW UP
TO   OF PRE TAX CONTRIBUTIONS PER YEAR
4HE TWO TYPES OF 6OLUNTARY 2ETIREMENT 0LANS
ARE THE

From Social Security and my mandatory retirement plan, I expect $____________ per year.

O /PTIONAL 2ETIREMENT 0LAN /20 AND

What else can I do?

O 3ECTION  $EFERRED #OMPENSATION 0LAN

6OLUNTARY 2ETIREMENT 0LANS CAN HELP lLL ANY GAP
.EARLY   5NIVERSITY OF -INNESOTA EMPLOYEES
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THESE ADDITIONAL TAX ADVANTAGED
SAVINGS OPPORTUNITIES

s 3UBSTANTIALLY ALL 5NIVERSITY EMPLOYEES ALSO PAR
TICIPATE IN THE FEDERAL Social Security SYSTEM

MINATION OR THE
WHICH YOU ATTAIN
"ROUGHT TO YOU BY

vii

viii

$100
$200

+ $76,000

$500

$100

$200

+ $4,800

$500

' "!!"! ! &
!"!"!!!!
' " ! !!""&
' "" &""!
!!" ! "##"!&
$& %"!  !&"
&" "  #

Assumptions. 4HE TRUE VALUES OF THESE FUTURE
OUTCOMES ARE UNCERTAIN AND ALL PROJECTIONS DEPEND
ON ASSUMPTIONS 4HE ABOVE PROJECTIONS ASSUME
-ARITAL STATUS
%XPECTED RETIREMENT AGE
!VERAGE ANNUAL RATE OF INVESTMENT RETURN
/THER SOURCES OF RETIREMENT INCOME

4HE ONLINE CALCULATOR WILL ALSO ALLOW YOU TO INPUT
AN EXPECTED RATE OF INmATION TO REmECT THE ABOVE
lGURES IN TODAYS DOLLARS

s
s
s
s

EMAIL GIVING YOU ACCESS TO OUR ONLINE CALCULATOR
(ERE YOU CAN PERSONALIZE THE PROJECTIONS FURTHER
BY CHANGING ASSUMPTIONS REGARDING YOUR

Online calculator. 9OU WILL SOON RECEIVE AN

Additional contributions per pay period

$0

+ $0

+ $2,400

+ $12,000

…how much additional annual income in retirement can I expect to receive from these
additional savings?

Additional contributions per pay period

$0

+ $0

+ $38,000

+ $189,000

…how much additional savings at retirement can I expect to have?

If I begin making additional contributions now…

5NIVERSITY OF -INNESOTA
%MPLOYEE "ENElTS
 $ONHOWE
 TH !VENUE 3%
-INNEAPOLIS -.  

2ETURN THE COMPLETED FORMS TO

3ELECT AN INVESTMENT COMPANY AND COM
PLETE THE ACCOUNT ENROLLMENT FORM FOR
THE COMPANY OR COMPANIES YOU SELECT

2ETURN THE FORM TO

Step 2:

Talk to the Employee Benefits Service Center
at (612) 624-9090, option 2.

Got questions? Get answers.

Preparing for a
lifetime is worth
a few minutes
of your time!

)F YOU WANT ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON THE INVEST
MENT COMPANIES OR INVESTMENT OPTIONS PLEASE
SELECT @9ES ON THE ENCLOSED )NFORMATION AND
%NROLLMENT +IT 2EQUEST #ARD AND DROP IN )NTER
CAMPUS MAIL FOR 4WIN #ITIES #AMPUS OR 53
-AIL #ROOKSTON $ULUTH -ORRIS OR 2OCHESTER 

5NIVERSITY OF -INNESOTA
%MPLOYEE "ENElTS
 $ONHOWE
 TH !VENUE 3%
-INNEAPOLIS -.  

&ILL OUT THE ENCLOSED  PAGE 3ALARY
2EDUCTION !GREEMENT /20 OR 2ETIRE
MENT 3AVINGS !GREEMENT  0LAN
WITH YOUR NEW RATE OR AMOUNT

Step 1:

I already participate in a Voluntary
Retirement Plan. How do I change my
contribution rate?



!TTEND A 6OLUNTARY 2ETIREMENT 0ROGRAM WORKSHOP WHERE YOU WILL LEARN ABOUT THE TWO PLANS
AND YOUR INVESTMENT OPTIONS #ALL THE %MPLOYEE "ENElTS 3ERVICE #ENTER AT   
AND SELECT /PTION  FOR DATES AND REGISTRATION

6ISIT WWWUMNEDUOHRBENElTSRETIRESAVEINDEXHTML

#ALL THE %MPLOYEE "ENElTS 3ERVICE #ENTER AT    AND SELECT /PTION 

To learn more about Retirement Savings Plans at the University of Minnesota, you can:

For more information…

Step 5:

Step 4:

#HOOSE YOUR PER PAY PERIOD SAVINGS
RATE AND COMPLETE THE 3ALARY 2EDUCTION
!GREEMENT /20 OR 2ETIREMENT 3AV
INGS !GREEMENT  0LAN 

#HOOSE THE /PTIONAL 2ETIREMENT 0LAN
OR THE 3ECTION  0LAN -ORE INFORMA
TION ABOUT THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE
TWO PLANS IS PROVIDED IN THIS BROCHURE

Step 2:

Step 3:

$ROP THE ENCLOSED )NFORMATION AND
%NROLLMENT +IT 2EQUEST #ARD IN
#AMPUS MAIL FOR 4WIN #ITIES OR 53
-AIL FOR #ROOKSTON $ULUTH -ORRIS
OR 2OCHESTER  )N A FEW WEEKS YOU WILL
RECEIVE THE RELEVANT INFORMATION AND
ENROLLMENT FORMS

Step 1:

I am not currently enrolled in a
Voluntary Retirement Plan. How do
I participate?

Figure C-2: Example Brochure for Income Treatment: Pages 2-3

!! !!  !!!

Additional savings
at retirement

Additional annual income
in retirement

Figure C-3: Example Brochure Final Page
Comparing the Optional Retirement and 457 Plans
0ENSION LAW SIMPLIlED  0LANS TO BRING THEM MORE IN LINE WITH QUALIlED RETIREMENT PLANS LIKE THE
/PTIONAL 2ETIREMENT 0LAN (OWEVER DIFFERENCES STILL EXIST 4O HELP YOU UNDERSTAND THESE DIFFERENCES n
SO YOU CAN MAKE THE MOST OF YOUR RETIREMENT SAVING OPPORTUNITIES n REVIEW THE CHART BELOW

)N SERVICE DISTRIBUTIONS
WHILE EMPLOYED

Optional Retirement Plan

457 Plan

s $ISTRIBUTIONS MAY BE MADE FOR
ANY lNANCIAL HARDSHIP IN CLUDING
COLLEGE EDUCATION AT THE
5NIVERSITYS DISCRETION

$ISTRIBUTIONS ARE ONLY AVAILABLE
FOR UNFORESEEABLE EMERGENCIES AT
THE 5NIVERSITYS DISCRETION OR IF

s !VAILABLE AFTER AGE 
ANY REASON

FOR

s 9OUR BALANCE DOES NOT EXCEED
 
s 4HERE HAVE BEEN NO PREVIOUS
IN SERVICE DISTRIBUTIONS
s 9OUVE MADE NO CONTRIBUTIONS
IN THE PREVIOUS TWO YEARS
s 9OU ELECT SUCH A DISTRIBUTION

!NNUAL CONTRIBUTION
LIMITS

 -INIMUM
  -AXIMUM

.O MINIMUM
  -AXIMUM

#ATCH UP CONTRIBUTIONS

-AY BE MADE BEGINNING AT AGE 

)N THE THREE YEARS PRIOR TO THE
YEAR IN WHICH YOU TURN AGE 
YOU MAY CONTRIBUTE UP TO A
MAXIMUM OF TWICE THAT YEARS
MAXIMUM CONTRIBUTION AMOUNT

,OANS

5P TO  PERCENT OF YOUR BALANCE
MAY BE AVAILABLE TO YOU AS A LOAN
TO A MAXIMUM OF  

.OT ALLOWED

)NVESTMENT OPTIONS

2ANGE FROM AGGRESSIVE GROWTH
MUTUAL FUNDS TO CONSERVATIVE
INTEREST BEARING ACCOUNTS WITH
3ECURIAN 2ETIREMENT &IDELITY
6ANGUARD AND $73 3CUDDER
)NVESTMENTS

2ANGE FROM AGGRESSIVE GROWTH
MUTUAL FUNDS TO CONSERVATIVE
INTEREST BEARING ACCOUNTS WITH
3ECURIAN 2ETIREMENT &IDELITY
AND 6ANGUARD

4HE EARLIER OF TERMINATION OF
EMPLOYMENT OR REACHING AGE 

4HE LATER OF TERMINATION OR THE
CALENDAR YEAR IN WHICH YOU ATTAIN
AGE 

-ONEY BECOMES AVAILABLE

ix

s -OST 5NIVERSIT

O 4HE -INN
PROVIDES A
SERVICE AN
EMPLOYEES

O 4HE &ACUL
CONTRIBUTI
AND ACADE
TORS 0!

s -OST EMPLOYEE

TO   OF P
4HE TWO TYPES
ARE THE
O /PTIONAL

O 3ECTION 

s 3UBSTANTIALLY A
TICIPATE IN THE

Figure C-4: Online Customization Tool Screenshot: Income Treatment

x

Appendix D

Balance across Treatment Groups: Full
and Follow-up Survey Samples

Observable characteristics by treatment group are shown for the full administrative sample
in Table D-1. Each characteristic was regessed on treatment group indicators with the
mean of the characteristic for the control group shown in a row below. We report the Fstatistic for the joint test of the hypothesis that all coeﬁcients on the planning, balance and
income group indicator variables are zero and report the p-value of the test at the bottom
of the table. The shaded columns represent characteristics which were explicitly balanced
across treatment groups in the randomization procedure. The table shows that there are
very few statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in observable characteristics across treatment
groups. The only characteristic that diﬀers signiﬁcantly across the diﬀerent groups is gender,
with a statistically higher percentage of women in the income group. For the remaining
characteristics, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that there are diﬀerences across the four
experimental groups.
In terms of the follow-up survey sample, Table D-2 presents evidence on what factors
inﬂuence survey response by regressing a dummy variable for survey response on treatment
group and incentive group indicators. Column 1 shows that being assigned into one of
the three groups sent printed materials signiﬁcantly reduced the likelihood of response: the
response rate was 24 percent in the control group, and 2-3 percentage points lower in the
planning, balance, and income groups. These estimates suggest that the reduction in survey
response was due to a general hassle factor from receiving repeated communication from the
researchers rather than a speciﬁc piece of information contained in the balance or income
group mailings. Column 2 shows that the small $2 non-conditional incentive sent at the
outset of the experiment led to a statistically signiﬁcant increase in response rates, and
Column 3 shows that the eﬀect of the incentive on response rates did not signiﬁcantly diﬀer

xi

across treatment groups.23
We next examine the demographic characteristics of the survey respondents, how they
diﬀer from our full administrative sample, and whether the diﬀerences in response rates
across treatment groups led to observable diﬀerences across treatment groups in our survey
subsample. Table D-3 shows the results of regressing several observable characteristics on
treatment group dummies for the survey subsample. As in Table D-1, we report the mean
of the characteristic for the control group and the p-value for the joint test of the hypothesis
that all coeﬁcients on the planning, balance and income group indicator variables are zero
at the bottom of the table.
Compared to Table D-1, our survey subsample is more likely to be female, has a greater
number of faculty, and are more likely to be VRP participants. However, there are very few
instances where observable characteristics diﬀer signiﬁcantly across treatment groups within
the survey subsample. The reported p-values are generally higher than conventional levels of
signiﬁcance, with the exception of that for age, where the respondents in the income group
are approximately one year older than respondents in the control group. Table D-4 shows the
treatment eﬀects of our administrative outcomes in our survey subsample. The estimated
treatment eﬀects are larger in magnitude relative to our full administrative sample.
Together, this evidence indicates that survey responders are not an entirely representative
sample of our population, as there are some diﬀerences in observable characteristics between
survey responders and the entire sample, and treatment eﬀects are larger. However, the
results in Table D-3 suggest that the diﬀerential response rate across treatment groups did
not create large imbalances in observable characteristics across treatment groups within the
survey subsample. Assuming that the data are missing at random conditional on observables,
there are still insights to be gained from the richer set of information available from survey
responders.

23

The incentive had a substantial eﬀect on survey response despite the fact that it was provided approximately four months prior to the survey.

xii

xiii
1,385
16,881
4.3253
0.0048

Departments
Individuals

F-Statistic
p-value

0.3811
0.7666

1,385
16,881

44.9451

0.1322
0.9409

1,385
16,881

12.4280

0.4994
0.6828

1,385
16,881

10.8471

0.7772
0.5067

1,385
16,881

0.0190

0.4096
0.7461

1,385
16,881

0.4263

0.1123
0.9530

1,385
16,881

0.2419

0.7797
0.5053

1,385
16,881

2348.3678

Notes: Dependent variable as indicated in column header. Shaded columns indicate variables used to balance randomization. Sample is
restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2. F-statistics for the joint test of the hypothesis that all coeﬃcients on the
planning, balance and income group indicator variables equal zero and the p-value of the F-test are reported at the bottom of the table.
Standard errors clustered at unit of randomization (Department) with unit of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the
10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.

0.5388

Control Mean

Adj. R2

1(Income)

1(Balance)

1(Planning)

Table D-1: Demographics by Treatment Group: Full Sample
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
1(Female)
Age
Tenure ln(Salary) % ∆ Salary 1(Faculty) Participant Cont. Amt.
-0.021
-0.070
0.009
-0.004
-0.022
0.001
-70.676
0.027
(0.021)
(0.165) (0.255)
(0.013)
(0.003)
(0.023)
(0.005)
(141.216)
-0.015
0.041
0.069
-0.008
-0.005
-0.005
0.002
94.308
(0.021)
(0.190) (0.259)
(0.014)
(0.003)
(0.022)
(0.005)
(139.693)
∗∗∗
0.061
0.134
-0.050
-0.001
-0.004
-0.019
0.002
-86.059
(0.023)
(0.175) (0.275)
(0.014)
(0.003)
(0.025)
(0.005)
(145.598)
0.057
0.139
0.065
0.241
0.117
0.151
0.087
0.048

Table D-2: Survey Response by Treatment Group and Incentives
(1)
(2)
(3)
1(Planning)
-0.024∗∗
-0.021∗
(0.010)
(0.011)
∗∗∗
1(Balance)
-0.039
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.010)
(0.011)
∗∗∗
1(Income)
-0.028
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.010)
(0.011)
∗∗∗
1(Incentive)
0.090
0.083∗∗∗
(0.013)
(0.029)
1(Incentive) X 1(Planning)
-0.032
(0.039)
1(Incentive) X 1(Balance)
0.006
(0.038)
1(Incentive) X 1(Income)
0.054
(0.039)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
2
Adj. R
0.043
0.048
0.049
Control Mean

0.2402

0.2489

0.2489

Departments
Individuals

1,385
16,881

1,046
13,667

1,046
13,667

Notes: Dependent variable is indicator variable for survey responder. Control group is the excluded
category. 1(Incentive) is indicator variable for receipt of non-conditional $2 incentive in beginning
of study. Sample is restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2. Columns 2 and
3 restrict attention to the Twin Cities campus because only that campus was eligible to receive the
non-conditional incentive. Standard errors clustered at unit of randomization (Department) with
unit of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables include a gender indicator variable, quadratic
in age, quadratic in tenure, ln(salary), percentage change in salary, faculty indicator, and indicators
for diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1%
level.

xiv

xv
996
3,688
0.8783
0.4518

Departments
Individuals

F-Statistic
p-value

2.6859
0.0454

996
3,688
0.3950
0.7566

996
3,688

46.5902 13.9888

1.6723
0.1713

996
3,688

10.9388

0.7318
0.5331

996
3,688

0.0129

2.0371
0.1070

996
3,688

0.4652

0.6906
0.5579

996
3,688

0.3402

0.1998
0.8966

996
3,688

3208.2060

Notes: Dependent variable as indicated in column header. Control group is the excluded category. Sample is restricted to employees
present in both Period 1 and Period 2 who responded to follow-up survey. Standard errors clustered at unit of randomization (Department)
with unit of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables include a gender indicator variable, quadratic in age, quadratic in tenure,
ln(salary), percentage change in salary, faculty indicator, and indicators for diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10% level;
** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.

0.6219

Control Mean

Table D-3: Demographics by Treatment Group: Follow-up Survey Sample
1(Female) Age
Tenure ln(Salary) % ∆ Salary 1(Faculty) Participant Cont. Amt.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
∗∗
1(Planning)
-0.001
-0.060 -0.285
0.000
0.001
-0.058
0.007
-220.877
(0.027) (0.480) (0.461) (0.017)
(0.003)
(0.027)
(0.018)
(309.109)
1(Balance)
0.007
0.096 -0.261
-0.011
0.004
-0.001
0.004
-48.095
(0.029) (0.561) (0.498) (0.020)
(0.003)
(0.028)
(0.018)
(307.736)
∗∗
1(Income)
0.037
1.096
0.174
0.029
0.004
-0.009
0.025
-139.883
(0.027) (0.510) (0.516) (0.018)
(0.003)
(0.030)
(0.018)
(315.246)
Adj. R2
0.038
0.137
0.059
0.189
-0.010
0.088
0.093
0.027

Table D-4: Eﬀect of Interventions: Follow-Up Survey Subample
Outcome:
1(∆ Contrib.)
∆ Contrib. Amt.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
1(Planning)
0.028∗∗ 0.034∗∗∗ 0.032∗∗∗
92.410
146.974
156.591
(0.013) (0.012) (0.012)
(94.572)
(107.036) (108.575)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
1(Balance)
0.042
0.051
0.051
101.140
145.999
154.868
(0.014) (0.013) (0.013) (109.785) (127.414) (128.151)
1(Income)
0.050∗∗∗ 0.058∗∗∗ 0.054∗∗∗ 326.426∗∗∗ 391.536∗∗∗ 385.563∗∗∗
(0.012) (0.012) (0.012)
(97.782)
(114.756) (114.828)
Quad FEs
Controls
Adj. R2

No
No
0.004

Yes
No
0.013

Yes
Yes
0.018

No
No
0.002

Yes
No
-0.019

Yes
Yes
-0.017

Control Mean

0.0625

0.0625

0.0625

119.7863

119.7863

119.7863

Departments
Individuals

996
3,688

996
3,688

996
3,688

996
3,688

996
3,688

996
3,688

Notes:Notes:1(∆ Contrib.) is an indicator for whether there was any change in the election and ∆
Contrib. Amt. is Period 2 contribution dollar amount minus Period 1 contribution dollar amount.
Control group is the excluded category. Sample is restricted to employees present in both Period
1 and Period 2 and who responded to the follow-up survey. Standard errors clustered at unit of
randomization (Department) with unit of stratiﬁcation ﬁxed eﬀects. Control variables in columns
(3) and (6) include a gender indicator variable, quadratic in age, quadratic in tenure, ln(salary),
percentage change in salary, faculty indicator, and indicators for diﬀerent campuses. * Signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.

xvi

Appendix E

Distributions of Survey Item Responses

xvii

.2

.15

µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

0
2
4
6
8
Difficult to find info that will help me decide how much to save for retirement

µ−2σ

µ

µ+σ

2
4
6
Better informed about retirement planning

µ−σ

µ+2σ

8

.6

.4

.2

0

µ

µ+σ

2
4
6
8
I understand how savings today could affect my retirement income

µ−σ

µ+2σ
.2
.15
Fraction
.1
.05
0

Fraction

No
Figured ret. savings

Yes

0

µ−2σ

µ

µ+σ

2
4
6
Certainty about HH retirement income

µ−σ

µ+2σ

8

0

µ−2σ

2

µ

µ+σ

4
6
8
Satisfaction with personal financial condition

µ−σ

10

µ+2σ

Notes: Sample is restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2 who responded to follow-up survey. Responses
exclude individuals who answered “don’t know” or “prefer not to say.”

(d) “I understand how savings today could (e) “How certain are you about the amount (f) “Overall, thinking of your assets, debts
aﬀect my retirement income.”
of annual retirement income you expect and savings, how satisﬁed are you with your
your household to have?”
current personal ﬁnancial condition?”

0

µ−2σ

Fraction

(a) “It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd information that (b) “I am better informed about retirement (c) “In the last 6 months, have you tried to
will help me decide how much to save for planning than I was 6 months ago.”
ﬁgure out how much you need to save for
retirement.”
retirement?”

0

µ−2σ

Fraction

Figure E-1: Survey Responses: Alternative Outcomes

.05

0

Fraction
.1

.4
.3
Fraction
.2
.1
0

.6
.4
.2
0
.15
.1
.05
0

xviii

0

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

2
4
6
Nowadays, a person has to live pretty much for today

µ−σ

8

µ−2σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

Not at all
Somewhat
Very
Difficulty in covering expenses/paying bills in typical month

µ−σ

0

µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

2
4
6
When I make a plan to do something, I am good at following through

µ−2σ

8

µ+2σ

µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

.2

.15

Fraction
.1

.05

0

.25
.2
Fraction
.15
.1
.05
0
0

µ−2σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

2
4
6
Find most retirement planning info easy to use

µ−σ

8

µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

0
2
4
6
8
Find it overwhelming to think about how much I need to save for retirement

µ−2σ

Notes: Sample is restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2 who responded to follow-up survey. Responses
exclude individuals who answered “don’t know” or “prefer not to say.”

(d) “I tend to put oﬀ thinking about how (e) “I ﬁnd most retirement planning infor- (f) “I ﬁnd it overwhelming to think about
much money I need to save for retirement.” mation easy to use.”
how much I need to save for retirement.”

0
2
4
6
8
I tend to put off thinking about how much $ I need to save for retirement

µ−2σ

(a) “Nowadays, a person has to live pretty (b) “In a typical month, how diﬃcult is it (c) “When I make a plan to do something,
much for today and let tomorrow take care for you to cover your expenses and pay all I am good at following through.”
of itself.”
your bills?”

µ−2σ

Fraction

Figure E-2: Survey Responses: Measures of Heterogeneity in Rational-Actor Factors, Time-Inconsistency, and Limited Cognition

.5

.4

Fraction
.3

.2

.1

0

.8
.6
Fraction
.4
.2
0

.3
.2
.1
0
.2
.15
Fraction
.1
.05
0

xix

.25

.2

Fraction
.15

0

µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

2
4
6
Assess your overall financial knowledge (7=high)

µ−2σ

µ+2σ

8

.3

.4

µ

µ+σ

2
4
6
Regularly keep up with economic/financial news

µ−σ

8

µ+2σ

0

µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

2
4
6
Good at dealing with day−to−day financial matters

µ−2σ

8

µ+2σ

.1
0

µ

µ+σ

2
4
Number of fin lit qs answered correctly (out of 6)

µ−σ

2

4
Pretty good at math

µ−σ

µ

6

µ+σ

8

6

µ+2σ

(c) “I am pretty good at math.”

0

µ−2σ

µ+2σ

Notes: SSample is restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2 who responded to follow-up survey. Responses
exclude individuals who answered “don’t know” or “prefer not to say.”

(d) “I am good at dealing with day-to-day (e) Number of questions answered correctly
ﬁnancial matters...”
on ﬁnancial literacy quiz

0

µ−2σ

(a) “On a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 (b) “I regularly keep up with economic and
means very low and 7 means very high, ﬁnancial news.”
how would you assess your overall ﬁnancial
knowledge?”

0

µ−2σ

Figure E-3: Survey Responses: Financial Literacy

.05

0

.1

.25
.2
Fraction
.15

.3
Fraction
.2
.1
0

.1
.05
0
Fraction
.2

.4
.3
Fraction
.2
.1
0

xx

0

.05

.1

Fraction
.15

.2

.25

Figure E-4: Survey Responses: Retirement Age and Investment Return Beliefs

55

60

65
Exp. Ret Age

70

75

0

.05

.1

Fraction
.15

.2

.25

(a) Expected Retirement Age

0

2

4

6

8

10

Exp. Return

(b) Expected Rate of Return

Notes: Sample is restricted to employees present in both Period 1 and Period 2 who responded
to follow-up survey. Responses exclude individuals who answered “don’t know” or “prefer
not to say.”

xxi

Appendix F

Financial Literacy Questions

The following questions comprise the ﬁnancial literacy quiz provided to survey respondents.24
Correct answers are marked in bold.
1. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inﬂation
was 2% per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money
in this account?
(a) More than today
(b) Exactly the same
(c) Less than today
(d) Don’t know
(e) Prefer not to say
2. Do you think the following statement is true or false? “Buying a single company stock
usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.”
(a) True
(b) False
(c) Don’t know
(d) Prefer not to say
3. Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year.
After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the
money to grow:
(a) More than $102
(b) Exactly $102
(c) Less than $102
(d) Don’t know
(e) Prefer not to say
4. If interest rates rise, what will typically happen to bond prices?
(a) They will rise
(b) They will fall
(c) They will stay the same
(d) There is no relationship between bond prices and the interest rate
(e) Don’t know
24

Questions taken from Lusardi and Mitchell (2007).

xxii

(f) Prefer not to say
5. Do you think the following statement is true or false? “A 15-year mortgage typically
requires higher monthly payments than a 30-year mortgage, but the total interest paid
over the life of the loan will be less.”
(a) True
(b) False
(c) Don’t know
(d) Prefer not to say
6. Let’s say you have $200 in a savings account. The account earns 10 percent interest per
year. How much would you have in the account at the end of two years? [open-ended;
correct answer = $242]

xxiii

