NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPPLY SIDE ECONOMICS:
OLD TRUTHS AND NEW CLAIMS

Martin Feldstejn

Working Paper No. 1792

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project -in Government Budgets. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #179 2

January

1986

Supply Side Economics:
Old Truths and New ClairtE

ABSTBCT

This

paper, prepared for the annual meetings of the American Economic

Association, examines the claims that were made at the beginning of the decade
by the "new" supply-siders and contrasts their views with the traditional

supply-side economics that has been a prominent part of economics since

Adam Smith. The analysis gives particular attention to the pace of recovery
and growthand to the revenue effects of the 1981 tax cut.

Martin Feldstein
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cairbridge, MA 02138

Supply Side Economics:
Old Truths and New Claims

Martin Feldstein*

I am pleased that the American Economic Association has chosen to devote

this session to assessing the idea of "supply side economics." Experience has
shown that the notion is a malleable one, easily misused by its supporters,
maligned by its opponents, and misinterpreted by the public at large.
Perhaps now, five years after supply side economics became a slogan for a
changing economic policy, it is possible to assess what supply side policy
really means and how the policies adopted under that banner have fared.
The term supply side economics originated as a way of describing an

alternative to the demand side emphasis of Keynesian economics. The essence
of Keynesian analysis is its conclusion that the level of national income and
employment depend on the level of aggregate demand and that easy money and
expanded budget deficits, by stimulating demand, can increase output and

employment. Although this may have been an appropriate emphasis during the
depression years of the 1930s when Keynes developed his theory, by the 1960s
and 1970s it was clear to most economists that it was wrong to focus
exclusively on demand and to ignore the factors that increase the potential
supply of output --

capital

accumulation, technical progress, improvements in

the quality of the labor force, freedom from regulatory interference, and

increases in personal incentives. Many of us also concluded that the

*Professor of Economics, Harvard University and President of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for presentation at the
annual meeting of the American Economic Association on December 29, 1985, at
the session entitled "Supply Side Economics: What Remains?"

—2-

persistently high level of measured unemployment did not reflect inadequate
demand but was due to government policies like unemployment insurance, welfare
restrictions, and the minimum wage that reduced the effective supply of labor.
In all of these ways, many of us were supply-siders before we ever heard

the term supply-side economics. Indeed, much of our "supply side economics"
was a return to basic ideas about creating capacity and removing government
impediments to individual initiative that were central in Adam Smith's Wealth

of Nations and in the writings of the classical economists of the nineteenth

century. The experience of the 1930s had temporarily made it easy to forget
the importance of the supply factors but by the 1970s they were returning to
the mainstream of economics.1

It is important therefore in any discussion of supply side economics to
distinguish the traditional supply side emphasis that characterized most
economic policy analysis during the past 200 years from the new supply side
rhetoric that came to the fore as the decade began.

I.

The Shift in Policy

Economic policy took a few hesitating steps in the traditional

supply-side direction in the late 1970s with deregulation in the
transportation industry, a significant reduction in the tax on capital gains,

and the partial taxation of unemployment compensation. But it was only in
1981 that Congress enacted the major tax bill that has become the centerpiece
of supply-side economics.

1These ideas are discussed in Feldstein (1981, 1982).

—3-

The emphasis throughout that tax legislation was on changing marginal tax
rates to strengthen incentives for work, saving, investment and risk-taking.
For individual taxpayers, the basic features of the Economic Recovery Tax Act

of 1981 were a 25 percent across the board reduction in personal tax rates, an
extra tax reduction for two-earner families, an increased exemption for longterm capital gains, and the creation of universal Individual Retirement

Accounts that effectively permit the majority of American employees to save
as much as they want out of pretax income and pay tax on those savings on a

consumption tax basis. Personal tax brackets were also indexed to prevent
inflation from raising real tax burdens (although this indexing was only

scheduled to begin in 1985). For businesses, the 1981 legislation contained
accelerated depreciation schedules that significantly reduced the cost of
investment in plant and equipment and an increased tax credit for research and
development.

The Reagan administration also began an unprecedented reversal of the
share of GNP absorbed by government nondefense spending. Those outlays
'beclined from 15.1 percent of GNP in fiscal year 1980 to 14.1 percent of GNP

in FY 1984. When the Social Security and Medicare outlays are excluded, this
spending declined from 9.3 percent of GNP in 1980 to 7.4 percent in 1984.
These spending reductions were significant not only because they released
resources that could be used to finance tax rate reductions but also because
they were often achieved by shrinking programs that in themselves had adverse
incentive effects.

President Reagan also provided strong support for the anti-inflationary

Federal Reserve policies. The sharp fall in inflation between 1980 and 1982

—4—

significantly reduced the effective tax rates on the return to corporate
capital, increasing the real after-tax return to savers as well as reducing
the uncertainty of saving and investment.2

II. Excessive Claims
These policies were a major step in the direction recommended by supply

side economists of both the new and old varieties. What distinguished the new
supply siders from the traditional supply siders as the 1980s began was not
the policies they advocated but the claims that they made for those policies.
The traditional supply siders —- and, although I dislike labels, I
consider myself one of that group —- were content to claim that the pursuit of

such tax, spending and monetary policies would, over the long run, lead to
increased real incomes and a higher standard of living. We recognized that the

key to this process was increased saving and investment and knew that that
would take a long time to have a noticeable effect.3

The "new" supply siders were much more extravagant in their claims. They
projected rapid growth, dramatic increases in tax revenue, a sharp rise in

saving, and a relatively painless reduction in inflation. The height of supply
side hyperbole was the "Laffer curve" proposition that the tax cut would
actually increase tax revenue because it would unleash an enormously

depressed supply of effort. Another remarkable proposition was the claim

2The effects of inflation on effective tax rates on investment in plant
and equipment are analyzed in the papers collected in Feldstein (1983a).
3Some of us were also nervous about the magnitude of the enlarged tax cut
that emerged from the bargaining between the Congressional Democrats and
Republicans. I advocated making a large part of the personal tax cut an
immediate indexing of the tax brackets (to eliminate the risk of a real tax
cut that was either bigger or smaller than needed to offset bracket creep
during the years 1981 to 1985) and phasing in much of the remaining tax cut
only as spending cuts were achieved.

—5-

that even if the tax cuts did lead to an increased budget deficit, that would
not reduce the funds available for investment in plant and equipment because
tax changes would raise the saving rate by enough to finance the increased

deficit. It was also claimed that the rapid rise in real output that would
result from the increased incentive to work would slow the rate of inflation
without the need for a rise in unemployment because the increased

supply of

goods and services could absorb the rising nominal demand.
Probably no single individual made all of those claims --

at

least not at

the same time. And anyone who feels the need to defend his name can argue that
the Administration's 1981 economic program was not enacted exactly as

proposed. Nevertheless, I have no doubt that the loose talk of the supply
side extremists gave fundamentally good policies a bad name and led to
quantitative mistakes that not only contributed to subsequent budget deficits
but that also made it more difficult to modify policy when those deficits
became apparent.

III. Growth and Recovery
To assess the claims of the new supply siders, it is useful to compare
the actual growth of real GNP between 1981 and 1985 with the growth that the
supply siders initially projected. The record shows that real GNP increased
10.9 percent between 1981 and 1985, only slightly more than half of the 19.1
percent predicted in the Reagan administration's original economic plan.4
This 45 percent shortfall in economic growth cannot be blamed, as some

4America's New Beginning: A Program for Economic Recovery. The White
House, February 18, 1981, page S-i. This official forecast predicted less
growth than some of the more ardent new suppply-siders anticipated.

—6-

of the new supply siders would now do, on a failure of the Federal Reserve to

supply as much money and credit as the plan originally envisioned. The
President's 1981 Program for Economic Recovery assumed that "the growth rates
of money and credit are gradually reduced from the 1980 levels to one-half
those levels by 1986" (page 23) while the actual money growth rates have
hardly declined at all since 1981.

Although the original forecast of nearly 5 percent a year real growth
from 1981 to 1985 was improbable on the basis of both historic experience and
economic theory, the shortfall was clearly exacerbated by the recession that
depressed GNP from the third quarter of 1981 until the final quarter of 1982.
The new supply siders were naively optimistic when they claimed that the
double digit inflation of 1980 and 1981 could be halved in a few years without
any increase in unemployment simply by increasing output enough through
improved incentives to absorb the excess demand.

Most of the new supply-siders have now conveniently forgotten the
substantial discrepancy between their growth forecast and the subsequent

experience. But some of the supply-side extremists even claim that the recovery
was delayed because individuals preferred to "consume leisure" and were

waiting to return to work until the final stage of the tax rate reduction had

occurred. Anyone who believes that that explains the 10.7 percent
unemployment in December 1982 has not studied the data on the composition and
timing of unemployment or on the relation between the spending upturn and

subsequent reductions in unemployment. And those who wish to believe that the
cut in the tax rate stimulated a major increase in the number of people wanting
to work will be disappointed by the data on labor force participation rates.

—7—

During the first four quarters of the recovery, real GNP increased at

about the average pace of the previous recoveries. In the second year of the
recovery, the rise in GNP exceeded the past norm. But now, 11 quarters after
the recovery began, the cumulative rise in GNP has settled back to the middle
of the range of past recoveries.

How much of the recovery has been due to the stimulus to increased supply

that was provided by the new policies?5 I have already commented on the lack
of evidence of an induced increase in the number of people wanting to work.
But it would be equally wrong to view the recovery as the result of the fiscal
stimulus to demand as some traditional Keynesians have done (e.g., Tobin
(1984)).

In fact, the rise in nominal GNP since 1982 can be more than fully
explained by the traditional relationship to the lagged increase in money

(Ml). The division of the nominal GNP increase between real GNP and inflation
was, however, more favorable than would have been expected on the basis of
past experience; somewhere around 2 percent of the 15 percent rise in real GNP

since the recovery began cannot be explained by the increase of nominal GNP and
the past pattern of inflation and might therefore be attributed to supply side

factors. However, the rise in the exchange rate fully explains the relatively
favorable inflation experience and leaves no unexplained rise in real GNP. Of
course, it might be argued that supply side factors contributed to the dollar's

rise. Only further research will resolve whether supply side influences have
contributed to the rise in real GNP since 1981.

5The remainder of this section is based on Feldstein (1986).

-8-

Let me emphasize that, to a traditional supply sider like me, the positive
but apparently modest supply-side effect is neither surprising nor

disappointing. Although we would expect some increase in work effort from the
reduction in the highest marginal tax rates, past evidence all points to

relatively small changes. The favorable effects of improved incentives for
saving and investment can only be expected after a much longer period of time.

IV. Tax Revenue
Perhaps the most dramatic claim of some of the new supply siders was that

an across-the-board reduction in tax rates would be self—financing within a
few years because of the increased output that results from the enhanced after

tax pay.6 It is, of course, very difficult to disentangle the effects of the
tax legislation from other things that influenced tax revenue. But a very
careful study by my colleague Lawrence Lindsey (1985a,b) indicates that in
1982 the response of taxpayers did offset about one-third percent of the
effect of the tax cut on Federal receipts.

Lindsey reports that about 65 percent of the induced offsetting rise in
tax revenue reflects higher pretax wages, salaries and business profits than
would have been anticipated without the change in tax rates and tax rules,
25 percent reflects an increase in realized capital gains, and the remaining

10 percent is due to reductions in various itemized deductions. These induced
offsetting effects are very small among taxpayers with incomes below $20,000.
Only among taxpayers whose initial marginal tax rates exceeded 50 percent was
there evidence that the rate reduction did not reduce federal revenue at all.

6The administration never made such a claim although the unusually strong
real growth that it predicted for the first five years would have been
sufficient to recoup between half and three-quarters of the proposed
30 percent tax cut.

-.9-

Only time will tell whether this first-year tax

response overstates the

long term effect (because it reflects a shift in the timing of income
receipts and deductions rather than a more fundamental

change in behavior)

or understates the long-term effect (because it takes time for taxpayers to

adjust their behavior to new tax rules). But the effect for 1982 is clearly an
economically significant one. Although the increase in taxable income fell
far short of the claims made by the

over-optimistic new supply-siders and may

have been due in large part to a restructuring of income (e.g., from fringe
benefits to cash) rather than an increase in work effort, the rise in taxable,
income is a reminder that the traditional

revenue estimation method that

ignores the behavioral response to tax changes can be very misleading
(Feldstein 1983b).

V.

Conclusion
The experience since 1981 has not been kind to the claims of the new

supply side extremists that an across-the-board reduction in tax rates would
spur unprecedented growth, reduce inflation painlessly, increase tax revenue
and stimulate a spectacular rise in personal saving. Each of those predictions
has proven to be wrong.

But it would be unfortunate if this gave a bad reputation to the
traditional supply side verities that the evolution of a nationts real income
depends on its accumulation of physical and intellectual capital and on the

quality and efforts of its workforce. Moreover, nothing about the experience
since 1981 would cause us to doubt the time-honored conclusion of economists
that tax rules influence economic behavior and that high marginal tax rates

-P10-

reduce incentives.

Indeed, the evidence suggests that the reduction in tax rates did have a
favorable effect on work incentives and on real GNP and that the resulting
loss of tax revenue was significantly less than the traditional revenue

estimates would imply. Traditional supply side considerations are undoubtedly
important in the design of economic policies in general and of tax policies in

particular. But the miraculous effects anticipated by some of the new supply
side enthusiasts were, alas, without substance.

Cambridge, Massachusetts
December 1985

—11—

Bibi iogry

Feldstein, Martin, "The Retreat from Keynesian Economics," The Public
Interest, Summer 1981, 64, 92-105.

_________

"The Conceptual Foundations of Supply Side Economics," in

Supply Side Economics in the 1980's, proceedings of a conference sponsored
by the Federal Reserve Bank in Atlanta and the

Emory University Law &

Economics Center, May 1982.
Inflation, Tax Rules and Capital Formation,

Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 1983a.

_________

Behavior Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, an NBER Project

Report, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983b.
__________

"The 1983 Economic Recovery: Lessons for
Monetary and Fiscal

Policy," 1986, forthcoming.

Lindsey, Lawrence, "Taxpayer Behavior and the Distribution of the 1982 Tax Cut,"
NBER Working Paper No. 1760, 1985a.

"Estimating the Revenue-maximizing lop Personal Tax Rate," NBER
Working Paper No. 1761, 1985b.

Tobin, James, "Unemployment in the 1980s: Macroeconomic Diagnosis and
Prescription," in Andrew Pierre (ed.), Unemployment and Growth in the

Western Economies, New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1984.

