                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE FREE RIDER PROBLEM:
                                   A DYNAMIC ANALYSIS

                                         Marco Battaglini
                                         Salvatore Nunnari
                                          Thomas Palfrey

                                       Working Paper 17926
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17926


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012




Battaglini gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Palfrey
gratefully acknowledges financial support from NSF (SES-0962802), and The Gordon and Betty Moore
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Marco Battaglini, Salvatore Nunnari, and Thomas Palfrey. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Free Rider Problem: a Dynamic Analysis
Marco Battaglini, Salvatore Nunnari, and Thomas Palfrey
NBER Working Paper No. 17926
March 2012
JEL No. D78,H41

                                              ABSTRACT

We present a dynamic model of free riding in which n infinitely lived agents choose between private
consumption and contributions to a durable public good g. We characterize the set of continuous Markov
equilibria in economies with reversibility, where investments can be positive or negative; and in economies
with irreversibility, where investments are non negative and g can only be reduced by depreciation.
 With reversibility, there is a continuum of equilibrium steady states: the highest equilibrium steady
state of g is increasing in n, and the lowest is decreasing. With irreversibility, the set of equilibrium
steady states converges to a unique point as depreciation converges to zero: the highest steady state
possible with reversibility. In both cases, the highest steady state converges to the efficient steady
state as agents become increasingly patient. In economies with reversibility there are always non-monotonic
equilibria in which g converges to the steady state with damped oscillations; and there can be equilibria
with no stable steady state, but a unique persistent limit cycle.


Marco Battaglini                                     Thomas Palfrey
Department of Economics                              Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences
Fisher Hall                                          Mail Code 228-77
Princeton University                                 California Institute of Technology
Princeton, NJ 08544                                  Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER                                             trp@hss.caltech.edu
mbattagl@princeton.edu

Salvatore Nunnari
Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences
Mail Code 228-77
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, 91125
salvatore.nunnari@gmail.com
1     Introduction
The most significant economic examples of free rider problems (pollution, public goods and com-
mon pools, for example) are characterized by two key features. First, they concern a large number
of agents who act independently and anonymously.         Second, they have an important dynamic
component since what matters to the agents is the stock of the individual contributions accumu-
lated over time.   These two features are particularly evident in environmental problems where
individual contributions (the levels of pollution) are infinitesimal and mostly anonymous; and
where the state of nature slowly evolves like a capital good.
    There is a large literature studying Nash equilibria in static environments that has explored the
first of these two features. This literature has formed most of the current understanding of free
rider problems in economics and other social sciences. There is, however, a much more limited
understanding of dynamic free rider problems. A number of important questions, therefore, still
need to be fully answered. What determines the steady states of these problems and their welfare
properties? Is the free rider problem better or worse as the number of agents increases? How do
we converge to the steady state? Can we have endogenous cycles in the investments?
    In this paper, we present a simple model of free riding to address the questions presented
above. In the model,  infinitely lived agents allocate their income between private consumption
and contributions to a public good  in every period. The public good is durable, so in period
                             P
 we have  = (1 − )−1 +  , where  is the contribution at time  of agent , and  is the
rate of depreciation.   We consider two scenarios.    First, we study economies with reversibility,
in which in every period individual investments can either be positive or negative. Second, we
study an economy where the investment is irreversible, so individual investments are non-negative
and the public good can only be reduced by depreciation:  ≥ (1 − )−1 .         Economies with
reversibility seem well suited to describe free-rider problems like pollution or common pools where
(as in the case of pollution, for example) it is natural to assume that an agent can either provide a
positive contribution (by adopting a more expensive green technology), or a negative contribution
(by adopting a cheaper “dirty” technology). Economies with irreversibility seem better suited to
describe the accumulation of physical public goods. For both these environments we characterize
the set of symmetric Markov equilibria in which strategies are continuous and depend only the
payoﬀ-relevant state variable .   This class of equilibria is widely adopted in applied work and
natural in the type of dynamic games like the one described above, with a large number of
symmetric and anonymous players.
    To understand the results, it is useful to start from the static version of our free rider game.
The game has a unique symmetric equilibrium in which  is independent of the number of the



                                                  1
agents, and in which all agents contribute equally to its cost. The aggregate level of , indeed, is
equal to the level that each agent would choose alone in autarky. The agents’ actions, moreover,
are perfect strategic substitutes: the reaction function of each agent is decreasing in the others’
contributions, so if we force an agent to invest more, all the other agents reduce their contribution
by the same amount in the aggregate.
    In the dynamic game, the results and the strategic interaction are very diﬀerent. Consider
first the economies with reversibility. We show that there is a continuum of equilibria, each
characterized by a diﬀerent stable steady state  ∗ . The set of equilibrium steady states are
                             ∗             ∗∗
given by a closed interval [ (  )   (  )], where  is the discount factor,  the rate of
depreciation of , and  is the size of the population. This set has three notable features. First
it always includes in its interior the level of  that would be reached in equilibrium by an agent
alone in autarky: it follows that in equilibrium the steady state in a community with  agents can
be either larger or smaller than when an agent is alone. Second, the upper- and lower-bounds are,
respectively, increasing and decreasing in . This implies that as the number of agents increases,
the set of equilibrium steady states expands, and the free rider problem can either improve or
                                                                       ∗∗
worsen with the rise of population. Finally, as  → 1 the upper bound   (  ) converges to
the eﬃcient level for any  and . When agents are suﬃciently patient, therefore, the eﬃcient
steady state can be achieved with simple Markovian strategies. This is perhaps remarkable since
we have a non-cooperative dynamic free riding game, with arbitrarily large numbers of players,
and the Markov assumption rules out reward or punishment strategies that are contingent on
individual actions or complicated histories, as required in folk-theorem constructions supporting
cooperation in repeated games.
    In an economy with irreversibility the set of equilibrium steady states is smaller, and contained
in the set of equilibrium steady states with reversibility. We show that as the rate of depreciation
converges to zero, this set converges to a unique steady state, the upper bound of the equilibrium
steady states with reversibility.         An immediate implication is that, as  → 1, all equilibrium
steady states with irreversibility are approximately eﬃcient if  is small.
    The fact that reversibility aﬀects so much the equilibrium set may appear surprising.                         In a
planner’s solution the irreversibility constraint is irrelevant: it aﬀects neither the steady state
(that is unique), nor the convergence path.1                   Most equilibrium steady states, moreover, are
supported by equilibria with investment functions that are monotonically increasing in . On the
convergent path, therefore, the stock of public good is never reduced: it keeps increasing until the
steady state is reached, and then it stops; the irreversibility constraint is, thus, never binding on

   1 This of course is true if the initial state  is smaller than the steady state, an assumption that we will maintain
                                                  0
throughout this paper for simplicity of exposition.



                                                           2
the equilibrium path.
      The reason why irreversibility is so important in a dynamic free rider game is precisely the
fact that investments are ineﬃciently low.               The intuition is as follows.   In the equilibria with
reversibility, an agent hold down his/her investment for fear that it will crowd out the investment
by other players, or even that it will be appropriated by other agents in the following periods. At
some point the equilibrium investment function falls so low that the irreversibility constraint is
binding. Even if this happens out of equilibrium, this aﬀects the entire equilibrium investment
function. In states just below the point in which the constraint is binding, the agents know that
the constraint will not allow the other agents to reduce  when  passes the threshold.                 These
incentives induce higher investments and a higher value function, with a ripple eﬀect on the entire
investment function on the equilibrium path. When depreciation is suﬃciently small, this eﬀect
“forces” the agents to cooperate and induces a unique stable steady state as depreciation converges
to zero.      Despite the practical importance of the case with irreversibility, to our knowledge
this paper presents the first clear characterization of stationary equilibrium behavior in dynamic
economies with a free riding problem and irreversibility.2
      For all the steady states and equilibria described above, we derive the associated convergence
path and characterize a simple suﬃcient conditions that guarantee its uniqueness. Equilibria can
be monotonic (i.e. with an investment function that is non decreasing in ) or non-monotonic.
When the equilibrium is monotonic, convergence is “standard:” the state gradually increases until
the steady state is reached. When the equilibrium is non-monotonic, convergence dynamics may
be surprisingly complex. We show that there always are non-monotonic equilibria in which the
state converges to the steady state with damped oscillations. We also show a suﬃcient condition
that guarantees the existence of equilibria where the investment path converges to a persistent
cycle. We construct an equilibrium in which the investment function can be solved in closed form
in which the cycle has a 2-period orbit.
      The reminder of the paper is organized as follows.             The following subsection discusses the
related literature. Section 2 describes the model, and describes the benchmark case in which the
public investment is chosen by a benevolent planner. Section 3 studies the equilibria in economies
with reversibility. Section 4 studies the equilibria in economies with irreversibility. In Section 5
we discuss non-monotonic equilibria and cycles in . Section 6 concludes.

  2   See Section 1.1 for a discussion of the related literature.




                                                            3
1.1      Related literature
There is a long tradition of research on static free rider problems started by Samuelson [1954]
and Olson [1965], and further developed in a large literature.3                Levhari and Mirman [1980]
and Fershtman and Nitzan [1991] are early works studying Markov equilibria in dynamic free
rider problems. Levhari and Mirman [1980] present a closed form characterization of a Markov
equilibrium in a common pool problem in a discrete time setting. Fershtman and Nitzan [1991]
characterize a Markov equilibrium in a voluntary public good contribution game similar to the
game in our paper. They, however, focus on equilibria in linear strategies in a diﬀerential game
with quadratic preferences. These two papers are among the first to show the implications of free
riding on the steady state of the economy (in terms of overexploitation of the pool in the first
case, and of a lower public good accumulation in the second case). In addition, Fershtman and
Nitzan [1991] is, to our knowledge, the first work to construct an equilibrium in which the steady
state  is lower in a community with  agents than the level that would be chosen by an agent
alone in autarky. None of these two seminal papers, however, present a full analysis of the set of
Markov equilibria. Extending Fershtman and Nitzan’s analysis, Wirl [1996] observes that multiple
equilibria may exist, and that the linear equilibrium selected in Fershtman and Nitzan [1996] is
indeed the worst possible in terms of welfare. Wirl [1996], however, who also restricts his analysis
to a diﬀerential linear quadratic case, does not explicitly solve for equilibrium strategies, making
it impossible to draw clear conclusion on the properties of the equilibria and the steady states. A
number of papers following this literature have continued using the linear quadratic diﬀerential
environment.4      Little work has been done to extend the analysis beyond the diﬀerential case to
environments with discrete time, and to characterize Markov equilibria with more general utility
functions.5     Our paper contributes to this literature by studying the dynamic free-rider problem
in a discrete time setting with general utilities, and by presenting a sharp characterization of the
equilibria. By doing this, we are able to clarify the conditions under which the dynamic strategic
substitutability eﬀect identified by Fershtman and Nitzan [1991] occurs, showing it is a general
phenomenon that does not occur only in a linear equilibrium of a linear quadratic model.                 We
are also able to identify conditions under which a novel dynamic strategic complementarity eﬀect
arises, and provide a clean characterization of the extent to which it can alleviate the free rider
problem.

  3   See, among others, Palfrey and Rosenthal [1984] and [1991], Bergstrom, Blume and Varian [1985].
  4   See, for example, Itaya and Shimomura [2001], Yanase [2006], Fujiwara and Matsueda [2009].
  5  Work has been done to study non-Markov equilibria. See, for example, Dutta and Sundaram [1993], and
Gaitsgory and Nitzan [1994]. Gaitsgory an Nitzan [1994] present a folk theorem under the overtaking criterion
that can be applied to the setting of Fershtman and Nitzan [1991].




                                                       4
       None of the papers mentioned above have studied economies with irreversible investments. A
form of irreversibility has been studied in the literature on monotone games in which it is assumed
that players’ individual actions can only increase over time. The papers that are most related to
our work are Lockwood and Thomas [2002] and Matthews [2011] who explicitly consider contribu-
tion games related to ours6 . The environment in these papers diﬀers from ours in two important
ways. First, the class of games studied in these papers does not include our (standard) free-rider
game. These papers restrict attention to stage games with a “prisoner dilemma structure:” both
papers assume that keeping the action constant (i.e., the most uncooperative action) is a dominant
strategy for all players, independently from the level of the action or the level of other players’
actions. In our free-rider environment agents may find it optimal (and indeed do find it optimal)
to make a contribution even if the other players choose their minimal contributions.7                   Second, in
our model the stock of  can either increase or decrease over time. This is obviously true when
the investment is reversible, but it is also true with irreversibility because of depreciation.                      In
the literature on monotone games, instead, players’ individual contributions (and therefore the
aggregate contributions as well) can only increase over time: our model is not a monotone game.8
  Because of this, our environment requires a new theoretical approach that is not related to the
approaches used in the literature.9            Our approach, moreover, applies to both games with and
without reversibility, allowing us to compare the Markov equilibria in both environments. The
literature on monotonic games focuses on subgame perfect equilibria only under the monotonicity
assumptions describe above.
       In recent work, Dutta and Radner [2004] and Harstad [2011] present dynamic models of pol-
lution in which agents can invest in a pollution reducing technology. With respect to our work,
these papers focus on environments and equilibria with simple dynamics, in which the agents’
actions are constant after the first period.           Harstad [2011] uses his model to study alternative
contractual arrangements among the agents with diﬀerent degrees of commitment. Battaglini and

   6 A number of significant papers in the monotone games literature are less directly related. These papers require
additional assumptions that make their environments hard to compare to ours. Gale [2001] provides the general
framework of monotone games with no discounting, and applies it to a contribution game in which agents care
only about the limit contributions as  → ∞. Admati and Perry [1991], Compte and Jehiel [2004] and Matthews
and Marx [2000] consider environments in which the benefit of the contribution occurs at the end of the game if a
threshold is reached and in which players receive either partial or no benefit from interim contributions. The first
two of these papers, moreover, assume that players contribute sequentially, one at a time.
    7 As standard in public good games, we assume the individual benefit for a marginal contribution converges to

infinity as the stock of  converges to zero.
   8   The degree of depreciation can be substantial: in our characterization we impose no constraint on its size.
   9The papers in the monotone games literature study subgame perfect equilibria in which a deviation is punished
by a trigger strategy. The prisoner’s dilemma structure guarantees that there is always a continuation equilib-
rium in which there are no additional contributions (indeed, in dominant strategies), and the strict monotonicity
assumption guarantees that it is the worst continuation equilibrium. Together, these assumptions are key for the
characterization the best subgame perfect equilibrium in these games.


                                                          5
Coate [2007] present a model in which a legislature chooses a public durable investment. As in
this paper, the public investment is a capital good that can be accumulated and that depreciates
slowly.   Diﬀerently from this paper, the level of public investment is chosen through a process
of non-cooperative bargaining. Related models are developed by Besley and Persson [2010] and
Besley, Ilzetzki and Persson [2011] and applied to study the accumulation of what they call “Fiscal
Capacity,” i.e. economic institutions for tax compliance; and by Battaglini, Nunnari, and Palfrey
[2011a] and [2011b] who also present experimental evidence on equilibrium behavior.10                         All of
                                                                                   11
these papers restrict their analysis to environments with reversibility.                We are confident that in-
sights developed in our paper on irreversible economies can help understanding public investments
even in these alternative models of public decision making in future research.
     None of the papers cited above studies non-monotonic equilibria. To our knowledge this is the
first paper to show the existence of non-monotonic equilibria in which convergence to the steady
state occurs with damped oscillations, and of equilibria with persistent cycles in a dynamic game
of free riding.


2      The model
Consider an economy with  agents. There are two goods: a private good  and a public good
.   The level of consumption of the private good by agent  in period  is  , the level of the
public good in period  is  . An allocation is an infinite nonnegative sequence  = (∞  ∞ )
where ∞ = (11   1   1     ) and ∞ = (1     ). We refer to  = (   ) as
the allocation in period . The utility   of agent  is a function of   = (∞  ∞ ), where
∞ = (1     ) We assume that   can be written as:
                                                      ∞
                                                      X          h            i
                                         (  ) =          −1  + ( ) 
                                                      =1

where (·) is continuously twice diﬀerentiable, strictly increasing, and strictly concave on [0 ∞),
with lim→0+ 0 () = ∞ and lim→+∞ 0 () = 0. The future is discounted at a rate .
     There is a linear technology by which the private good can be used to produce public good,
with a marginal rate of transformation  = 1. The private consumption good is nondurable, the
public good is durable, and the stock of the public good depreciates at a rate  ∈ [0 1] between
periods. Thus, if the level of public good at time  − 1 is −1 and the total investment in the

 10 Other related papers are Battaglini and Coate [2008], Azzimonti, Battaglini and Coate [2011] and Barseghyan,

Battaglini and Coate [2011], where the legislature can issue debt, and debt is the state variable.
  11 An exception is Battaglini et al. [2011a] that presents an experimental study based on the theoretical model

of this paper.




                                                             6
public good is  , then the level of public good at time  will be

                                          = (1 − )−1 +  

   We consider two alternative economic environments.              In a Reversible Investment Economy
(RIE) the public policy in period  is required to satisfy three feasibility conditions:

                                                     ≥ 0 ∀ ∀
                                                      ≥ 0 ∀
                                            
                                            X
                                      +            ≤  ∀
                                            =1

where  is the aggregate per period level of resources in the economy. The first two conditions
guarantee that allocations are nonnegative. The third condition is simply the economy’s resource
constraint.   In an Irreversible Investment Economy (IIE), the second condition is substituted
with:
                                           ≥ (1 − )−1 ∀

The RIE corresponds to a situation in which the public investment can be scaled back in the
future at no cost. The assumption that the state variable  is non negative in a RIE is natural
when  is physical capital and it will maintained throughout the analysis. It should however be
noted that it is not relevant for the results and (as we discuss below in Example 2), there are cases
in which it is natural to assume that the state variable is unbounded. More detailed applications
of these two models are presented in the examples at the end of this section.
   It is convenient to distinguish the state variable at , −1 , from the policy choice  and to
reformulate the budget condition. If we denote  = (1 − )−1 +  as the new level of public
good after an investment  when the last period’s level of the public good is −1 , then the public
policy in period  can be represented by a vector (  1    ). Substituting  , the budget
                        
                        X
balance constraint  +    ≤  can be rewritten as:
                        =1

                                  
                                  X
                                         + [ − (1 − )−1 ] ≤ 
                                  =1

With this notation, we must have  ≥ 0  ≥ 0 in a RIE, and  ≥ 0  ≥ (1 − )−1 in a IIE.
   The initial stock of public good is 0 ≥ 0, exogenously given. Public policies are chosen as
in the classic free rider problem. In period , each agent  is endowed with  =  units of
private good. We assume that each agent has full property rights over a share of the endowment
() and in each period chooses on its own how to allocate its endowment between an individual


                                                        7
investment in the public good (which is shared by all agents) and private consumption, taking
as given the strategies of the other agents.             In a RIE, the level of individual investment can
be negative, with the constraint that            ∈ [−(1 − )  ] ∀, where  =  −  is the
investment by agent .12         In a IIE, an agent’s investment must satisfy ∈ [0 ] ∀ The total
economy-wide investment in the public good in any period is then given by the sum of the agents’
investments.
    In the following examples we discuss how the model can be applied to a variety of natural
environments.

Example 1 (Public capital). The state variable can have alternative interpretations. A natural
interpretation is that  is physical public capital.            In this case it may seem natural to assume
that the environment is irreversible.          Once a bridge is constructed, it can not be decomposed
and transformed back to consumption.                Similarly, a painting donated to a public museum can
not typically be withdrawn. The choice of the model to adopt (reversible or irreversible) should
depend on the nature of the public good. If the public good is easily divisible and can be easily
appropriated (as, for example, wood and other valuable resources from a forest) an agent may
choose to appropriate part of the accumulated level. When withdrawals are possible (both because
allowed, or because they can not be prevented), then the model may be described as RIE. The
ability of the community to prevent agents from “privatizing” (or stealing) the stock of public
good is a technological variable that may vary case to case.

Example 2 (Pollution). Suppose the state  is the level of global warming with the convention
that the larger is , the worse is global warming. The utility of an agent now is ( ) =  − (),
where (·) is increasing, convex and diﬀerentiable.              It is natural to assume that an agent can
either increase or decrease global warming by choosing a “dirty” or a “clean” technology. This
environment can be modelled as before if we assume that an increase in the “greenness” of the
technology costs, at the margin, a dollar’s worth of current consumption. Given this, we have,
                              X 
as before:  = (1 − )−1 −      , where now  stands for the individual investment in green
                                        
technology (and it can be positive or negative). In this context it is, therefore, natural to assume

   12 This constraint guarantees that the sum of reductions in  is never larger than the total stock of public good,

it must be satisfied in any simmetric equilibrium. The analysis would be similar if we allow each agent to withdraw
up to (1 − ) since an agent never finds it optimal to reduce  to zero because the marginal utility of  at zero is
infinity. In this case, however, we would have to assume a rationing rule in case the individuals withdraw more than
(1 − ). A simple rationing rule that generate identical results isthe following. At the beginning of each period
agent  can claim any amount  ≤ (1 − )−1 from the pool: if         ≤ (1 − )−1 , then  receives his demand
  
                                                                                      
 ; if     (1 − )−1 , then the public good is rationed pro quota,  = (1 − )    −1 . The agent can then
                                                                                       
consume  with  ≤  +  and leave the rest of  +  invested in the public good. As it is easy to verify,
in any symmetric equilibrium we have  = (1 − )−1  with this rule, and so  ∈ [−(1 − )  ] as in
the text above. Of course, the lowerbound is irrelevant if we assume  is unbounded, as in Example 2 presented
below.


                                                          8
the economy is reversible.    Still, depending on the technological assumptions we are willing to
make, we may have complete or partial irreversibility of actions. An interesting feature of this
case is that when  is interpreted as pollution there is no need to assume it is non negative, as
in the physical public good case: we can assume  ∈ (−∞ +∞), with 0 () → ∞ as  → ∞
and () → 0 as  → −∞ (for example, () =  where  is a non negative constant). The
construction of the equilibria presented below applies immediately to this environment with an
unbounded state variable.

Example 3 (“Social Capital” or “Fiscal Capacity”) A number of recent works have high-
lighted the importance of a variety of forms of intangible, or semi tangible community assets, like
social capital (Putnam [2000]) or fiscal capacity (Besley and Persson [2011]).      For the case of
social capital, it may seem natural to assume that agents take actions that can be either positive
or negative for capital accumulation. Moreover, because social capital is an intangible asset, we
may assume it takes values in  ∈ (−∞ +∞). It follows that the accumulation of social capital
can probably be modelled as a reversible investment economy as described in Example 1 (where it
is assumed that there is a minimum level of capital, zero) or as in Example 2 (where capital is in
the real line). The case of fiscal capacity is similar, and indeed Besley and Persson [2011] assume
it is reversible. There may be however cases in which even this type of social investment is not
reversible, or it is partially reversible. This is probably the case when fiscal capital is embodied
in institutions that can not be easily undone. In these cases, an irreversible investment economy
can be a more appropriate model.

     To study the properties of the dynamic free rider problem described above, we focus on sym-
metric Markov-perfect equilibria, where all agents use the same strategy, and these strategies are
time-independent functions of the state, .     A strategy is a pair ((·) (·)): where () is an
agent’s level of consumption and () is an agent’s level of investment in the public good in state
.   Given these strategies, by symmetry, the public good in state  is () = (1 − ) + ().
Associated with any equilibrium is a value function, (), which specifies the expected discounted
future payoﬀ to an agent when the state is . An equilibrium is continuous if () and () are
continuous in ; it is monotonic if () is non decreasing in . In the reminder we will focus on
this class of equilibria. We will therefore refer to them simply as “equilibria.” In Section 3 and
4 we first focus on monotonic equilibria; we then extend the analysis to non-monotonic equilibria
in Section 5.
     The focus on Markov equilibria seems particularly appropriate for this class of dynamic games.
Free rider problems are often intended to represent situations in which a large number of agents
autonomously and independently contribute to a public good (Olson [1965, Chapter 1.B]). In
a large economy, it is natural to focus on an equilibrium that is anonymous and independent

                                                 9
from the action of any single agent.            The Markov perfect equilibrium respects this property,
by making strategies contingent only on the payoﬀ relevant economic state. For these reasons,
this equilibrium is standard in the applied literature on dynamic public accumulation games (see
Levhari and Mirman [1980], Fershtman and Nitzan [1991], Battaglini and Coate [2007], Harstad
[2011], just to cite a few examples).


3      The planner’s problem
As a benchmark with which to compare the equilibrium allocations, we first analyze the sequence
of public policies that would be chosen by a benevolent planner who maximizes the sum of utilities
of the agents. This is the welfare optimum because the private good enters linearly in each agent’s
utility function. Consider first an economy with reversible investment. The planner’s problem
has a recursive representation in which  is the state variable, and  (), the planner’s value
function can be represented recursively as:
                          ⎧                                                                          ⎫
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                P                                                        ⎪
                                                                                                     ⎪
                          ⎨                      
                                            =1  + () +  ()
                                                                                                     ⎬
              () = max                                                                                          (1)
                       ⎪
                          ⎪       P                                                                 ⎪
                                                                                                     ⎪
                          ⎩                                 
                                    =1  +  − (1 − ) ≤   ≥ 0 ∀  ≥ 0
                                                                                                     ⎭

By standard methods (see Stokey and Lucas [1989]), we can show that a continuous, strictly
concave and diﬀerentiable  () that satisfies (1) exists and is unique. The optimal policies have
an intuitive characterization.      When the accumulated level of public good is low, the marginal
benefit of investing in  is high, and the planner finds it optimal to invest as much as possible: in
                                        P
this case  () =  + (1 − ) and =1  = 0. When  is high, the planner will be able to
reach the level of public good ∗ (  ) that solves the planner’s unconstrained problem: i.e.


                                  0 (∗ (  )) + 0 (∗ (  )) = 1                                  (2)

Applying the envelope theorem, we can show that at the interior solution ∗ (  ) we have
0 (∗ (  )) = 1 − . From (2), we therefore conclude that:
                                                                 µ                  ¶
                                                        −1           1 − (1 − )
                                    ∗ (  ) = [0 ]                                                          (3)
                                                                          
                                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                                          ()−
The investment function, therefore, has the following simple structure.                        For          1−       ,
∗ (  ) is   not feasible: the planner invests everything and  () = (1 − ) +  .                  For  ≥
  ∗
  ()−
      1−      ,   instead, investment stops at  () =              ∗ (  ).    In this case, without loss of




                                                            10
         y(g)                                                  y(g)




                                                                           1‐d
                                                                 W


         W


                yPo  W / d         y (d , n)  W                                yP* (d , n)  W
                                      *
                                      P
                                                                                                   y P* (d , n)  y Po
                                       1 d                                           1 d
                          y*P (d , n)


                 Case 1: W / d  y*P  d , n                           Case 2: W / d  y*P (d , n)


                                          Figure 1: The Planner’s Problem


generality, we can set  () = ( + (1 − ) − ())  ∀.13             Summarizing, we have:

                                    () = min { + (1 − ) ∗ (  )}                                           (4)

This investment function implies that the planner’s economy converges to one of two possible
steady states (see Figure 1). If  ≤ ∗ (  ), then the rate of depreciation is so high that
the planner cannot reach ∗ (  ), (except temporarily if the initial state is suﬃciently large).
In this case the steady state is  = , and the planner invests all resources in all states on the
equilibrium path (Figure 1, Case 1). If   ∗ (  ), ∗ (  ) is sustainable as a steady
state.     In this case, in the steady state  = ∗ (  ), and the (per agent) level of private
consumption is positive: ∗ = ( + (1 − ) − )   0 (Figure 1, Case 2).
      An economy in which the planner’s optimum can be feasibly sustained as a steady state is the
most interesting case. With this in mind we define:

Definition 1. An economy is said to be regular if   ∗ (  )

In the rest of the analysis we focus on regular economies.14                 This is done only for simplicity:
extending the results presented below for economies with  ≤ ∗ (  ) can be done using the
same techniques developed in this paper.

 13   Indeed, the planner is indiﬀerent regarding the distribution of private consumption.
 14   The limit case of  = 0 is also included as a regular economy.


                                                         11
   The planner’s optimum for the IIE case is not very much diﬀerent. The planner finds it
                                                              ³ ∗                     ´
                                        ∗ ()−                        ∗
                                                                ()−  ()
optimal to invest all resources for  ≤  1−        . For  ∈  1−       1−        , the planner
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                ()
finds it optimal to stop investing at ∗ (  ), as before.      For  ≥      1−     ,   ∗ (  ) is not
feasible, so it is optimal to invest 0, and to set  () = (1 − ) This diﬀerence in the investment
function for IIE, however, is essentially irrelevant for the optimal path and the steady state of
the economy.         Starting from any 0 lower than the steady state ∗ , levels of  larger or equal
        ∗
        ()
than     1−        are impossible to reach, and the irreversibility constraint does not aﬀect the optimal
investment path.


4      Reversible investment economies
We first study equilibrium behavior when the investment in the public good is reversible. Diﬀer-
ently from the planner’s case, in equilibrium no agent can directly choose the level of aggregate
investment : an agent (say ) chooses only his own level of private consumption  and the level
of its own contribution to the public investment. The agent realizes that, given the other agents’
level of private consumption, his/her investment ultimately determines .               It is therefore as if
agent  chooses  and , provided that he satisfies the feasibility constraints.              The agent faces
three feasibility constraints. The first constraint is a resource constraint that specifies the level
of aggregate investment:
                                    =  + (1 − ) − [ + ( − 1) ()]

This constraint requires that aggregate investment  equals total resources,  + (1 − ), minus
the sum of private consumptions,  + ( − 1) (). The function  () is the equilibrium per
capita level; naturally, the agent takes the equilibrium level of the other players, ( − 1) (),
as given. The second constraint requires that private consumption  is non negative. The third
requires total consumption  to be not larger than total resources (1 − ) +  .                    Agent ’s
problem can therefore be written as:
                          ⎧                                                      ⎫
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪             + () +  ()                        ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎨   +  − (1 − ) =  − ( − 1) ()             ⎬
                     max                                                                                      (5)
                       ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪     − ( − 1) () + (1 − ) −  ≥ 0              ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                          ⎩           ≤ (1 − ) +                         ⎭

where  () is his equilibrium value function.
    In a symmetric equilibrium, all agents consume the same fraction of resources, so agent  can



                                                      12
assume that in state  the other agents each consume:
                                                   + (1 − ) −  ()
                                        () =                         
                                                           
where  () is the equilibrium level of investment in state . Substituting the first constraint of
(5) in the objective function, recognizing that agent  takes the strategies of the other agents as
given, and ignoring irrelevant constants, the agent’s problem can be written as:
                           ⎧                                             ⎫
                           ⎪
                           ⎪                                             ⎪
                                                                         ⎪
                           ⎨               () −  +  ()            ⎬
                      max                                                                                       (6)
                         ⎪⎪                                             ⎪
                           ⎩  ≤  +(1−) + −1  ()  ≥ −1  () ⎪⎭
                                                                         


where it should be noted that agent  takes  () as given.15             The objective function shows that
an agent has a clear trade oﬀ: a dollar in investment produces a marginal benefit 0 () + 
                                                                                             0
                                                                                               ();
the marginal cost is −1, a dollar less in private consumption.16               The two constraints define the
maximal and minimal feasible investment given the other players’ investments.
    A symmetric Markov equilibrium is therefore fully described in this environment by two func-
tions: an aggregate investment function  (), and an associated value function  ().                      Two
conditions must be satisfied.        First, the level of investment must solve (6) given  ().               The
second condition for an equilibrium requires the value function  () to be consistent with the
agents’ strategies. Each agent receives the same benefit for the expected investment in the public
good, and consumes the same share of the remaining resources, ( + (1 − ) −  ()) . This
implies:

                                    + (1 − ) −  ()
                         () =                         +  ( ()) +  ( ())                            (7)
                                            
We can therefore define:

Definition 2. An equilibrium in a Reversible Investment Economy is a pair of functions,  (·)
and  (·), such that for all  ≥ 0,  () solves (6) given the value function  (·); and for all
 ≥ 0,  () solves (7) given  (·)

    For a given value function, if an equilibrium exists, the problem faced by an agent looks similar
to the problem of the planner. There are two diﬀerences. First, in the objective function the
agent does not internalize the eﬀect of the public good on the other agents. This is the classic
free rider problem, present in static models as well: it induces a suboptimal investment in . The

  15 Since  () is the equilibrium level of investment, in a symmetric equilibrium ( − 1) () is the level of
                                                                                            
investment that agent  expects from all the other agents, and that he/she takes as given in equilibrium.
  16 For simplicity of exposition we assume here that  () is diﬀerentiable. We refer to the proofs in the appendix
                                                       
for the details.


                                                        13
second diﬀerence with respect to the planner’s problem is that the agent takes the contributions
of the other agents as given. The incentives to invest depend on the agent’s expectations about
the other agents’ behavior.        This radically changes the nature of the equilibria.            The more an
agent (say agent ) expects the other agents to invest, the more  finds it optimal to invest. The
relevant question is: Does this make the static free rider problem worse or better in a dynamic
environment?
      To characterize the properties of equilibrium behavior, we first study a particular class of
equilibria, the class of weakly concave equilibria. An equilibrium is said to be weakly concave if
(; ) is weakly concave on  for any , where (; ) is the expected value of investing  in a
state :
                                      + (1 − ) − 
                                ( | ) =             + () + ()
                                             
We show that this class is not empty and its key properties can be easily characterized. We then
prove that there is no loss of generality in focusing on this particular class in order to study the
set of equilibrium steady states. We therefore use the class of weakly concave equilibria as a tool
to gain insight on the general equilibrium properties of the game.
      In a weakly concave equilibrium, the agent’s problem (6) is a standard concave programming
problem similar to (1).         Because the objective function may have a flat region, however, the
investment function typically takes a more general form than the planner’s solution (4). Figure
2 represents a typical equilibrium. The equilibrium investment function will generally take the
following form:
                                   ⎧
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪    ©               ¡ ¢ª
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪ min  + (1 − )   2     2
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎨
                                                                 £       ¤
                           () =             ()           ∈ 2  3                                       (8)
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪           ¡ ¢
                                   ⎩          3                3

where  2   3 are two critical levels of , and () is a non decreasing function with values in
[  + (1 − )]. To see why  () may take the form of (8), consider Figure 2. The top panel
                                                                                                    
of the figure illustrates a canonical equilibrium investment function. The steady state is labeled 
in the figure, the point at which the (bold) investment function intersects the (dotted) diagonal.
The bottom panel of the figure graphs the corresponding objective function, () −  +  ().
For    2 , the objective function of (6) is strictly increasing in : either resources are suﬃcient
                                                                                               £     ¤
to reach the level that maximizes the unconstrained objective function and so () ∈  2   3
                         ¡ ¢
(in Figure 2, () =   2 in  1 ≤  ≤  2 ); or it is optimal to invest all resources (in Figure 2,
() =  +(1−) in  ≤  1 ).17         For    3 , the objective function is decreasing: the investment

 17   In Figure 2 it is assumed that we have  + (1 − )  2 for for  ≥  1 , so the agent can aﬀord to choose a


                                                        14
           yg                                                     W  (1  d ) g
                                                                                              g




y( g 3 )


  y Ro
yg2 




                g1                 g2            y Ro                 g3




                                                                             u( y )   vR  y   y




           g1                     g2                                  g3


                     Figure 2: The equilibrium in an economy with reversibility



                                                15
level is so high that the agents do not wish to increase  over ( 3 ). For intermediate levels of
      £      ¤                                      ¡        ¢
 ∈  2   3 , an interior level of investment  ∈  2   3 is chosen. This is possible because
                                                                                          £      ¤
the objective function is flat in this region: an agent is indiﬀerent between any  ∈  2   3 .
The key observation here is that since the objective function has a flat region, the agents find
                                                           £       ¤
it optimal to choose an increasing investment function in  2   3 : a weakly concave objective
function, therefore, gives us more freedom in choosing the equilibrium investment function and
even a higher level of investment.
    The open question is whether the flat region in Figure 2 is a general equilibrium phenomenon
or just an intellectual curiosity, and what degrees of freedom we have in choosing investment
functions that are consistent with an equilibrium.                 For an investment curve as in Figure 2 to
be an equilibrium, agents must be indiﬀerent between investing and consuming for all states in
£ 2 3¤
    . If this condition does not hold, the agents do not find it optimal to choose an interior
level (). The marginal utility of investments is zero if and only if:
                                                                    £          ¤
                                       0 () + 0 () − 1 = 0 ∀ ∈  2   3                            (9)

Since the expected value function is (7), we have:

                                       1 −  −  0 ()
                            0 () =                   + 0 (()) 0 () + 0 (()) 0 ()            (10)
                                             
Substituting this formula in (9), we see that the investment function () must solve the following
diﬀerential equation:

                         1 − 0 ()   1 −  −  0 ()
                                    =                 + 0 (()) 0 () +  0 (()) 0 ()            (11)
                                           
This condition is useful only if we eliminate the last (endogenous) term:  0 (()) 0 (). To see
                                          £         ¤           ¡         ¢
why this is possible, note that () is in  2   3 for any  ∈  2   3 in the example of Figure 2.
In this case, (9) implies  0 (()) = 1 − 0 (()). Substituting this condition in (11) we obtain
the following necessary condition:
                                                          (1−0 ())
                                              0      1−−     
                                              () =                                                     (12)
                                                        1−
Condition (12) shows that there is a unique way to specify the shape of the investment function that
is consistent with a “flat” objective function in equilibrium. This necessary condition, however,
leaves considerable freedom to construct multiple equilibria: (12) defines a simple diﬀerential
                                                                                                    
equation with a solution () unique up to a constant.                   To have a steady state at  we need
                                 
a second condition: (   ) =     . This equality provides the initial condition for (12), and so
                      
                             £        ¤
uniquely defines (| ) in  2   3 (see the dashed curve in Figure 2).
                                                                  
level of  that maximizes the objective function (i.e.  ∈ 2   3 ) if and only if  ≥  1 .


                                                            16
    Proposition 1, presented below, shows that the degrees of freedom allowed by (12) are suﬃcient
to characterize all the stable steady state we can have in equilibrium, weakly-concave or not. A
                                                                           
steady state  is said to be stable if there is a neighborhood  ( ) of  such that for any
                                                        
0 ( ) ⊆  ( ),  ∈ 0 ( ) implies  () ∈ 0 ( ). Intuitively, starting in a neighborhood
of a stable steady state,  remains in a neighborhood of a stable steady state for all following
periods.18     Define the two thresholds:

            ∗                  −1                                                  −1
            (  ) = [0 ]                             ∗∗
                                    (1 − (1 − )) , and   (  ) = [0 ]        (1 −  (1 − ))         (13)

                                         
We say that an equilibrium steady state  is supported by a concave equilibrium if there is a
                                                        
concave equilibrium  ()  () such that  ( ) =  . The following Proposition characterizes
the set of equilibrium steady states of monotonic equilibria. The details about the equilibrium
strategies are in the appendix.
                                    
Proposition 1. An investment level  is a stable steady state of a monotonic equilibrium in a
                         ∗             ∗∗                   
RIE if and only if  ∈ [ (  )   (  )]. Each  in this set is supported by a concave
equilibrium with investment function as illustrated in Figure 2.
                                                                                ∗             ∗∗
    We may obtain an intuitive explanation of why the steady state must be in [ (  )   (  )]
by making three observations. First, an equilibrium steady state must be in the interior of the
                             
feasibility region, that is  ∈ (0 ).19                           
                                                         Intuitively,   0, since at 0 the marginal utility
                                     
of the public good is infinite; and    since even in the planner’s solution we have this
                                                         0   
property. Second, in a stable steady state we must have  ( ) ∈ (0 1).20                       The highest and
the lowest steady states, moreover, correspond to the equilibria with the highest and, respectively,
            0          0   ∗∗
the lowest  (): so  (  (  )) = 1 and, respectively ,  0 (
                                                                       ∗
                                                                         (  )) = 0. Third, since the
                                                                                              
solution is interior and the agents can choose the investment they like in a neighborhood of  ,
                                   
 () can have positive slope at  only if the agents’s objective function is flat in the neigh-
borhood (otherwise the agents would choose the same optimum point irrespective of ). By the
                                                             0   
argument presented above, this implies (12). Using (12) and  ( ) ≤ 1, we obtain the upper
        ∗∗                                       0                                       ∗
bound,   (  ); similarly, using (12) and  ( ) ≥ 0, we obtain the lower bound,  (  ).

   18 An alternative stability concept that has been used in the litetature is achievability (Matthews [2011]). A

steady state is achievable if it is the limit of an equilibrium path. Our concept of stability is weaker: this allows us
to have a stronger characterization of the equilibrium set in our environment. It is easy to see that if an equilibrium
is not stable, then it is not reachable in a monotonic Markov equilibrium. On the other hand, all steady states
characterized in Proposition 1 are achievable (as in the equilibrium illustrated by Figure 2).
  19 The feasibility set is given by  ≥ 0 and  ≤  + (1 − ), so a steady state must satisfy   ≥ 0 and
                                                                                                 
  ≤  + (1 − )  . The second inequality implies   ≤ .
                                                  
  20 We are assuming that  () is diﬀerentiable for the sake of the argument here, details are provided in the
                               
appendix. Note that in a monotonic equilibrium      0 () ≥ 0. Moreover, if  0 (  )  1, we would have  ()  
                                                                                                            
(respectively  ()  ) for any  in a right (respectively, left) neighborhood of  , so   would not be stable.
                                                                                              



                                                          17
Proposition 1 formalizes this argument, and it uses the construction described above to prove that
      ∗             ∗∗                                                  
 ∈ [ (  )   (  )] is suﬃcient as well as necessary for  to be a stable steady state.
   In the following three subsections we discuss three issues related to the dynamic properties
of the equilibria.   In Section 3.1 we discuss the eﬃciency of the steady states.               In Section 3.2,
we reinterpret Proposition 1 in the light of the type of strategic interaction (substitutability vs.
complementarity) of the agents’ actions. In Section 3.3 we discuss how the equilibrium converges
to the steady state. We defer the discussion of non-monotonic equilibria to Section 5, after we
have presented the case of economies with irreversibility.

4.1    Steady states and eﬃciency
Proposition 1 shows that, as in the static model, an equilibrium allocation is always ineﬃcient, even
in the best equilibrium: ∗ (  )  
                                          ∗∗
                                             (  ) for any   1 and   1. Let ( ) be the steady
                                                                                       −1
state that would be achieved by an agent alone in autarky: ∗ (  1) = [0 ]            (1 − (1 − )). We
can make three observation regarding the magnitude of the ineﬃciency.

Corollary 1. In a RIE we have:

                                       ∗             ∗∗
   • For any   1 we have ( ) ∈ ( (  )   (  ));

   • The highest equilibrium steady state increases in ; the smallest steady state decreases in .
                 ∗                   −1                               −1
      As  → ∞,  (  ) → [0 ]               ∗∗
                                          (1) and   (  ) → [0 ]    (1 − ) ;

                        ∗∗
   • For any  and , |  (  ) − ∗ (  )| → 0 as  → 1


   The first point in Corollary 1 shows that the accumulated level of  in a community with
 players may be either higher or lower than the level that an agent alone in autarky would
accumulate. This is in contrast to the static case (when  = 0), where the level of accumulation
is independent of .    The second point shows that, in terms of the steady state level of , the
common pool problem may become better or worse as the size of the community increases. The
multiplicity of equilibria, moreover, is not an artifact of the assumption of a finite population.
Finally, the last point highlights the fact that the best equilibrium steady state converges to the
eﬃcient level as  → 1. What is remarkable in this result is the fact that the eﬃcient steady state
can be achieved with an extremely simple equilibrium (Markov) in which agents focus exclusively
on the state .

4.2    Substitutability and complementarity in the free rider problem
To interpret Proposition 1 it is useful to start from the special case in which  = 0 and so the
                                                        ∗              ∗∗
free rider problem is static.    In this case, we have  (  ) =   (  ): there is a unique

                                                     18
                                                       
equilibrium “steady state” in which the agents invest  = [0 ]−1 (1), independent of .                    In
addition, the agents’ actions are pure strategic substitutes.           In a symmetric equilibrium, each
                 
agent invests    .   If agent  is forced to invest 1 + ∆, then all the other agents find it optimal
to reduce their investment exactly by ∆( − 1).
   In a dynamic game the strategic interaction is richer. Let us say that an investment function
() displays strategic substitutability at a point of diﬀerentiability , if  0 ()  1 − . We have
substitutability when  0 () is less than 1 −  because in this case a marginal increase in investment
at  by ∆ is followed by a marginal reduction in investment (otherwise the stock would increase by
at least (1 − ) ∆). Similarly, an investment function displays strategic complementarity (respec-
tively, neutrality) at a point of diﬀerentiability  if  0 ()  1 −  (respectively,  0 () = (1 − )).
The following result shows that for any   0, in a dynamic free rider problem we may have strate-
gic substitutability, or strategic complementarity, or both, depending on whether the equilibrium
steady state is less than or greater than ( ), respectively.21
    For a given initial state  0 , an equilibrium investment function  ( |
                                                                                                    
                                                                                ) with steady state 
                                                      ¡          ¢
defines a convergent path   →     
                                        , with   =   −1 |
                                                               
                                                                   .

Proposition 2. The equilibrium investment strategy in a RIE may display both strategic substi-
tutability and strategic complementarity:

                                  ∗
   • If the steady state is  ∈ ( (  ) ( )], then there is an equilibrium path   → 
                                                                                                   

      with  0 = 0 along which the investment function never displays strategic complementar-
      ity.   In addition, there is a ∗ such that for   ∗ we have necessarily have strategic
      substitutability.

                                           ∗∗
   • If the steady state is  ∈ (( )   (  )] and   0, then for any equilibrium path
        → 
             
               with  0  
                           
                             , there is a ∗ such that for   ∗ we necessarily have strategic
      complementarity.

                                                     
   The first point of Proposition 2 shows that when   ( ) we can have equilibria exclusively
characterized by strategic substitutability. These equilibria lead to steady state levels of  that
are even below the level that would be reached by a single agent in perfect autarky, ( ).
Proposition 2, therefore confirms and extends the main result of Fershtman and Nitzan [1991].
They showed that in the linear equilibrium of a linear-quadratic diﬀerential game, an agent could
be worse in a dynamic setting than in a static setting because of the strategic substitutability.
Proposition 2 shows that this phenomenon is a feature not only of this particular equilibrium

  21 In the boundary case of  = 0, there is no region of strategic complementarity because () =  ∗∗ ( ) =
                                                                                                    
[0 ]−1 (1 − ).


                                                      19
selection or this environment, but is typical of the free rider problem and it is associated to a
continuum of (non-linear) equilibria.
       The second point of Proposition 2, however, shows that the equilibrium of the game is not
necessarily characterized by strategic substitutability. Indeed, not only it is true that strategic
complementarity is possible in equilibrium, but Proposition 2 shows that is a necessary feature
of equilibria with suﬃciently large steady states.              An agent is willing to keep investing until
 
      ( ) only if he expects the other agents to react to his investment by increasing their
own investments. This complementarity allows the agents to mitigate the free rider problem and
partially “internalize” the public good externality.             In these equilibria, the agents accumulate
more than what would be reached by an agent in perfect autarky.

4.3       Convergent paths in monotone equilibria
                               
Even if we fix a steady state  , there could in principle be more than one equilibrium investment
path consistent with it.22            This opens up a number of questions.                Can we have multiple
                                                                    
convergent paths to a given steady state? For a given steady state  , moreover, how fast can
we converge to it starting from an initial state  0  
                                                        
                                                          ? We say that an equilibrium investment
path   → 
            
              is monotonically increasing if   ≥  −1 ∀. The following result shows that
when the equilibrium is concave, then the equilibrium convergence path from below is uniquely
defined:23

Proposition 3. In a monotonic and concave equilibrium, the convergent path   → 
                                                                                  
                                                                                    start-
ing from any  0  
                    
                      is uniquely defined and monotonically increasing.                           
                                                                                              If     ∗
                                                                                                      (  )
convergence is achieved only in the limit.

       The fact that, given a steady state, there is a unique monotonically increasing converging
investment path is a feature that concave equilibria have in common with the planner’s solution.
There are however three notable diﬀerences. First, the planner’s solution is unique and it admits
a unique steady state; in equilibrium, we may have a continuum of steady states. Second, in the
planner solution, convergence to the steady state is in finite time: the planner invests as much as
possible until he/she reaches the steady state. In the equilibrium, instead, Proposition 3 shows
that the state never actually reaches the steady state, convergence is only in the limit with the

  22 In the equilibrium represented in Figure 2 the investment function stops being strictly increasing at  3 . We
                                                                                                                3
can however have equilibria in which the investment function stops being strictly increasing at a point  0 in   .
It can be proven that if an agent believes that the investment function stops increasing at this point, then it would
indeed be optimal to stop investing at this point.
  23 The equilibrium investment function corresponding to a steady state     ∗ is not generally uniquely defined
                                                                                     for all values of     ,
for values of  above the steady state. For example, one could replace  |     with                          
                                                                 as a steady state.
and still have an equilbrium investment function that supports 



                                                         20
                          ∗
only exception being  =  (  ).       Third, for any of these steady states there may be non
monotonic equilibria. These equilibria may be characterized by a cyclic investment path in which
the state  alternates overshooting and undershooting the steady state, gradually spiraling into
the steady state; or by persistent loops in which the steady state never converges. We will discuss
these possibilities in detail in Section 5.


5     Irreversible economies
We now turn to irreversible investment economies. When the agents cannot directly reduce the
stock of the public good, the optimization problem of an agent can be written like (5), but with
an additional constraint: the individual level of investment cannot be negative; the only way to
reduce the stock of , is to wait for the work of depreciation. Following similar steps as before,
we can write the maximization problem faced by an agent as:
                    ⎧                                                                ⎫
                    ⎪
                    ⎪                                                                ⎪
                                                                                     ⎪
                    ⎨                  () −  +  ()                           ⎬
                max                                                                               (14)
                  ⎪⎪                                                                ⎪
                                                                                     ⎪
                    ⎩  ≤  +(1−) + −1  ()  ≥ (1−) +         −1          ⎭
                                                                        ()


where the only diﬀerence with respect to (6) is the second constraint. To interpret it, note that
                                        −1
it can be written as  ≥ (1 − ) +          [ () − (1 − )]: the new level of public good cannot
be lower than (1 − ) plus the investments from all the other agents (in a symmetric equilibrium,
an individual investment is [ () − (1 − )] ).
    As in the reversible case, a continuous symmetric Markov equilibrium is fully described in this
environment by two functions: an aggregate investment function  (), and an associated value
function  (). The aggregate investment function  () must solve (14) given  (). The
value function  () must be consistent with the agents’ strategies. Similarly, as in the reversible
case, we must have:

                                + (1 − ) −  ()
                    () =                          +  ( ()) +  ( ())              (15)
                                        
We can therefore define:

Definition 3. An equilibrium in a Irreversible Investment Economy is a pair of functions,  (·)
and  (·), such that for all  ≥ 0,  () solves (14) given the value function  (·), and for all
 ≥ 0,  () solves (15) given  ()

    As pointed out in Section 3, when public investments are eﬃcient, irreversibility is irrelevant
for the equilibrium allocation. The investment path chosen by the planner is unaﬀected because
the planner’s choice is time consistent: he never finds it optimal to increase  if he plans to reduce


                                                    21
                                                                                   y ( g )
                                                                                     R
                                                                                              g
            yg




                                                                                   yR  g 

             yo




                        g1              g2           yo                   g3


              Figure 3: The irreversibility constraint and the reversible equilibrium.


it later. In the monotone equilibria characterized in the previous section, the investment function
may be ineﬃcient, but it is weakly increasing in the state. Agents invest until they reach a steady
state, and then they stop. It may seem intuitive, therefore, that irreversibility is irrelevant in this
case too. In this section we show that, to the contrary, irreversibility changes the equilibrium set:
it induces the agents to significantly increase their investment and it leads to significantly higher
steady states when depreciation is small.
   To illustrate the impact of irreversibility on equilibrium behavior, suppose for simplicity that
 = 0 and consider Figure 3, where the red dashed line represents some arbitrary monotone
equilibrium with steady state   in the model with reversibility. Next, suppose we ignore the
irreversibility constraint where it is not binding, so we keep the same investment function for
 ≤   where  () ≥  and then set the investment function equal to  when  ()  .
This gives us the modified investment function e (), represented by the green solid line. This
investment function induces essentially the same allocation: the same steady state   and the same
convergent path for any initial 0 ≤   . Unfortunately, e () is no longer an equilibrium. On
the left of   the objective function, () −  +  (), is flat.   On the right of   , the objective
function would remain flat if the investment were the red dashed line as with reversibility; with
irreversibility, however, the constraint  ≥  forces the investment to increase at a faster rate
than  (). Because  () is ex ante suboptimal, the “forced” increase in investment makes the


                                                    22
                          y  g 
                                                                                 W  (1  d ) g
                                                                                                  g                 (1  d ) g




                                                                                                      y IR  g 




                  y* IR




                            g1        g 2  y *R ( , d , n ) o                          y ( , d )
                                                             y IR  , d , n 



                                     Figure 4: The irreversible equilibrium as  → 0.


objective function increase on the right of   . But then choosing   would no longer be optimal
in state   , so it cannot be a steady state.24
       Does an equilibrium exist? What does it look like? Let b() be the unique solution of (12)
that is tangent to the line  = (1 − ) (see Figure 4 for an example). As it can be easily verified
from (12), the point at which b() is tangent to  = (1 − ) is ( ).25                                               
                                                                                                                   Define  (  ) as
the fixed point of this function:26

                                                                        
                                                    b( (  )) =  (  )                                               (16)

The following Proposition states the existence result.                                In the appendix we provide a detailed
description of the equilibrium strategies.

Proposition 4. In any IIE there is a monotonic equilibrium with an investment function as

  24 This problem does not arise with the planner’s solution because the planner’s solution is time consistent. After
the planner’s steady state  ∗ is reached the planner would keep  at  ∗ . If the planner’s is forced to increase  on
                                                                          
              ∗ , we would have a kink at  ∗ , but it would be a “downward” kink. Such a kink makes the objective
the right of                               
function fall at a faster rate on the right of the steady state, so it preserves concavity and it does not disturb the
optimal solution. The kink is “upward” in the equilibrium with irreversibility because the steady state is not
optimal, so the irreversibility constraint,  ≥ , increases expected welfare. This creates a sort of “commitment
device” for the future; the agents know that  can not be reduced by the others (or their future selves).
  25   Formally, () is the solution of (12) with the initial condition (( )) = (1 − )( ).
  26               (  ) is a function of   and  since 
       Note that                                             () depends on these variables.



                                                                            23
                                          
illustrated in Figure 4 and steady state  (  ) as defined in (16). This equilibrium is weakly
concave.

    Proposition 4 establishes that the dynamic free rider game with irreversibility admits an equi-
librium with standard concavity properties. Figure 4 shows the investment function associated
with the equilibrium.        In equilibrium the investment function merges smoothly with the irre-
versibility constraint: at the point of the merger (i.e. ( ), where the constraint becomes
binding), the investment function has slope 1 − . This feature is essential to avoid the problems
discussed above.
    Proposition 4 does not establish that the there is a unique equilibrium steady state.                The
following result establishes bounds for the set of stable steady states in a IIE and shows that when
                                                                                  
depreciation is not too high all stable steady states must be close precisely to  (  ):
                                     ∗               ∗
Proposition 5. There is lower bound  (  ) ≥  (  ) such that  is a stable steady
                                                 ∗              ∗∗
state of a monotonic equilibrium only if  ∈ [ (  )   (  )]. Moreover, as  → 0
 ∗              ∗∗                                                −1
 (  ),   (  ) and  (  ) all converge to [0 ]     (1 − ).

    There is an intuitive explanation for Proposition 5.               Because of decreasing returns, the in-
vestment in  declines over time, so the constraint  ≥ (1 − ) must be binding when  is high
enough. When this happens the agents are forced to keep the investment higher than what they
would like. Since the equilibrium is ineﬃciently low (because the agents do not fully internalize
the social benefit of ), the constraint  ≥ (1 − ) increases expected welfare in these states. The
states where the constraint  ≥ (1 − ) is binding are typically out of equilibrium (that is on the
right of the steady state): in the equilibrium illustrated in Figure 4, for example, the constraint is
                 
binding for    (  ). The irreversibility constraint, however, has a ripple eﬀect on the en-
tire investment function. In a left neighborhood of ( ), the constraint is not binding; still, the
agents expect that the other agents will preserve their investment, so the strategic substitutability
                                                       
will not be too strong.      Steady states lower than  ( ) can occur with reversibility because
the agents expect high levels of “strategic substitutability.” Proposition 5 shows that when  is
suﬃciently low, the irreversibility constraint makes these expectations impossible in equilibrium,
inducing an equilibrium steady state close to the maximal steady state of the reversible case,
 ∗∗
  (  ). Thus, as  → 0, there is a unique equilibrium steady state in the irreversible case,
            ∗∗
i.e.,  =   (  ).
    An immediate implication of Propositions 4 and 5 is the following result:

Corollary 2. As  → 1 the highest stable steady state in a IIE converges to the eﬃcient level.
As  → 1 and  → 0, every stable steady state in a IIE converges to the eﬃcient level.

    Results proving the eﬃciency of the best steady state in monotone games as  → 1 have

                                                       24
been previously presented in the literature by Lockwood and Thomas [2002] and more recently
by Matthews [2011]. We have already explained in Section 1.1. that these results do not apply
to our environment because they rely on assumptions that are not verified in our environment.
We emphasize here three additional novel aspects of Corollary 2. First, the result shows that the
community can achieve eﬃciency using a very simple equilibrium (Markov) that requires minimal
coordination among the players (in previous results the eﬃcient steady states are supported by
subgame perfect equilibria where behavior depends on the entire history of the game). Second,
we do not need  = 0 to have the result: when  is small, all equilibria must be approximately
eﬃcient. Finally, here irreversibility is not necessary for eﬃciency, the same equilibrium exists in
a RIE: irreversibility only guarantees its uniqueness as  → 0.


6     Non-monotonic equilibria and cycles
Following the previous literature on dynamic free rider problems, to this point we have focused
on monotonic equilibria in which () is non-decreasing. Can there be non-monotonic equilibria?
Non-monotonic equilibria are of particular interest: when () is decreasing, the dynamics of the
equilibrium can be much more complicated, and perhaps surprising; in principle, there could be
spiraling-in convergence to a steady state, or limit cycles.             This raises a number of questions:
                                                              ∗∗                             ∗
in particular, can the steady state be higher than             (  )?   or lower than  (  )? Can
we have equilibria where the investment path does not converge to a steady state, but instead
have persistent cycles? For simplicity, in the reminder of this section we will focus on the case of
non-monotonic Markov equilibria in economies with reversibility, the analysis for economies with
irreversibility is similar.
    The first result we present establishes the existence of stable steady states supported by non-
monotonic equilibria, and it bounds the set of steady states that can be supported in these
equilibria. Define the lower bound threshold:
                                                         µ                ¶
                                ∗∗∗                 −1       
                                  (  ) = [0 ]     1 + ( +  − 2)
                                                             
           ∗∗∗              ∗
Note that    (  )   (  ). We have:
                                                             ∗                 ∗
Proposition 6. There exists a ∆  0 such that any point in [ (  ) − ∆  (  )] is a
stable steady state of a non-monotonic equilibrium. In these equilibria:

    • The investment path converges to the steady state with damped oscillations as in Figure 5.

                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗
    • A stable steady state must be in [   (  )   (  )].




                                                        25
                                              W  (1  d ) g    45o
       y( g 3 )                                                                                     yR nm  g 




     yR *  d , n 
                yRo
yR*  d , n   




                        g2      y Ro    y R*  d , n                 g3




                                                                           u ( y )   v nm R  y   y




                          g2                                                  g3
                                  y R*  d , n 


                                                                            
                      Figure 5: Non-monotone equilibrium with steady state  .



                                                         26
    Figure 5 represents a non-monotone equilibrium with a stable steady state. In this equilibrium
                         
the investment function   () intersects the 450 line at a stable steady state   from above, with
   0
[ ] (  ) ∈ (−1 0).    The convergent path, therefore, is characterized by damped oscillations
(as represented by the green arrows in Figure 5).           We can draw two lessons from this proposi-
tion. First, the result presented in Section 3 that the stable steady states are bounded above by
 ∗∗
  (  ) still holds true in the larger class of equilibria that may be non-monotonic. Second,
                                                                 ∗
however, the lowest steady state now can be strictly lower than  (  ). This result extends
and reinforces the finding that the steady state of a dynamic free rider game may be lower in a
community with  agents than when there is only one agent in autarky. Proposition 6, therefore,
confirms the main conclusions reached in the previous sections studying monotonic equilibria.
    The intuition for the existence of non-monotonic equilibria and why steady states below
 ∗
 (  )   can be supported in these equilibria is relatively straightforward.           As in the equi-
                                                                              
libria constructed in Section 3, an agent’s objective function       () +   () −    in these equilibria
is weakly concave, with a “flat” top in the interval (2  3 ), as illustrated in the lower panel in
Figure 5.      The flat region allows the investment function to be in (2  3 ), since the agents are
indiﬀerent in this region. As described in Section 3, however, in order to have this property in
the region (2  3 ), the investment function must satisfy the diﬀerential equation (12). When  is
suﬃciently large, this equation implies that  0 ()  0. In these cases,  is such that the objective
function remains flat only if the agents expect the other agents to continue investing. When  is
very large (i.e.   ( )), then  0 ()  1 − , so we have strategic complemetarity. When  is
small, however, the private value of investment 0 () is very large: indeed 0 () → ∞ as  → 0.
In these cases the agents are willing to choose an interior level of  only if they expect that the
other agents will reduce the stock of investment: this reduction compensates for the high level
                                                                           ∗
of private value of the investment.        This is the reason why for    (  ), the equilibrium
investment function must be negatively sloped. If we are constructing a steady state larger than
 ∗
 (  ), it is not necessary to support it by a non-monotonic investment path; but a steady
                  ∗
state lower than  (  ) can be supported only by a non-monotonic investment path.
                                                  ∗∗∗
    It is natural to ask whether the lower bound    (  ) of Proposition 6 is tight. The answer
to this question depends on the exact shape of the utility function (). Define ∆ () to be the
                                             ∗               ∗
solution to (12) with initial condition ∆ ( (  )) =  (  ) − ∆. The function ∆ () is
                                  ∗
diﬀerentiable, with a minimum at  (  ), and it intersects the 45 at two points: ∆
                                                                                               
                                                                                           and ∆
          ∗               27
with ∆   (  )  ∆ .          The next assumption on the underlying fundamentals yields a

  27 Since  () is convex and continuous, with a minimum at  ∗ ( ), and such that lim
             ∆                                                                               →0 ∆ ()  0 and
 ∗ ( )       ∗
                                                  
                                                          ∗
                                                                   
                                                                   
           ∆  ( ) by construction, we have ∆ ∈ 0  ( ) . Since, in addition, lim→∞ ∆ () = ∞, we
have ∆   ∗ ( ).
              




                                                      27
         y8
                                                                            45o
                                                                                             y*(g)
             7                                                                               [y*]2(g)
             6

             5

             4

             3

             2

             1

             0
                 0           1        2     3     4      5      6      7      8      9
                                                                                         x
                     g*1            g*2



         Figure 6: An example of an equilibrium converging to a cycle with a 2-state orbit.

                        ∗∗∗
suﬃcient condition for    (  ) to be a tight lower bound:
                                  ∗                       0                    ∗∗
Assumption 1. There is a ∆ ∈ (0  (  )) such that ∆ (∆ )  −1 and ∆ (  (  ) − ∆) 
     
∆ (∆  ).

This condition can be easily verified in specific examples.

Example 4.                 Let the utility function be () =   , parametrized by .     In this case we
can solve for ∆ () in closed form (the explicit solution is presented in the appendix).               If, for
instance, we assume  = 3,  = 75  = 02  = 01, then, as show in the appendix, Assumption
1 is verified at least for any ∆ ∈ (1 12).

    We have the following result:

Proposition 7.                   Given Assumption 1, there is a  ∗ such that for any    ∗ the dy-
namic free rider game has an equilibrium in which  is a stable steady state for any  ∈
  ∗∗∗             ∗∗
[   (  )   (  )].

    Note that the level  ∗ that guarantees the result in Proposition 7 does not need to be very
                                                                         ∗
large. For the class of equilibria that we construct we must have   ( (  ) − ∆). In the
example presented above this implies  ≥ 16.



                                                         28
     The last question we would like to address is the possibility of cycles. In general we have a
cycle when there is a time path (∗ )∞         ∗           ∗      ∗                ∗
                                      =0 with 0 = 0 and  = (−1 ) such that  does not
converge to any point. We have:

Proposition 8. If Assumption 1 holds there is a  ∗∗ such that for any    ∗∗ the dynamic
free rider game has an equilibrium with a cycle.

     A cycle may be periodic in the sense that it generates an orbit of a given finite length. Let
 () = () and define the  -iterate recursively as   () = ( −1 ()),  = 1 2 . We say that
 1

we have a p-cycle if there is a point  such that  =   ( ). When we have a p-cycle the state
rotates in an orbit of  points defined by the set {(1    )| =   ( ) for  = 1  }. Under
the specific parametric assumptions of Example 4, the orbit of a 2-cycle can be explicitly solved
for. Letting ∆ = 11, the equilibrium investment function can be solved in closed form:
                                 ¡   ¡                                       ¢      ¢
                     ∗ () = min min  + (1 − ) 16 − 200 01 + 18633  115

Figure 6 represents  ∗ () for this example and its 2-iteration [ ∗ ]2 () =  ∗ ( ∗ ()).    As it can
              ∗ 2
be seen [ ] () (the red line) has two stable fix points 1 = 059535 and 2 = 16478 such that
1 =  ∗ (2 ), and 2 =  ∗ (1 ), so {1  2 } constitute a 2-period orbit. In the example of Figure 6,
therefore, the state oscillates between 1 and 2 . This cycle, moreover, is stable: if we start from
any initial state 0 there is a limit 2-cycle, in the sense that the investment path converges to this
two-period orbit.


7      Conclusions
In this paper we have studied a simple model of free riding in which  infinitely lived agents choose
between private consumption and contributions to a durable public good . We have considered
two possible cases: economies with reversible investments, in which in every period individual
investments can either be positive or negative; and economies with irreversible investments, in
which the public good can only be reduced by depreciation. For both cases we have characterized
the set of steady states that can be supported by symmetric Markov equilibria in continuous
strategies.
     We have highlighted four main results. First, we have shown that economies with reversible
investments have typically a continuum of equilibria.         In the best equilibrium the steady state
is higher in a community with  agents than in autarky, and it is increasing in ; in the worst
equilibrium, the steady state is lower in autarky, and it decreases in . We have argued that, while
in a static free rider’s problem the players’ contributions are strategic substitutes, in a dynamic



                                                    29
model they may be strategic complements. Second, we have shown that in economies with irre-
versible investments, the set of equilibrium steady states is much smaller: indeed, as depreciation
converges to zero, the set of equilibrium steady states converges to the best equilibrium that can
be reached in economies with reversible investments. Irreversibility, therefore, helps the agents
removing the coordination problem that plagues most of the equilibria in the reversible case, and
so it necessarily induces higher investment. Third, as agents become increasingly patient, the best
steady state in both economies with reversibility and irreversibility converges to the eﬃcient level.
As patience increases and depreciation decreases, all equilibrium steady states in an irreversible
economy converge to the eﬃcient level.      Fourth, we have shown that there are non-monotonic
equilibria with complex and (perhaps) surprising dynamic properties, in which the state converges
to the steady state with damped oscillations, and in which there are persistently cycles. Indeed,
we have constructed a closed form example in which the state perpetually rotates in a 2-period
orbit.
   Although in this paper we have focused on a free rider problem in which agents act indepen-
dently and there is no institution to coordinate their actions, the ideas we have developed have a
wider applicability and can be used to study dynamic games in other environments as well. In
future work, it would be interesting to investigate economies with irreversible investments or the
existence of endogenous cycles when public decisions are taken by legislative bargaining or other
types of centralized political processes.




                                                 30
References
   Admati Anat and Perri Motty (1991), “Joint Projects Without Commitment,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 58, 259-276.
   Azzimonti, M., M. Battaglini and S. Coate (2009), “Analyzing the Case for a Balanced
   Budget Amendment of the U.S. Constitution,” mimeo, Princeton University.
   Barshegyan, L., M. Battaglini and S. Coate (2011), “Fiscal Policy over the Real Business
   Cycle: A Positive Theory,” mimeo, Cornell University.
   Battaglini, M. and S. Coate, (2007), “Ineﬃciency in Legislative Policy-Making: A Dynamic
   Analysis,” American Economic Review, 97(1), 118-149.
   Battaglini, M. and S. Coate (2008), “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation and
   Debt,” American Economic Review, 98(1), 201-36.
   Battaglini, M., S. Nunnari, and T. Palfrey (2011a), “The Dynamic Free Rider Problem: A
   Laboratory Study,” in preparation.
   Battaglini, M., S. Nunnari, and T. Palfrey (2011b), “Legislative Bargaining and the Dynam-
   ics of Public Investment,” mimeo, California Institute of Technology.
   Bergstrom, T., L. Blume, and H. Varian (1986), “On the Private Provision of Public Goods,”
   Journal of Public Economics, 29, 25-49.
   Besley T. and T. Persson (2011), Pillars of Prosperity, 2010 Yrjö Jahnsson Lectures, Prince-
   ton University Press.
   Besley T., E. Iltzetki, and T. Persson (2011), “Weak States and Steady States: The Dynam-
   ics of Fiscal Capacity,” mimeo.
   Compte Olivier and Jehiel Philippe (2004), “Gradualism in Bargaining and Contribution
   Games,” Review of Economic Studies, 71, 975-1000.
   Dutta, P. and R. Radner (2004), “Self-enforcing climate change treaties,” Proceedings of the
   National Academy of Sciences, USA 101—14, 5174—5179.
   Dutta P. K. and R. K. Sundaram (1993), “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Economic Theory
   3, 413—426.
   Fershtman, C., and S. Nitzan (1991), “Dynamic voluntary provision of public goods,” Eu-
   ropean Economic Review, 35, 1057—1067.
   Fujiwara, K. and Matsueda, N. (2009), “Dynamic Voluntary Provision of Public Goods: A
   Generalization,” Journal of Public Economic Theory, 11: 27—36.
   Gaitsgory, V. and Nitzan, S. (1994), “A Folk Theorem for Dynamic Games,” Journal of
   Mathematical Economics, 23, 167-178.
   Gale Douglas (2001), “Monotone Games with Positive Spillovers,” Games and Economic
   Behavior, 37, 295-320.
   Harstad, B. (2009), “The Dynamics of Climate Agreements,” mimeo, Kellogg School of
   Business.


                                             31
Itaya, J., and K. Shimomura (2001), “A Dynamic Conjectural Variations Model in the
Private Provision of Public Goods: A Diﬀerential Game Approach,” Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 81, 153—172.
Levhari, D., and L. J. Mirman (1980), “The Great Fish War: An Example Using Nash—
Cournot Solution,” Bell Journal of Economics, 11, 322—334.
Lockwood Ben and Thomas, Jonathan (2002), “Gradualism and Irreversibility,” Review of
Economic Studies, 69, 339-356.
Matthews, Steven (2011), “Achievable Outcomes of Dynamic Contribution Games,” mimeo,
University of Pennsylvanya.
Marx Leslie and Steven Matthews (2000), “Dynamic Voluntary Contribution to a Public
Project,” Review of Economic Studies, 67: 327-358.
Olson, M. (1965), The Logic of Collective Action, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Palfrey, T. R. and Rosenthal, H. (1984), ”Participation and the Provision of Discrete Public
Goods: A Strategic Analysis”, Journal of Public Economics, 24, 171-193.
Putnam, Robert D. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Com-
munity. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Samuelson, P. (1954), “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 36: 387-389.
Stokey, N., R. Lucas and E. Prescott, (1989), Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wirl, F. (1996), “Dynamic Voluntary Provision of Public Goods Extension to Nonlinear
Strategies,” European Journal of Political Economy, 12, 555-560
Yanase, A. (2006), “Dynamic Voluntary Provision of Public Goods and Optimal Steady-
State Subsidies,” Journal of Public Economic Theory, 8: 171—179.




                                         32
Appendix
7.1     Proof of Proposition 1
     ∗                ∗∗
Let  (  ) and   (  ) be defined by (13).         Since we are in a regular economy, we have
       ∗∗
                                                        ∗
          (  ). We first prove here that for any   ∈ [             ∗∗
                                                                (  )   (  )], there is Markov
equilibrium with steady state equal to   . Each   is supported by a concave equilibrium with
investment function  ( |  ) described by (8), where
                                ½                                                  ¾
                                                                        ∗
                        2 = max min { | ( | ) ≤  + (1 − ) }   (  )                           (17)
                                     ≥0

                  ¡        ¢   ∗∗
3 is defined by   3 |  =   ( ), and () =  ( |  ) is the the unique solution of (12) with
                         
initial condition  ( | ) =   . This proves the “suﬃciency” part of the statement. Then we
                                         ∗             ∗∗
prove that the steady state must be in [ (  )   (  )]. This proves the “necessity” part
of the statement.

7.1.1     Suﬃciency

To construct the equilibrium we proceed in 3 steps.

Step 1.      We first construct the strategies for a generic   and prove their key properties.
Let  ( |  ) be the solution of the diﬀerential equation when we require the initial condition:
                                  ∗
 (  |  ) =   , for   ∈ [             ∗∗
                                    (  )   (  )]. Let  2 () be defined by (17). This, essentially,
is the largest point between the point at which  ( |  ) crosses from below  + (1 − ), and
  ∗
                                             ¡               ¢
  (  ). Let  3 (  ) be defined by   3 (  ) |  =   ∗∗
                                                                       (  ).
                                           £                        ¤
Lemma A.1.  0 ( |  ) ∈ (0 1) in  2 (  )      ∗∗
                                                           (  ) and  00 ( |  ) ≥ 0.
Proof. From (12),  0 ( |  ) ≥ 0 for  ≥  ∗
                                                 (  ), and  0 ( |  ) ≤ 1 for  ≤ 
                                                                                           ∗∗
                                                                                              (  ). Since
                     h 00 i
                  
 00 ( |  ) = 1−    ()
                            ,  00 ()  0. ¥
                          ∗
Lemma A.2. For any  ∈ [             ∗∗
                            (  )                             ∗∗
                                           (  )],  3 (  ) ≥   (  ).
                     ∗∗
Proof. Note that  (                                                       ∗∗
                        (  ) |  ) is increasing in   . Moreover  (              ∗∗
                                                                                (  ) |  (  ) ) =
 ∗∗                     ∗∗
  (  ).   So  (                      ∗∗
                           (  ) |  )                         ∗∗
                                                  (  ) for      (  ).   It follows that  3 (  ) ≥
 ∗∗
                           ∗∗
    (  ) for any   ≤   (  ).      ¥

    We have:
                                                  ¡                 ¢
Lemma A.3.  ( |  ) ∈ (0  + (1 − )) in  2 (  )  3 (  ) .
                         ¡             ¢
Proof. First note that   2 (  )|  ≤  +(1− ) 2 (  ). Since  0 ( |  )  1 for          ∗∗
                                                                                                           (  )
                    
                                                 ¡  2       ∗∗
                                                                         ¢               ∗∗
we must have  ( | )   + (1 − ) for  ∈  ( )  (  ) . For    (  ), we have
                             ∗∗
                                                                               ¡                      ¢
 + (1 − )   + (1 − )                                    ∗∗
                                (  ). Since  ( |  )    (  ) in  2 (  )  3 (  ) , We have

                                                        33
                                                                                 £ ∗∗                      ¢
 ( |  )  ∗∗
                   (  )   + (1 − )   ∗∗
                                                  (  )   + (1 − ) in       (  )  3 (  ) as well.
                                                              ¡           ¢
Similarly, since  0 ( |  ) ≥ 0 for    2 (  ) and   2 (  )|  ≥ 0, we must have  ( |  )  0
                                 ¡             ¢
for    2 (  ). Note that   2 (  ) |  ≥ 0 since  0 ( |  ) ∈ (0 1 − ) in [∗
                                                                                             (  )   ] implies
                                   ∗
that  ( |  )   for all  ∈ [ (  )   ]          ¥

    For any   ∈ [∗             ∗∗
                       (  )   (  )], we now define the investment function:
                            ⎧
                            ⎪
                            ⎪        ©                       ¡ 2   ¢ª
                            ⎪
                            ⎪   min       +  (1 −  )      ( ) |         ≤  2 (  )
                            ⎪
                            ⎪
                            ⎨
             ( |  ) =                        ( |  )             2 (  )   ≤  3 (  )
                            ⎪
                            ⎪
                            ⎪
                            ⎪
                            ⎪
                            ⎪
                            ⎩                  ∗∗
                                                    (  )                   ≥  3 (  )
                                                 © ¡ ¡           ¢      ¢          ª
For future reference, define  1 (  ) = max 0   2 () |  −   (1 − ) . This is the point at
                                ¡              ¢                                            £             ¤
which  + (1 − ) 2 (  ) =   2 (  ) |  , if positive. Clearly, we have  1 (  ) ∈ 0  2 (  ) . We
have:
                                                                           £                     ¤       £                      ¤
Lemma A.4. For any   ∈ [    ∗             ∗∗
                                  (  )   (  )],  ( |  ) ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) for  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) .
                                                                         £                    ¤
Proof. Since  ( |  ) it is monotonic non-decreasing in  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) ,
                                   £ ¡               ¢ ¡                  ¢¤     £                      ¤
                       ( |  ) ∈   2 (  ) |     3 (  ) |     ∀ ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) 
                                                           £                ¤
Since  ( |  ) has slope lower than one in  2 (  )  3 (  ) and  (  |  ) =   for   ≥  2 (  ),
                    ¡              ¢                                                         £         ¤
we must have   2 (  ) |  ≥  2 (  ), so  ( |  ) ≥  2 (  ) for  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) . Similarly,
 ¡               ¢                                                 £                      ¤
  3 (  ) |  ≤  3 (  ), so  ( |  ) ≤  3 (  ) for  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) .   ¥
                                                                                        ∗
Step 2. We now construct the value functions corresponding to each steady state   ∈ [             ∗∗
                                                                                          (  )   (  )].
       £ 2  3  ¤
For  ∈  ( )  ( ) define the value function recursively as

                                     + (1 − ) −  ( |  )
                      (|  ) =                              + ( ( |  )) + ( ( |  ))                   (18)
                                              
By Theorem 3.3 in Stokey and Lucas (1989), the right han side of (18) is a contraction: it defines a
unique, continuous and diﬀerentiable value function 0 ( |  ) for this interval of . (diﬀerentiability
follows from the diﬀerentiability of  ( |  )). We have
                                                                                £                     ¤
Lemma A.5.                              ∗
                        For any   ∈ [             ∗∗
                                          (  )   (  )] and any  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) , 0 () +
00 (;   ) = 1.
                                           £                      ¤                       £                      ¤
Proof.      Note that by Lemma A.4, for  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) , we have  ( |  ) ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) .
From (12) we can write (for simplicity we write  0 ( |  ) =  0 ()):
                          1 − 0 ()   1 −  0 ()
                                     =             + 0 (()) 0 () + [1 − 0 (())]  0 ()
                                         

                                                              34
           £                      ¤
for any  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) . But then using (12) again allows to substitute 1 − 0 (()) to obtain:

       1 − 0 ()          1 −  0 ()
                      =                + 0 (()) 0 ()
                             ∙                                                                      ¸
                                1 −  0 (())                            £                ¤
                           +                  + 0 ( 2 ()) 0 ((()) + 1 − 0 ( 2 ())  0 (())  0 ()
                                       
                                                                                0                 1
where  0 () = ,  1 () = (),   () = ( −1 ()), and [ 0 ] () = 1, [ 0 ] () =  0 (), and
[ 0 ] () =  0 ([ 0 ]−1 ()). Iterating we have:
                            X         ∙                                                  ¸Y
1 − 0 ()                                   0           
                                       1 −  ( ( | ) | )    0 +1    0           
                                                                                                     
              = lim                                          +  ( ()) ( ( | ) | )      [ 0 ] ( −1 ())
                    →∞        =0                                                        =0

              =  0 ( |  )

This implies 0 () + 00 (;   ) = 1.        ¥
                                                                               £                      ¤
    In the rest of the state space we define the value function recursively. In  1 (  )  2 (  ) , if
 1 (  )   2 (  ), the value function is defined as:
                                              ¡             ¢
                            + (1 − ) −   2 (  ) |         ¡               ¢          ¡               ¢
           0 ( |  ) =                                     + (  2 (  ) |  ) + 0 (  2 (  ) |  )
                                          
                                                                                                                   (19)
     ¡               ¢ £                      ¤
for   2 (  ) |  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) 
                                      £          ¤
Lemma A.6. For any  ∈  1 (  )  3 (  ) , () + ( |  ) is concave and has slope larger or
equal than 1.

Proof.       If  1 (  ) =  2 (  ), the result follows from the previous lemma. Assume therefore,
                                                                               £                     ¤
 1 (  )   2 (  ). In this case  2 (  ) =  ∗
                                                        (  ). For any  ∈  1 (  )  2 (  ) , (;   ) =
    ∗
 ( (  ) |  ). So we have 00 ( |  ) = (1 − ) implying: 0 () + 00 ( |  ) = 0 () + (1 −
                                 ∗
)  1 since  ≤  2 (  ) =  (  ). The statement then follows from this fact and Lemma
A.5.      ¥
                               £                ¤
    Consider    1 (  ). In −1   1 (  ) the value function is defined as:


                          −1 ( |  ) = ( + (1 − )) + 0 ( + (1 − ) |  )
                    n 1            o
where −1 = max 0  (1−      )−
                                      . Assume that we have defined the value function in  ∈
£             ¤
 −  −(−1) as − , for all  such that −(−1)  0. Then we can define −(+1) as:

                       −(+1) ( |  ) = ( + (1 − )) + − ( + (1 − ) |  )
  £             ¤                       − −
in −(+1)  − with −(+1) =          1−     .


                                                           35
Lemma A.7. For any  ∈ [0  3 (  )], () + ( |  ) is concave and it has slope greater than
or equal than 1.
                                                                                    h                             i
                                                                                         1 ( )−
Proof. We prove this by induction on . Consider now the interval                            1−        1 (  ) . In this
range we have

             0
            −1 ( |  ) = [0 ( + (1 − )) + 00 ( + (1 − ) |  )] (1 − ) ≥ 1 − 
                        £                  ¤                         h 1                   i
since  + (1 − ) ∈  1 (  )  3 (  ) . It follows that for  ∈  (1−
                                                                            )−
                                                                                  1 (  ) :


                                  0 () + −1
                                             0
                                                ( |  ) ≥ 0 () + (1 − )  1                                     (20)

                                                                       ∗∗
Where the last inequality follows from the fact that  ≤  2 (  )    (  ). Note, moreover,
that the right and left derivative of ( |  ) at  1 (  ) are the same. To see this note that by the
argument above, the left derivative is (1 − ); by Lemma A.5, however, the right derivative is
(1 − 0 (
          ∗
            (  )))  = (1 − ) as well. We conclude that 0 () + −10
                                                                                ( |  ) is concave, it has
                                                                         £           ¤
derivative larger than 1. Assume that we have shown that for  ∈ −   3 (  ) , () + − ( |  )
                                                              £             ¤
is concave and 0 () + − 0
                                ( |  )  1. Consider in  ∈ −(+1)  − . We have:

             0
                               £                                             ¤
            −(+1) ( |  ) = 0 ( + (1 − )) + −
                                                      0
                                                         ( + (1 − ) |  ) (1 − ) ≥ 1 − 
                     £               ¤
since  + (1 − ) ≥ −   3 (  ) .         So 0 () + −(+1)
                                                              0
                                                                     ( |  ) ≥ 0 () + (1 − ) ≥ 1.                 By
the same argument as above, moreover,  is concave at − . We conclude that for any  ≤  1 ,
() + ( | ) is concave and it has slope larger than 1.              ¥
     We can define the value function for  ≥  3 (  ) as:
                                            ∗∗
                             + (1 − ) −   (  )
           1 ( |  ) =                                     ∗∗
                                                         + (                     ∗∗
                                                                 (  )) + 0 (  (  ) |  )
                                       
                                   ∗∗
since, by Lemma A.2,  3 (  ) ≥   (  ).

Lemma A.8. For any  ≥ 0, () + ( |  ) is concave and it has slope less than or equal than
1.
Proof.      For    3 (  ), 0 ( |  ) = (1 − ) .                                 ∗∗
                                                                 Since, by Lemma A.2,  ≥   (  ) ≥
 ∗
 (  ), we have 0 () +  0 ( |  )  1. Previous lemmas imply () + (|  ) is concave and
has slope greater than or equal than 1 for  ≤  3 (  ). This establishes the result.                       ¥

Step 3. Define
                               + (1 − ) − ( |  )                    ( |  ) − (1 − )
               ( |  ) =                             , and ( |  ) =
                                                                                     
as the levels of per capita private consumption and investment, respectively.                             Note that by
                                                                                           
construction, ( | ) ∈ [0 ].          We now establish that ( | ), ( | ) and the associated

                                                         36
value function  ( |  ) defined in the previous steps constitute an equilibrium. We first show that
given ( |  ),  ( |  ) describes the expected continuation value to an agent, starting at state
                            £               ¤       £                      ¤
. Since ( |  ) ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) for  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) ,  ( | ) must be described by (18)
        £                     ¤
for  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) . By construction, moreover, ( |  ) is the expected continuation value
to an agent in all states  ≥  3 (  ), and  ≤  2 (  ). We now show that ( |  ) is an optimal
reaction function given ( |  ). An agent solves the problem (6), where  () = ( |  ). Note
                                                                                   +(1−)        −1
that ( |  ) satisfies the constraints of this problem if ( | ) ≤                      +            
                                                                                                     ( | ),   so
                                                        −1                     
if ( | ) ≤  + (1 − ); and if ( | ) ≥               ( | ),   so if ( | ) ≥ 0.       Both conditions
are automatically satisfied by construction.             If    ( ), we have  () +  0 () ≥ 1 for all
                                                                  1                 0

 ∈ [0  + (1 − )], so ( |  ) =  + (1 − ) is optimal. If  ≥  1 (  ), then ( |  ) is an
unconstrained optimum, so again it is an optimal reaction function.

7.1.2    Necessity
                                                                         ∗             ∗∗
We now prove that any stable steady state of an equilibrium must be in [ (  )   (  )].
We proceed in two steps.
                                 ∗∗
Step 1. We first prove that  ≤   (  ). Suppose to the contrary that there is stable steady
              ∗∗                                   ∗∗
state at     (  ).     We must have  ∈ (  (  ) ], since it is not feasible for a
                                                                                           
steady state to be larger than . Consider a left neighborhood of  ,  ( ) = ( −   ).
                                              
The value function can be written in  ∈  ( ) as:

                       + (1 − ) −  ()
              () =                         + ( ()) +  ( ())
                                 
                                                           + (1 − )
                    = ( ()) +  ( ()) −  () +                + (1 − 1)  ()
                                                               
                                    −1
In  ( ) the constraint  ≥          ()   cannot be binding, else we would have  () = (1 −
                                                                          
1) (), so  () = 0: but this is not possible in a neighborhood of   0. We consider two
cases.
                                
    Case 1. Suppose first that   . We must therefore have that  ()   + (1 − )
                                       +(1−)         −1
in  ( ), so the constraint  ≤                  +        is not binding. The solution is in the interior
of the constraint set of (6), and the objective function ( ()) +  ( ()) −  () is constant
             
for  ∈  ( ).
                                        
Lemma A.9. There is a neighborhood  ( ) in which  () is strictly increasing.
                                                                                         
Proof.       Suppose to the contrary that, for any  ( ), there is an interval in  ( ) in which
                                                                                   0
 () is constant. Using the expression for  () presented above, we must have  () = (1−)
                                       
for any  in this interval. Since  ( ) is arbitrary, then we must have a sequence   → 
                                                                                             
                                                                                               such



                                                          37
      0
that  (  ) = (1 − ) ∀. We can therefore write:
                                             
            −               ( ) −  (   − ∆)               (  ) −  (  − ∆)
            ( ) =     lim                          = lim lim
                        ∆→0             ∆                ∆→0 →∞              ∆
                                    (  ) −  (  − ∆)   1−
                      = lim lim                             =
                        →∞ ∆→0                 ∆               
       −                                           
where  ( ) is the left derivative of  () at  , and the second equality follows from the
                                                                 
continuity of  (). Consider now a marginal reduction of  at  . The change in utility is (as
∆ → 0):

                                                                   
                 ∆ ( ) = ( − ∆) − ( ) +  [ ( − ∆) −  ( )] + ∆
                            ∙    µ                 ¶¸
                                            1 −  
                          =  1 − 0 (
                                      
                                        )+           ∆
                                               
                      
In order to have ∆ ( ) ≤ 0, we must have 0 (
                                                 
                                                   ) + (1 − ) ≥ 1.                              
                                                                                      This implies  ≤
 ∗              ∗∗                                                                                  
 (  )    (  ), a contradiction.       Therefore, if there is stable steady state at  
 ∗∗
                                                                       
    (  ), then  () is strictly increasing in a neighborhood  ( ).     ¥
                                                       
   Lemma A.9 implies that there is a neighbrohood  ( ) in which ()+ ()− is constant.
       
Since  is a stable steady state and  () is strictly increasing. Moreover, for any open left
                          
neighborhood 0 ( ) = ( − 0  
                                               
                                       ) ⊂  (              
                                                  ),  ∈ 0 (                          
                                                                 ) implies  () ∈ 0 ( )). These
observations imply:
                                         
Lemma A.10. There is a neighborhood  ( ) in which
                                                  µ                      ¶
                                  0                  1 − 0 () 1 − 
                                  ()   =                     −                                  (21)
                                            −1                   
                                                                                         
Proof. There is a  ( ) and a constant  such that  () =  +  − () for  ∈  ( )).
                                                                                      
Hence  () is diﬀerentiable in  ( ). Moreover,  () ∈  ( ) for all  ∈  ( ). Hence
                                                          
( ()) +  ( ()) −  () is constant in  ∈  (  ) as well. These observations and the
                                   0       1−
                                                  ¡    1
                                                         ¢   0             
definition of  () imply that  () =  + 1 −            () in  ( ) (where  () must be
diﬀerentiable otherwise  () would not be diﬀerentiable).          Given that 0 () + 
                                                                                           0
                                                                                             () = 1 in
         
 ∈  ( ), we must have:
                                                      ∙        µ     ¶       ¸
                                                          1−      1
                      0 () + 
                                 0
                                   () = 0 () +            + 1−      0
                                                                        () = 1
                                                                  
                                    
which implies (21) for any  ∈  ( ).         ¥
   Let   be a sequence in  (
                                 
                                   ) such that   → 
                                                      
                                                        . We must have
                                           
           −              ( ) −  (   − ∆)               (  ) −  (  − ∆)
           ( ) =     lim                         = lim lim
                      ∆→0             ∆                ∆→0 →∞
                                                                  µ         ∆            ¶
                                  (  ) −  (  − ∆)          1 − 0 (
                                                                             
                                                                                ) 1−
                    = lim lim                             =                       −
                      →∞ ∆→0                 ∆             −1                      

                                                       38
       −                                     
where  ( ) is the left derivative of  ( ), and the second equality follows from continuity.
                               
Consider a state ( − ∆). For  to be stable we need that for any small ∆:

                                                                     
                            ( − ∆) ≥  − ∆ =  ( ) + ( − ∆) − 

                                                                                    − 
where the equality follows from the fact that  ( ) =  . As ∆ → 0, this implies  ( ) ≤ 1
        
in  ( ). By (22), we must therefore have:
                                      µ                  ¶
                                       1 − 0 (
                                                 
                                                   ) 1−
                                                    −      ≤1
                                −1                  
                   ∗∗
This implies:  ≤   (  ), a contradiction.
                            
   Case 2. Assume now that  =  and it is a strict local maximum of the objective function
                                                               
() +  () − .   In this case in a left neighborhood  ( ), we have that the upperbound
      +(1−)
≤            + −1
                    ()
                                                                                 
                                 is binding: implying  () =  +(1−) in  ( ). We must therefore
have a sequence of points   → 
                                 
                                   such that   =  ( −1 ) and  (  ) =  + (1 − )  ∀.
Given this, we can write:
                                                               £                         ¤
            (  ) = ( +1 ) +  ( +1 ) = ( +1 ) +  ( +2 ) +  ( +2 )
                       X∞
                     =          ( + (1 − ) + )
                                   =0
                                                                                       £     ¤0
note that since  +1 =  + (1 − )   the derivative of  +1 with respect to   is  +1 =
                                                              £    ¤0
(1 − ). By an inductive argument, it is easy to see that  + = (1 − ) . So  (  ) is
diﬀerentiable and:
                                            X∞                      +1
                            0
                           (  ) =              [(1 − )]            0 ( + (1 − ) + )
                                              =0

Since 0 (  ) + 
                    0
                      (  ) ≥ 1, we have:
                                        X∞                   +1
                      0 (  ) +                 [(1 − )]        0 ( + (1 − ) + ) ≥ 1
                                            =0

for all . Consider the limit as  → ∞. Since 0 () is continuous and   → 
                                                                              
                                                                                , we have:
                                    h            X∞                                   i
                                                              +1 0
                1 ≤         lim      0 (  ) +    [(1 − )]    ( + (1 − ) + )
                           →∞                         =0
                                            X∞                 +1                   0 (
                                                                                          
                                                                                            )
                            0     
                     =         ( )   +          [(1 − )]         0 (
                                                                           
                                                                             )=
                                             =0                                  1 − (1 − )
                      −1
This implies  ≤ [0 ]                        ∗∗
                             (1 − (1 − ))    (  ), a contradiction.
                            
   Case 3. Assume now that  = , but it is not a strict maximum of () +  () −  in
any left neighborhood. It must be that () +  () −  is constant in some left neighborhood
     
 ( ). If this were not the case, then in any left neighborhood we would have an interval in

                                                               39
which  () is constant, but this is impossible by Lemma A.9. But then if () +  () −  is
                      
constant in some  ( ), the same argument as in Case 1 of Step 1 implies a contradiction.
                                       ∗                                                            
Step 2.         We now prove that  ≥  (  ).         Assume there is stable steady state at  
 ∗
 (  ).     Since lim→0 0 () = ∞, 
                                            
                                               0.                                                  
                                                             There is therefore a neighborhood  ( ) =
      
(   + ) in which  () satisfies all the constraints of (6) and it maximizes () +  () − 
                                                                                              
We conclude that the objective function ( ()) +  ( ()) −  () is constant in  ( ).
                                                                                  
By the same argument as in Lemma A.9 it follows that there is a neighborhood  ( ) in which
                                         
 () is strictly increasing.    Since  is a stable steady state and  () is strictly increasing
                                                
in  ( ), there is a neighborhood  ( ) of  such that for any open right neighborhood
                 
0 ( ) = (   + 0 ) ⊂  (
                                                 
                                     ),  ∈ 0 (                           
                                                    )) implies  () ∈ 0 ( ). By the same argument
                                                                0
as in Lemma A.10, it follows that there is a 0 ( ) in which  () is given by (21). Equation
                             0                              ∗
(21), however, implies that  () ≥ 0 only for states  ≥  (  ). This implies that  () is
non-monotonic, a contradiction.         ¥

7.2       Proof of Proposition 2
We start from the first point of Proposition 2. Consider the equilibrium described in Proposition
                      
                                  £                    ¤
1 with steady state   . If  ∈  2 (  )  3 (  ) , then  () =  ( |
                                                                               
                                                                                 ). From (12) we can see
that  0 ( |
                                                         
                ) ≤ 1 −  if and only if  ≤ ( ). If                   0
                                                            ≤ ( ), then  () ≤ 1 −  at any point
                                        
of diﬀerentiability less or equal than  (i.e. almost everywhere, since  () in this equilibrium is
                                                                                     £                   ¤
almost everywhere diﬀerentiable). In addition, since  () is strictly increasing in  2 (  ) ( ) ,
there is a ∗ such that for   ∗ ,  +1 = (  |
                                                     
                                                       ), and hence  0 (  |
                                                                               
                                                                                 )  1 − .
                                                        ∗∗                                      
    We now show that if the steady state  ∈ (( )   (  )], then starting from  ≤  ,
for any equilibrium path   → 
                                
                                  , there is a ∗ such that for   ∗ we have strategic
                                                          ∗∗                              ∗∗
complementarity. First note that   0 implies ( )    (  ), so  ∈ (( )   (  )]
                      ∗∗                                                      
exists.    Since  ≤   (  ), it must be that  ∈ (( )  + (1 − ) ).           By continuity,
                                                       
therefore, there is a neighborhood      ( )   of      in which  () is interior of the constraint set
of problem (6), and so ( ()) +  ( ()) −  () is constant. Using the same argument as
                                                                                      
in Step 1 in Section 7.1.2, we can establish that  () is equal to ( | ) in  ( ), i.e. the
                                                                                             
function that solves (21) with the initial condition  = ( | ) in a left neighborhood of  . It
                                 
follows that starting from    , for any equilibrium path   → 
                                                                     
                                                                       , there is a ∗ such that for
  ∗ ,  +1 = (  |
                         
                           ), and  0 (  |
                                                                                        
                                               ), is given by (21). Since by assumption   ( ),
for  large enough we must have    ( ), and so  0 (  |
                                                                 
                                                                   )  (1 − ).            ¥

7.3       Proof of Proposition 3
          ∗             ∗∗
Let  ∈ [ (  )   (  )] be the steady state of  (). Define:


                                                       40
                                   ½                                                   ¾
                     2 (
                                                  
                            ) = max min { | ( |                       ∗
                                                     ) ≤  + (1 − ) }   (  )
                                         ≥0

                                                      
We now show that, as in (8),  () is equal to ( | ) (i.e., a function that solves the diﬀerential
                                                                               
equation (12) with the initial condition ( | ) =  ) for all  ∈ [2 ( )  ].
                                   ∗             
   Consider first the states  ∈ [ (  )  ].               Assume that there is an interval (1  2 ) ⊂
  ∗                                                                                                 0
[ (  )  ] in which  () is constant.          For any point in (1  2 ) we would have  () =
                       ∗                             0
(1 − ). Since 1 ≥  (  ), we have () +  () = () + (1 − )  1 for  ∈ (1  2 ).
                                                                                             
Since () +  () is concave, we must have that the left derivative of () +  () at  exists
                                                                                          
and it strictly smaller than 1. But this is in contradiction with the optimality of  at  . We
                                                 ∗             
conclude that  () is strictly increasing in ( (  )  ].
                ∗∗                                               
   Because  ≤   (  )  , we must have    + (1 − ) . There is a neighborhood
            
 ( ) of  in which  () ∈ (0  + (1 − )).                  As it can be immediately be verified, this
                                                               
implies that there is a neighborhood            ( )   of      in which  () is interior of the constraint
set of problem (6).       Using the same argument used in Step 1 of Section 7.1, we conclude that
                                                                       
that  () must be equal is equal to ( | ) in  ( ). Since ( | ) is strictly increasing in
  ∗                                                                 
[ (  )  ], we must have that  () = ( | ) until ( | ) becomes flat, or it intersects
                                                           
from below the curve  + (1 − ): that is for  ≥ 2 (    ). We conclude that a monotonic
                                        
                                                             ¡ 2     
                                                                       ¢                   
investment function below steady state  , can diﬀer from   () |   only for   2 ( ).
   To prove the rest of the proposition, we now have two cases:
                                    ∗
Case 1.     Assume first 2 ( )   (  ).         In this case we know that the right derivative of
                                                                                   
() +  () at    2 ( )   is 1. The left derivative of () +  () at 2 ( ) can be equal to one
                                                     ∗                 
only if  () is equal to ( | ).       For  ∈ [ (  ) 2 ( )],  0 ( |
                                                                                       
                                                                                         )  (1 − ).   Since we
                                                                                           
have (2 ( ) | ) =  + (1 − )(2 ( ) | ), we would have ( | )   + (1 − )( | ),
                                                                      
which is unfeasible. So the left derivative of () +  () at 2 ( ) must be strictly greater than
                                                                                   ∗
one. This implies  () =  + (1 − ), as in (8). We conclude that if 2 ( )   (  ), any
                                                                             
investment function with steady state  must be equal to  ( | ) for  ≤  (i.e., in this case,
                                                                                        
 + (1 − )). This implies that the convergent path to the steady state from any 0 ≤  is
unique.
                                      ∗
Case 2.         Assume now 2 ( ) =  (  ).             In this case we know that the right deriva-
                                                                                              
tive of () +  () at 2 ( ) is 1.         The left derivative of () +  () at 2 ( ) can be
                                                                        ∗
equal to one only if  () is equal to ( | ).              For  ≤  (  ),  0 ( |
                                                                                               
                                                                                                 )  0, so the in-
vestment function would not be monotonic.                  So the left derivative of () +  () for any
                                                        
  2 ( )
           must be strictly larger than one. Define 1 ( ) as in the proof of Proposition 1,
 1 
            © ¡ ¡ 2       
                            ¢     ¢        ª
 ( ) = max 0   () | −   (1 − ) : this is the point at which  + (1 − ) is equal

                                                          41
    ¡            ¢
to   2 () |  , if positive.For  ≤  1 (  ), since the objective function is strictly increasing,
                                                                            £               ¤
 + (1 − )   2 (), so  () =  + (1 − ). By monotonicity, in  1 (  )  2 (  ) , we must
             ¡            ¢
have () =   2 () |  . This, again, implies that the convergent path to the steady state from
          
any 0 ≤  is unique.
   The result that the convergent path is monotonically increasing follows from the fact that
                                             
 () is increasing and  ()   for    . The result that convergence is only in the limit if
 
    ∗
                                                                              ∗
        (  ), follows from the fact that  () is strictly increasing in (             
                                                                                   (  )  ).      ¥

7.4       Proof of Proposition 4
                                                  ∗∗
Since we are in a regular economy, we have     (  ). We construct here a concave and
                                            
monotonic equilibrium with steady state is  ( ) as defined in (16). We proceed in two steps.
                                                                                            −1
Step 1. We first construct the strategies. Remember that ( ) ≡ ∗ (  1) = [0 ]         (1 − (1 − )).
This is the point at which the solution of the diﬀerential equation (12) has slope (1 − ). Define
 2
 as:
                                  ½                                             ¾
                        2                                            ∗
                          = max min { |b
                                            () ≤  + (1 − ) }   (  )                       (22)
                                      ≥0

The investment function is defined as:
                          ⎧
                          ⎪
                          ⎪       ©               ¡ 2 ¢ª
                          ⎪
                          ⎪   min  + (1 − ) b             2
                                                              ≤ 
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎨
                 () =                b ()           2
                                                            ≤ ( )
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎩            (1 − )              ≥ ( )

Using the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 1, we can prove that  () is continuous
and almost everywhere diﬀerentiable with right and left derivative at any point, and  () ∈
[(1 − )  + (1 − )] for any . Finally, it is easy to see that  () has a unique fixed-point
                           
                                 £ 2           ¤
  such that  ( ) =  ∈   ( ) 

Step 2. We now construct the value function  () associated to  (), and prove that
 ()  () is an equilibrium.        For  ≤ ( ), we define the value function exactly as in
Step 2 of Section 7.1.1. For  ≥ ( ), note that  ()  , so we can define the value function
recursively as:

                                           
                                () =     + ((1 − )) +  ((1 − ))                           (23)
                                           
The value function defined above is continuous in . Using the same argument as in Step 2 of
                                             
Section 7.1.1 we can show that () + (;  ) −  is weakly concave in  for  ≤ ( ); it is

                                                      42
                        £ 2 ¤                £ 2           ¤
strictly increasing in 0    , and flat in   ( ) . Consider now states   ( ). Let
                 £           ¤                           £ 2       ¤
 4 = ()               4                                                      0      0
       1− . In ( )  , we must have (1 − ) ∈   ( ) . Note that  () +  () = 1
        £ 2          ¤
for  ∈   ( ) , so by (23) we have

                         0
                         () = (1 − ) [0 ((1 − )) + 
                                                             0
                                                                ((1 − ))] = 1 − 
           £          ¤
for  ∈ ( )  4 . This fact implies that 0 () +    0
                                                                 () = 0 () +  (1 − ) for any  ∈
£            ¤
 ( )  4 , and hence it is concave in this interval. It follows that  () is concave in  ≤  4
                                              £          ¤
because 0 () + 0
                        () ≤ 1 for any  ∈ ( )  4 . Using a similar approach we can prove
that  () is concave for all , and we have 0 () + 
                                                          0
                                                             () ≤ 1 for  ≥ ( ). To prove that
 ()  () is an equilibrium, we proceed exactly as in Step 3 of Section 7.1.1 to establish that
 () is optimal given  (), and that  () satisfied (15) given  ().¥

7.5     Proof of Proposition 5
We proceed in 2 steps.

Step 1.     The same argument used in Step 1 of Section 7.1.2 shows that no equilibrium stable
                                  ∗∗                       −1
steady state can be greater than   (  ) = [0 ]          (1 −  (1 − )).    The same argument
                                                                                  ∗
used in Step 2 in Section 7.1.2 we can show that no equilibrium can be less than  (  ), so
 ∗               ∗
 (  ) ≥  (  ).

Step 2. Consider a sequence  → 0. For each  there is at least an associated equilibrium
                                                                       ∗∗                  −1
 (),  () with steady state  . If follows trivially that lim→∞  (  ) = [0 ]         (1 − ) =
(0).
                                             ∗                            −1
    What remains to be shown is that lim→∞  (  ) = [0 ]               (1 − ) = (0). Let Γ be
the set of equilibrium steady states when the rate of depreciation is  .              We now show by
                                             e such that for   ,
contradiction that for any   0, there is a                    e inf  Γ ≥ (0) − . Since
            ∗∗                                             ∗
inf  Γ ≤   (  ), this will immediatly imply that  (  ) → (0).           Suppose to the
                                                 0
contrary there is a sequence of steady states    ,   with associated equilibrium investment and value
                                                  0
functions  (),  (), and an   0 such that   (0) −  for any arbitrarily large . Define
 0                                −1
 () =  (), and  () =  (   ()) and consider a marginal deviation from the steady state
      0     0
from  to  + ∆. By the irreversibility constraint we have  () ≥ (1 −  ) . Using this
                            0                           0      0
property and the fact that  is a steady state, so  ( ) =  , we have:

                   0             0
                                                ¡ 0    ¢
               ( + ∆) −  ( ) ≥ (1 −  )         0
                                                    + ∆ −  = (1 −  ) ∆ −  
                                                                                 0



This implies that, as  → ∞, for any given ∆:
                                         0         0
                                     ( + ∆) − 
                                                     ≥ 1 + 1 ( )
                                           ∆

                                                    43
where 1 ( ) → 0 as  → 0. We now show with an inductive argument that a similar property
                             0
holds for all iterations  ( ). Assume we have shown that:
                                     −1 0          0
                                      ( + ∆) − 
                                                      ≥ 1 + −1 ( )
                                            ∆
where −1 ( ) → 0 as  → 0. We must have:

                        −1 0              0
                    (  ( + ∆)) −  ( ) ≥ (1 −  ) 
                                                             −1 0          0
                                                                ( + ∆) − 

We therefore have:
                      −1 0           0    −1 0          0
                  (  ( + ∆)) −  ≥   ( + ∆) −  −  
                                                                  −1 0
                                                                     ( + ∆)

so we have:
                    −1 0           0            −1 0          0
                (  ( + ∆)) −              ( + ∆) −     
                                                                        −1 0
                                                                           ( + ∆)
                                             ≥                    −
                          ∆                             ∆                  ∆
                                             ≥ 1 +  ( )                                                 (24)
                                 
                                    −1   0
                                        ( +∆)
where  ( ) = −1 ( ) −         ∆         ,   so  ( ) → 0 as  → 0
                                                           0
   We can write the value function after the deviation to  + ∆ as:
                X∞           ∙                                                           ¸
       0                        + (1 −  ) 
                                              −1 0
                                                 ( + ∆) −    0
                                                                ( + ∆)
    ( + ∆) =         −1                                                  
                                                                         + (   0
                                                                                ( + ∆))
                   =0                             
For any given function  (), define ∆ () =  ( + ∆) −  (). We can write:
                                             ⎡                                 ⎤
                                                        (1− )∆
                                                                 −1   0
                                                                     (       
                                                                         )∆−∆   0
                                                                                 ( )∆
                                      X∞           ⎢                               ⎥
                     0
                ∆ ( )∆ =                  −1 ⎢
                                                   ⎣
                                                                                    ⎥
                                                                                    ⎦
                                         =0           £ 0 0           ¤     0
                                                      +  ( ) +  (∆) ∆ ( )∆
                                                    ⎡                               ⎤
                                                        (1− )(1+−1 ( ))−(1+ ( ))
                                      X∞           ⎢                                  ⎥
                                ≥             −1 ⎢
                                                   ⎣
                                                                                       ⎥
                                                                                       ⎦                    (25)
                                         =0            £ 0 0           ¤          
                                                       +  ( ) +  (∆) (1 +  ( ))

where  (∆) → 0 as ∆ → 0. In the first equality we use the fact that if we choose ∆ small, since
                           0
 () is continuous, ∆ ( ) is small as well. This implies that
                     ¡  0                   0
                                                  ¢ £  0              0
                                                                            ¤
                      ( ( + ∆)) − ( ( ))   ( + ∆) −  ( )

converges to 0 (
                     0
                    ( )) as ∆ → 0. The inequality in 25 follows from (24). Given ∆, as  → ∞,
                              0               0 (
                                                   0
                                                     )+(∆)
we therefore have lim→∞ ∆ ( )∆ ≥               1−     .    We conclude that for any   0, there must
                                                                            0                    0 (
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                        )
be a ∆ such that for any ∆ ∈ (0 ∆ ) there is a ∆ guaranteeing that ∆ ( )∆ ≥               1−       −
                                                        0
for   ∆ . After a marginal deviation to                + ∆, therefore, the change in agent’s objective
function is:
                                                                 0 (
                                                                      0
                                                                        )
                          0 (
                               0           0
                                 ) + ∆ ( )∆ − 1 ≥                    −  − 1
                                                                  1−

                                                       44
                                                                                            0
for  suﬃciently large. A necessary condition for the un-profitability of a deviation from  to
 0
 + ∆ is therefore:

                                          0           −1
                                          ≥ [0 ]        (1 −  +  (1 − ))                             (26)

                                                                                        0
Since  can be taken to be arbitrarily small, for an arbitrarily large , (26) implies  ≥ (0)−2,
                   0
which contradicts                                ∗
                      (0) − . We conclude that  (  ) → (0) as  → 0.                       ¥

7.6    Proof of Proposition 6
                                                  ∗∗
Since we are in a regular economy, we have     (  ). To construct the equilibrium we
proceed in two steps.

Step 1. We first construct the strategies.                     Let ∆ () be the solution of (12) with the initial
                 ∗                   ∗
condition   ∆ ( (  ))   =    (  )   − ∆. Let  2 (∆) be:
                             ½                                                  ¾
                   2                                             ∗
                   (∆) = max min { |∆ () ≤  + (1 − ) }   (  ) − ∆                             (27)
                                        ≥0

                             ¡      ¢   ∗∗
Let  3 (∆) be defined by ∆  3 (∆) =   (  ). The investment function is defined as:
                         ⎧
                         ⎪
                         ⎪      ©                   ¡      ¢ª
                         ⎪
                         ⎪  min  + (1 − ) ∆  2 (∆)              ≤  2 (∆)
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎨
                
                 () =                ∆ ()                  2 (∆)   ≤  3 (∆)                         (28)
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎩            ∆ ( 3 (∆))                    ≥  3 (∆)

It follows immediately from the proof of Proposition 1 that ∆ () is continuous and almost every-
where diﬀerentiable with right and left derivative at any point. Since lim→∞ ∆ ()  0 as  → 0,
                        
                           ¡                      ¢
there is a fixed-point ∆              ∗
                          ∈  2 (∆)                            
                                         (  ) such that ∆ (∆ ) = ∆
                                                                            . We have:
                                                                        £              ¤
Lemma A.11. There is a ∆∗ such that for ∆ ≤ ∆∗ : ∆ () ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆) for any  ∈
£ 2             ¤
  (∆)   3 (∆) .

Proof. First note that  2 (∆) is continuous and decreasing in ∆. We first show that there is
   0                       0                                   £              ¤
a ∆ such that for ∆ ≤ ∆ ∆ () ≤  + (1 − ) for any  ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆) . Assume not.
                                                                 £                ¤
Then there must be a sequences ∆ → 0 and (  ) with   ∈  2 (∆ )   3 (∆ ) , such that
                                                 ∗
∆ (  )   + (1 − )  for any  and   →                                ∗
                                                   (  ) (since  2 (∆ ) →  (  )). This
implies: lim→∞ ∆ (  ) ≥  + (1 − ) lim→∞   . Note that

                         + (1 − ) lim                                ∗
                                                           =  + (1 − ) (  )
                                           →∞
                                                           ≤                        ∗
                                                                  lim ∆ (  ) =  (  )
                                                                 →∞



                                                                45
                ∗∗                                                 ∗∗
implying  ≤   (  ). However, in a regular economy     (  ), a contradiction.
                                                                                                         0
                                ∗
Since by construction ∆ () ≥  (  ) − ∆, we conclude that ∆ () ≥  2 (∆) for ∆ ≤ ∆ . We
                                  00                         00
now prove that there is a ∆ such that, for ∆ ≤ ∆ , ∆ () ≤  3 (∆). Note that for  ≥ ∆
                                                                                        
                                                                                          , we
               3                                                 
                                                                                   ¡ 2
                                                                                         ¢
have ∆ () ≤  (∆) by construction (since ∆ () ≤ ). For   ∆ , we have  ≤ ∆  (∆) . If
                                                                            ∗
the statement were not true, then we would have sequences ∆ → 0 and   →  (  ) such that
              ∗∗
∆ (  )                                                          ∗
                 (  ), but this is impossible since ∆ (  ) →               ∗∗
                                                                         (  )    (  ).          ¥
                                                                           
Step 2. Using Lemma A.11, we can now construct the concave value function   () associated
                                                                                         
with the investment function in (28) exactly as in Proposition 1. The proof that   (),   () is
an equilibrium is identical to the corresponding proof in Proposition 1 and omitted. To prove that
                  
the steady state ∆ is stable and that convergence to it is characterized by damped oscillations,
                         0                                     ∗               0  
we need to prove that [ ] (∆ ) ∈ (−1 0). Note that since ∆   (  ), [ ] (∆ )  0;
                                     ∗                                0  
and since ∆ is arbitrarily close to  (  ) for ∆ small, then [ ] (∆ ) ∈ (−1 0).
                                                          ∗∗
Step 3. The fact that a steady state is bounded above by   (  ) is already proven as in
                                                                    ∗∗∗
Proposition 1.     To show that a steady state is bounded below by    (  ) we proceed by
                                                                           ∗∗∗
contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that there is a steady state       (  ). Since it
must be    0, in a right neighborhood of   we must have that the investment function ()
is interior in (0  + (1 − )). Following an argument similar to the argument of Proposition 1
we can show that in this range the investment function cannot be constant (otherwise the agents
would want to invest more), and that () must satisfy (21). Since   is a stable equilibrium we
must have | 0 (  )|  1. This implies   ≥ 
                                                ∗∗∗
                                                    (  ).         ¥

7.7      Example 4
Assuming () =   , we can solve for ∆ () in closed form:

                                                                      ( −  (1 − ))
                      ∆ () =  (    ∆) +                 −                                      (29)
                                                        (1 − )          (1 − )
where:
                      µ                  ¶ 1−
                                            1  "   µ                  ¶ 2−1 #
                                                                       1−
                                                                                              ( − (1 − ))
 (    ∆) =                             1−                                          +                  −∆
                           − (1 − )                  − (1 − )               (1 − )        (1 − )

Assuming  = 3,  = 75  = 02  = 01, we have: ∆ () = 19733 − ∆ − 200 01 + 16 and
 ∗                                                                  
 ( ) = 12814.        When ∆ ≥ 1, ∆ () admits a fixed-point ∆ lower than 063581 and such
      0   
that ∆ (∆ ) ≤ −14063, so the first part of Assumption 1 is verified. When ∆ ≤ 12, moreover,
                                         ∗∗                    
it admits a fixed-point ∆  such that ∆ (  ( ) − ∆)  ∆ (∆  ). In this example, therefore,
Assumption 1 is verified for any ∆ ∈ (1 12). Note, moreover, that since (29) is continuous in all
parameters, Assumption 1 is satisfied in an open set of all fundamental parameters.

                                                        46
7.8    Proof of Proposition 7
                                                                   ∗               ∗
Let ∆ () be the solution of (12) with the initial condition ∆ ( (  )) =  (  ) − ∆. Let
 2 (∆) be:
                            ½                                                  ¾
                  2                                             ∗
                  (∆) = max min { |∆ () ≤  + (1 − ) }   (  ) − ∆                       (30)
                                  ≥0

and define  3 (∆) = ∆
                                
                         , where ∆                                                ∗
                                     is the fixed point of ∆ () to the right of  (  ).       The
investment function is defined as:
                        ⎧
                        ⎪
                        ⎪      ©                ¡       ¢ª
                        ⎪
                        ⎪  min  + (1 − ) ∆  2 (∆)           ≤  2 (∆)
                        ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎨
              
               () =                ∆ ()                2 (∆)   ≤  3 (∆)                      (31)
                        ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎪
                        ⎩          ∆ ( 3 (∆))                   ≥  3 (∆)

It follows immediately that ∆ () is continuous and almost everywhere diﬀerentiable with right
                                                                                  ∗
and left derivative at any point. Let ∆ is the fixpoint of ∆ () on the left of  (  ). Note
      
that ∆ is decreasing in ∆ and continuous in ∆. Since by Assumption 1 there is a ∆0 such that
 0                            ∗∗∗             ∗
∆ 0 ()  −1, for any    ∈ [   (  )  (  )] we must have a ∆ such that ∆ (  ) =   . We
only need to prove that, in correspondence to this ∆, ∆ () is an equilibrium investment function
for  suﬃciently large. We have:

Lemma A.12. Given Assumption 1, for any   ∈ [ ∗∗∗             ∗
                                                      (  )  (  )], there is a ∆ and a
                                                  £                  ¤          £              ¤
∆ such that for   ∆ , ∆ ( ) =  and ∆ () ∈  (∆)   (∆) in  ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆) .
                                                  2          3


Proof. The fact that there is a a ∆ such that ∆ (  ) =   (for any  ) follows from the previous
                                                                                 £              ¤
argument. We now show that when  is large enough we also have ∆ () ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆) for
    £                ¤
 ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆) . It is immemdiate to see that for  large enough, ∆ () ≤  + (1 − )
         £               ¤
for  ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆) . Given this, ∆ () ≥  2 (∆) follows directly. We next prove that
∆ () ≤  3 (∆). For  ≥ ∆
                           
                             we have ∆ () ≤  3 (∆) by construction. Assume now  ≤ ∆
                                                                                       
                                                                                         . We
                     ∗                     
have ∆ () ≤ ∆ (   (  )−∆) ≤ ∆ (∆  ), where the second inequality follows from Assumption
                                                                                  £            ¤
1. Since by definition ∆ (∆ ) = ∆ =  3 (∆), we conclude that ∆ () ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆) for
                                     
   £                 ¤
 ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆)        ¥
                                                                                     
   Using Lemma A.12, one can construct a concave value function   () associated to   ()
in the same way as in Proposition 1.         ¥

7.9    Proof of Proposition 8
We can construct an equilibrium with investment function ∆ () exactly as in Proposition 7.
         ∗
Let ∆   (  ) be the fixed point of ∆ (), and let  2 (∆) and  3 (∆) be defined as in

                                                    47
                                                             ∗∗∗
Proposition 7. By Assumption 1 we can choose ∆ so that ∆      (  ), and so in a open right
                                                                                  ¡               ¢
neighborhood  (∆ ) of ∆ we have ∆ ()  −1. Consider an initial state 0 ∈  2 (∆)   3 (∆)
                                   0

                                                     ∗
with 0 6= ∆ . It is immediate to see that no path { } with 0∗ = 0 and 
                                                                             ∗        ∗
                                                                               = ∆ (−1 ) can
                                            
converge. The path can converge only to ∆    , since this is the unique fixed point of ∆ () in
¡ 2             ¢             0
  (∆)   3 (∆) . But since ∆ ()  −1 in  (∆                 ∗
                                                    ) there is no {                  
                                                                      } converging to ∆ starting
            
from 0 6= ∆ as well. We conclude that this equilibrium has a cycle.      ¥




                                                48
