NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OPT-IN REVOLUTION? CONTRACEPTION AND THE GENDER GAP IN
WAGES
Martha J. Bailey
Brad Hershbein
Amalia R. Miller
Working Paper 17922
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17922
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

This research was supported by a core grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) to the Population Studies Center at the University
of Michigan (R24 HD041028), which provided generous financial support for work in the University
of Michigan Research Data Center (RDC). During work on this project, Hershbein was supported
by the NICHD (T32 HD0007339) as a University of Michigan Population Studies Center (PSC) Trainee
and by the PSC Marshall Weinberg Research Fellowship. The research in this paper was conducted
while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Michigan
Census RDC. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential
data are revealed. We are grateful to Jim Davis, Maggie Levenstein, Stan Sedo, and Clint Carter for
extensive support with the preparation and revision of the restricted data proposal and disclosure process
and to John Bound, Charlie Brown, John DiNardo, Claudia Goldin, David Lam, Thomas Lemieux,
Bob Margo, Paul Rhode, Jeff Smith, Gary Solon, and Sarah Turner for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Martha J. Bailey, Brad Hershbein, and Amalia R. Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Opt-In Revolution? Contraception and the Gender Gap in Wages
Martha J. Bailey, Brad Hershbein, and Amalia R. Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 17922
March 2012, Revised June 2012
JEL No. J13,J16,J3,N32
ABSTRACT
Decades of research on the U.S. gender gap in wages describes its correlates, but little is known about
why women changed their career paths in the 1960s and 1970s. This paper explores the role of “the
Pill” in altering women’s human capital investments and its ultimate implications for life-cycle wages.
Using state-by-birth-cohort variation in legal access, we show that younger access to the Pill conferred
an 8-percent hourly wage premium by age fifty. Our estimates imply that the Pill can account for 10
percent of the convergence of the gender gap in the 1980s and 30 percent in the 1990s.
Martha J. Bailey
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
207 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
baileymj@umich.edu
Brad Hershbein
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
bjhersh@umich.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17922

Amalia R. Miller
Department of Economics, University of Virginia
armiller@virginia.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION

During the 1980s, the long-standing U.S. gender gap in pay narrowed rapidly. The median annual
wage and salary earnings of full-time, full-year women workers rose from roughly 60 percent of men’s
earnings in 1979 to 69 percent a decade later. Not only was this decade a striking departure from the
stability of women’s relative pay during the 1970s, but the speed of women’s convergence in the 1980s
was also faster than during the 1990s and the 2000s.
The correlates of the narrowing of the gender gap in the 1980s are well documented. Expecting to
remain in the labor-force longer, women born in the 1950s (who came of age in the 1970s) narrowed the
gender gap in college going and completion, professional degree attainment, and employment in nontraditionally female occupations (Goldin 2004, 2006). Increases in demand for skills that benefited
women relative to men increased the returns to women’s career investments (Blau and Kahn 1997, Welch
2000). Widening wage inequality among women also encouraged women to invest in market skills and
led more able women to select into full-time employment (Mulligan and Rubinstein 2008). Each of these
factors may have contributed to and resulted from the growth in women’s work experience (O’Neill and
Polachek 1993, Wellington 1993).
The root causes of these changes are less clear. Two important but elusive candidate explanations
include the resurgence of the women’s movement in the late 1960s and early 1970s and the new legal
protections afforded to women under the 1964 Civil Rights Act (and later federal enforcement) that
reduced overtly-discriminatory hiring and compensation practices. Recent literature also suggests oral
contraception, often called “the Pill,” as another important candidate. Its diffusion to younger, unmarried
women improved their ability to time births, altered their expectations about childbearing during a period
critical to their career investments, and reduced the cost of increasing their early career investments. The
timing of its diffusion during the 1960s and 1970s also fits well with the slow growth in women’s wages
during the 1970s (as younger women invested more in their human capital) and the rapid convergence in
the gender gap during the 1980s (when these women enjoyed the returns on their human capital
investments and accumulated labor-market experience). To quantify the importance of the Pill, Goldin
Opt-In Revolution – 1

and Katz (2002) use state-by-birth-cohort legal changes that reduced the age of consent from 21 to 18
and, thereby, also reduced the age of legal access to prescription birth control. Subsequent literature links
this “earlier access to the Pill” to delays in marriage (among college goers) and motherhood, changes in
selection into motherhood, increased educational attainment, labor-force participation, and occupational
upgrading (Goldin and Katz 2002, Bailey 2006, Guldi 2008, Hock 2008, Ananat and Hungerman 2012).
This article examines the role of the Pill in altering women’s life-cycle wages and its ultimate
implications for the convergence in the gender gap during the 1980s and 1990s. Although previous work
implies that the Pill benefitted individual women’s careers, changes in the composition of working
women and increased labor supply mean that its effect on aggregate women’s wages need not be large or
even positive. Following earlier work, our empirical strategy leverages state-by-birth-cohort changes in
laws reducing the age of consent for medical care and, by extension, access to prescription birth control
for unmarried women under age 21. We extend the literature by providing new evidence relating to this
empirical strategy’s identifying assumptions. Using the 1970 National Fertility Study (NFS), we show
that early access laws increased Pill use among women between the ages of 18 and 20—precisely the ages
affected by access laws—but not beyond age 21, when the laws did not bind. In addition, we test the
excludability of Pill access laws (i.e., the assumption that early legal access to the Pill was conditionally,
randomly assigned) using the National Longitudinal Survey of Young Women (NLS-YW). Among 18
family background characteristics that should not have been affected by these legal changes, early access
to the Pill is correlated with only one at the 10 percent level—no more than would be expected by chance.
Using longitudinal wage information from the NLS-YW, our main results show that early access
to the Pill lowered women’s wages in their early twenties (corresponding to the 1970s) but raised their
wages in their thirties and forties (corresponding to the 1980s and 1990s). By their late forties, women
with early access to the Pill earned a statistically significant hourly premium of 8 percent—enough to
account for between a third and half of the total hourly wage gains for these cohorts over their peers born
a decade earlier. Consistent with the well-known relationship of women’s wage growth and cumulative
labor-force experience, our decomposition indicates that almost two thirds of the Pill-induced wage
Opt-In Revolution – 2

premium at the mean is explained through its effect on women’s labor-force experience. Another third of
the premium is due to changes in educational attainment and occupational choice.
The NLS-YW also sheds light on the mechanisms for these effects. Stratifying our sample by
measures of high school “IQ score” reveals that the flexibility conferred by the Pill had no measurable
impact on the education or experience of lower IQ women. Both middle and higher IQ women, however,
raised their educational attainment in their twenties and, in their thirties, acquired more labor-market
experience and increased their representation in non-traditionally female occupations. Interestingly, the
Pill’s larger effects on work experience accrued to women in the middle of the IQ distribution with some
college as did its effects on lifecycle wages. Thus, the rapid narrowing of the gender gap during the 1980s
reflected, in part, a Pill-induced revolution in middle-ability women planning for and opting into paid
work.
II.

THE REVOLUTION IN WOMEN’S WORK

Aggregate statistics documenting women’s wages from the 1950s and 1960s only hint at the
tremendous changes in women’s earning capacity. Goldin (1990: table 3.1) shows that women’s real
wages fell relative to men’s from the 1950s to the 1960s; from the 1960s through the mid-1970s, the gap
in pay remained constant at roughly 60 percent (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 2010: figure 51). Beginning in
the 1980s, the gender gap in wages narrowed substantially. Although this narrowing has continued to the
present, its pace has slowed since the mid-1990s. To provide context for our cohort-age based
investigation, this section uses the 1964 to 2009 March Current Population Surveys (CPS) to describe by
age and cohort the changes in women’s wages and labor-force outcomes, what Goldin (2006) dubbed the
“quiet revolution.”1 We also present statistics relative to men to underscore the convergence in outcomes.
Figure 1 shows the evolution of mean annual wage and salary earnings in 2000 dollars (PCE
deflator) for seven different birth cohorts of women relative to men—a measure of the age-specific

1

We use CPS rather than the NLS, because the CPS contain information on older cohorts and their larger sample sizes make our
series less noisy. Data from the NLS-YW augment this discussion when informative.

Opt-In Revolution – 3

gender gap for the following cohorts: those born from 1922 to 1927 (called mid-1920s), 1928 to 1932
(early 1930s), 1933 to 1937 (mid-1930s), 1938 to 1942 (early 1940s), 1943 to 1946 (mid-1940s), 1947 to
1950 (late 1940s), and 1951 to 1954 (early 1950s).2 For cohorts born before the 1940s, the relative wage
series have similar age profiles. Beginning with cohorts born in the early 1940s, the gender gap increases
less rapidly (i.e., the pay of women relative to men falls less rapidly) in women’s twenties and rebounds
more quickly after age 30. For 34 year olds, annual incomes increased from 39 percent of similarly aged
men for the 1938 to 1942 cohort to 55 percent for cohorts born less than a decade later.
Large changes in relative wage and salary earnings followed dramatic relative increases in
women’s pre-market and post-entry career investments. Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko (2006) show that
the share of women (relative to men) attending and completing college accelerated for cohorts born after
the mid-1930s. Labor-force participation during the childbearing years grew rapidly as well. At the
extensive margin, participation of 30-year-old women born in the mid-1940s increased by 16 percentage
points (from a base of 39 percent) over cohorts born a decade earlier. For women born in the early 1950s,
this statistic increased another 14 percentage points.3 Because the labor-force participation of men was
stable over this period, these increases imply a narrowing in the cohort-based gender gap in participation,
shown as a flattening of the relative labor-force participation series plotted in figure 2A. Women’s greater
labor-force participation also translated into considerably more work experience (cf. O’Neill and
Polachek 1993, Wellington 1993). In the NLS-YW, we calculate that women born in the early 1950s
worked 3000 more hours between ages 24 and 40 than did women born in the mid-1940s—an increase of
1.5 full-time, 50-week years.4

2

This divides the cohorts of the National Longitudinal Surveys of Mature and Young Women into roughly equal-sized groups.
Wage and salary earnings in figure 1 exclude farm, business or self-employment income. Our sample excludes those who report
zero earnings, but figure 1 makes no further sample restrictions.
3
Statistics for women alone are computed using the March CPS, but only statistics relative to men are presented for brevity.
4
We cannot compare these estimates with cohorts born earlier than the mid-1940s, as the Mature Women were first interviewed
when they were between the ages of 30 and 45. Therefore, we are missing information on these older cohorts’ labor-force
participation at younger ages. For construction of these experience measures, see Appendix A.

Opt-In Revolution – 4

Changes in the nature of women’s work for pay—along with their experience—also coincide
with the narrowing of the cohort-based gender gap. The fraction of women working in professional or
managerial jobs in their mid-thirties was roughly twice as high for cohorts born in the mid-1940s as for
cohorts born a decade earlier. Figure 2B shows that, after accounting for the increase in the share of men
working in professional and managerial jobs, women’s representation in these fields at age 30 increased
by 25 percentage points between the cohorts born in the early and late 1940s and another 24 percentage
points for cohorts born in the early 1950s.
Although the remarkable, late-twentieth-century transformation in women’s careers is well
known, its catalysts are less well understood. Women may have been pulled into the labor force by
changes in demand reflecting increasing enforcement of anti-discrimination legislation or skill- (and
gender-) biased technological change (Welch 2000, Black and Juhn 2000, Weinberg 2000, Black and
Spitz-Oener 2010). At the same time, rapidly changing ideas about women’s work and roles in the
workplace (Fernandez, Fogli, and Olivetti 2004, Fernandez and Fogli 2009, and Fortin 2009), shifts in
divorce rates (Stevenson and Wolfers 2007), and the availability of better colleges and better education at
the same colleges (Goldin and Katz 2010) may have increased the supply of women’s skills to the market.
The next sections describe the potential importance of the Pill for young women’s decisions and wages
and outline our empirical strategy for quantifying its role within the broader social and economic changes
of the last 40 years.
III.

WAS THIS AN OPT-IN REVOLUTION? THE EXPECTED EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN PILL ACCESS
ON WOMEN’S LIFECYCLE WAGES
The diffusion of oral contraception, first released for the regulation of menses in 1957 and

approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as a contraceptive in 1960, had an important impact
on younger women’s ability to time births and plan future childbearing. Women born in the early 1940s
(who would be young adults in the early 1960s) would have been the first with access to the Pill in late
adolescence when they made decisions about family formation, childbearing, and career investments.
They would have also been the first to gain autonomy in deciding to use contraception (rather than

Opt-In Revolution – 5

sharing it with their partners), the first to be able to make decisions about contraception at a time separate
from intercourse, and the first to benefit from the reliability and expectation of birth predictability the Pill
conferred over years crucial to their human capital investment. Changes in expectations even affected
women who—without the Pill—would not have married or had a child before age 22, as these women did
not know this would be the case at age 18.
The difficulty of parsing the Pill’s effect on women’s wages relates to the timing of its
appearance. By cause or coincidence, its diffusion coincided with important changes in norms and ideas
about women’s work and the end of the baby boom. Following Goldin and Katz (2002) and Bailey
(2006), our empirical strategy makes use of state-level variation within birth cohorts in “early legal access
to the Pill” (ELA), which allowed younger women to consent for medical care. As described in Bailey
(2006), most legal changes were due either to judicial expansions in the rights of legal minors or to
legislative changes that lowered the age of majority to 18. The timing of changes in ELA differed
considerably across states (the earliest change was in 1960 and the latest in 1976), but the common
feature of these laws is that they gave physicians latitude to prescribe oral contraception to unmarried
women under 21 without consulting parents (Paul, Pilpel, and Wechsler 1974, 1976). State-by-birth
cohort variation in ELA, therefore, facilitates comparisons of labor-force outcomes for women who
gained legal access to the Pill earlier (typically at their 18th birthdays) to those who gained access at 21.
This three-year difference in access to the Pill during a formative life stage potentially affected a
host of decisions. Having early access to the Pill, for instance, directly reduced the cost of delaying
childbearing and marriage to enter or stay in college.5 Even among women who did not attend college,
better fertility control reduced the cost of remaining at a job long enough to obtain a promotion or

5

A lower risk of childbearing at ages 18 to 19 may have also affected when and whom women married, which could have an
independent effect on their careers (Chiappori and Oreffice 2008). Staying in college longer could allow marriage to a more
educated man and, therefore, increase a woman’s nonwage income and reduce her labor-supply (Ge 2011). On the other hand,
staying in college longer should increase a woman’s own earnings and, therefore, increase her options outside of marriage. If this
leads to greater divorce, women would have lower nonwage incomes and, therefore, tend to work more at older ages (and
younger ages, to the extent that women are risk averse and forward looking). For both reasons, marriage delay may improve
women’s career outcomes independently of fertility delay (Loughran and Zissimopolous 2009, Miller 2011).

Opt-In Revolution – 6

additional training. In addition, early access to the Pill may have altered the expected returns to early
human capital investments. All else equal, the expected lifetime returns to human capital investments
would increase if women anticipated lower costs of completing them. In short, earlier access to the Pill
should have both reduced the costs of and increased the expected returns to early career investments—
predictions consistent with the empirical literature: Hock (2008) and Ananat and Hungerman (2012) show
Pill access affected college enrollment and education; Bailey (2006) shows that it increased women’s
labor-force attachment; and Goldin and Katz (2002) find that it increased college women’s representation
in non-traditionally female professions.
This framework suggests three (potentially reinforcing) mechanisms linking ELA to steeper wage
and salary earnings profiles. First, ELA may have increased school enrollment and participation in
training programs, which should lower wage earnings at younger ages, and increase them following
school exit. We call this channel the “formal human-capital investment mechanism.” Second, ELA may
have increased labor-force participation, which should enable women to accumulate more labor-market
experience and job- or firm-specific human capital and, thus, have more rapid wage growth. We call this
mechanism the “experience mechanism.” Third, women with ELA may have shared the costs of gaining
on-the-job human capital by accepting lower initial wages but then enjoying more rapid wage growth
with tenure. We call this channel the “on-the-job-investment mechanism.”
There are two off-setting forces as well. Because ELA could increase labor-force participation for
large numbers of women (and, thus, reduce the capital-to-labor-ratio), its effect on any one woman may
be larger than its effect on an entire birth cohort, the parameter recovered in the analysis. As shown in the
theory appendix, the magnitude of these supply-side effects depends (among other things) on the degree
of substitutability of male and female labor in production. The closer substitutes men and women are in
production, the smaller the labor-supply effect and the more likely the overall effect of ELA on wages will
be positive (due to its effect on human capital accumulation). Our estimates include this labor-supply
channel, so our estimates will tend to understate the effect of the Pill on an individual woman’s wages,
especially in the shorter-run (at younger ages) before firms adjust their capital stock.
Opt-In Revolution – 7

Changes in selection—while endogenous—also complicate the analysis. Because wages are only
observed for labor market participants, the observed impact of ELA on women’s wage growth will be
larger than the effect on the average woman if the Pill differentially affects human capital investments and
labor supply of higher ability women. If, for instance, early access to the Pill causes higher ability woman
to continue in their education and makes them less likely to work in their early twenties, then the ELAinduced growth in wages will reflect both the returns to these greater investments and changes in the
composition of working women to favor those of higher ability.

Our analysis explores these

compositional effects explicitly by breaking our sample into three IQ tertiles (based upon a composite
developed from high school aptitude tests) and examining the effects of ELA for women within each of
these tertiles.
IV.

DATA AND EMPIRICAL STRATEGY FOR IDENTIFYING THE IMPACT OF THE PILL ON WAGES
Our analysis uses the rich, longitudinal data of the National Longitudinal Survey of Young

Women (NLS-YW), which contains information beginning in 1968 for 5,159 women, ages 14 to 24, with
21 subsequent interviews. Crucial is that the NLS-YW sampled women born from 1943 to 1954, cohorts
that varied in their early legal access to the Pill. Although this dataset is smaller than those used in earlier
studies, the restricted version contains information on the legal state of residence for the respondents at
age 21. We use residence at age 21 (which should be reported as parents’ residence for unmarried, college
women) to infer treatment status with considerably less error than previous studies.6
The NLS-YW confers several additional advantages. It contains a rich set of pre-treatment
outcomes for testing the validity of our empirical strategy and also facilitates an analysis of heterogeneity
in the impact of the Pill by socio-economic status and high school IQ of the respondent, which allows us
to understand the ways in which the Pill influenced the selection of women into paid work.7 Finally, the

6

Restricting the sample to those with valid date of birth (cohort) and state of residence information reduces the sample to 4354.
Both Goldin and Katz (2002) and Bailey (2006) use repeated cross-sections that contain no information on an individual’s state
of residence at ages 18 to 21. As a result, Goldin and Katz (2002) and Bailey (2006) infer ELA based upon the reported birth state
or state of residence at the time of the survey respectively.
7
Appendix A describes the survey questions and coding of each variable.

Opt-In Revolution – 8

NLS-YW provides information on women’s wage earnings in every survey year as well as their career
investments including educational attainment, job training and certification, and labor-force participation
(weeks and hours). Repeated reports of women’s labor-force participation allows us to construct measures
of their cumulative labor-force experience and link the Pill to this important correlate of women’s wage
gains.
A. Empirical Specification
Our empirical strategy follows the previous literature with several modifications. We estimate the
following linear regression models for continuous dependent variables,
∑

1

∑

∑

∑

,

where Y is the outcome of interest for individual i, at age a, who was born in year c = 1943, 1944, …,
1953 (also referred to as “birth cohort”), and residing in state s = 1, 2, …, 51 at age 21. Fixed effects for
state of residence, ∑

1 if i resided in state s at age 21, and single year-of-birth

where

cohorts, ∑

where

dummy variables

are set to 1 if the respondent’s age fell into the five-year age group, g (14-19, 20-

1 if i was born in year c, are included in all specifications. The

24, …, or 45-49). Standard errors for all models are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state
level.8
Early legal access to the pill, ELAcs, is equal to one if a woman born in year c would have had
access to oral contraception before age 21 in her state of residence at age 21, and interactions of ELA with
the age-group dummy variables allow its effect to vary across the lifecycle. Therefore, the key parameters
of interest, the

terms, measure differences in the outcome of interest in age group g between women

with and without early legal access to the Pill.

will understate the impact of early Pill access if local

compliance and enforcement were imperfect (young women drove across state lines to obtain the Pill or
doctors prescribed it to underage women).

8

For dichotomous dependent variables, we estimate probits and report average partial effects (APEs). The standard errors are
calculated using a non-parametric bootstrap method with states as clusters (1,000 repetitions).

Opt-In Revolution – 9

The main modification to Bailey (2006) is that we rely upon a revised legal coding (see Appendix
B). This updated legal coding reduces measurement error in ELA and allows the estimation of more
precise effects over the lifecycle. Because these laws are not used elsewhere in the literature, the
following section establishes their relationship with Pill use and subjects them to validity checks using
detailed information on pre-treatment characteristics.
B. Validity of Using ELA to Identify the Impact of the Pill
is that ELA is

One important assumption required to obtain consistent estimates of

uncorrelated with the error term after conditioning on state, age-group and birth-cohort fixed effects, or
cov(ELA,|

=0, where

captures the fixed effects in equation (1).

One reason that cov(ELA,|

may not be zero is that ELA may not be conditionally, randomly

assigned at baseline. That is, a systematic correlation between omitted characteristics and ELA could drive
the relationship between ELA and outcomes. Because the NLS-YW contain rich information on
respondents’ backgrounds at age 14 before treatment with ELA, we test this possibility using the
following specification,
2

,

where X is a pre-treatment characteristic and other notation remains as previously described. Thus,
measures the residual correlation between ELA and pre-treatment characteristics that could indicate
correlations with other, unobserved characteristics. (This approach is akin to testing for balance in
observable characteristics in a controlled experiment.) Failure to reject

0 is consistent with

conditional random assignment of early legal access to the Pill. Although the power of this test is limited
by our small sample sizes, it provides a useful validity check of the empirical strategy.
Table 1 reports the results of this exercise for 18 pre-treatment characteristics including a binary
variable for whether the respondent’s father was born in the U.S.; a binary variable for whether the
respondent’s father/mother worked for pay or held a professional job when she was 14 (four separate
outcomes); an occupational prestige index for the father, conditional on working; a socio-economic status
Opt-In Revolution – 10

index for the respondent’s parents in 1968; a binary variable for whether the respondent resided on a farm
or in a rural area at age 14; a binary variable for whether the respondent had access to magazines,
newspapers or a library card at age 14 (three separate outcomes); a binary variable for whether the
respondent lived in a household with two parents at age 14; the number of siblings a respondent had; the
highest grade completed by father/mother by 1968 (two separate outcomes); the number of years of
schooling parents wanted the respondent to obtain when she was age 14; the atypicality of the
respondent’s mother’s job (conditional upon mother working; negative numbers represent more atypical
outcomes); and the respondent’s IQ score in high school (see Appendix A for details). Each column
represents a separate, least-squares regression estimate of

.9 Consistent with treating ELA as

conditionally, randomly assigned, only one of the 18 estimates is statistically significant at the ten percent
level—no more than expected by chance. It is also reassuring that the pattern of correlations suggests no
consistent relationship between ELA and the pre-treatment characteristics. For instance, ELA is negatively
associated with father’s employment and with family socio-economic status, but is positively associated
with mother’s education and professional employment.
Even if ELA is conditionally, randomly assigned, another reason that cov(ELA,|

may not be

zero is that ELA is packaged with other policy changes. Although the history of these legal changes makes
this unlikely, one concern is that cohorts with ELA were differentially treated with abortion access by
chance—a treatment that could have a similar effect. Although data limitations mean that abortion access
cannot be measured directly, our analysis accounts for this possibility by augmenting our equation (1)
with a rich set of abortion controls:
50

1′
50

∑

∑

50
∑

9

,

Linear probability models are used for binary outcomes to circumvent potential problems with disclosure. The results are robust
to using negative binomials and probits where appropriate.

Opt-In Revolution – 11

where EAA represents “early access to abortion” and is equal to 1 if an individual resided (at age 21) in
Alaska, California, the District of Columbia, Hawaii, New York or Washington, states that legalized
abortion in 1970. C50 is equal to 1 for birth cohorts born in 1950 or later, because the early legalization of
abortion in 1970 could not have affected Pill use or fertility timing among 18 to 20 year olds before 1970
(cohorts born before 1950). It is also important to note that any cohort-invariant, state-level differences in
access to abortion will be captured in the state effects. The interaction of EAA and C50 with age-group
dummies allows the differential evolution of outcomes for state-birth-cohort groups exposed to legal
abortion in their state of residence before their 21st birthdays. Separate interactions of EAA and C50 with
ELA and age-group dummies allow early abortion access and early access to the Pill to be complements
or substitutes. Finally, cross-state travel to obtain abortion is accounted for by inclusion of log distance to
the nearest large city providing legal abortions to out-of-state residents (Buffalo, New York City, Los
Angeles, San Francisco, or the District of Columbia),

, for cohorts born in 1950 or later (cf.

Joyce, Tan and Zhang 2010). Therefore, the key parameters of interest,

, measure differences in

outcomes in age group g between women with and without ELA for cohorts that did not have early access
to abortion in their home state after adjusting for cohort-level changes in cross-state travel for abortion.10
Finally, we test the sensitivity of our results in four alternative specifications of (1’): one with
linear, state-specific time trends; another with controls for Vietnam casualties;11 another using only a
balanced sample of individuals (those missing information in any year or attriting are omitted); and

10

Disclosure limitations from the Research Data Center prevent us from reporting effects for EAA and the ELA-EAA interactions,
although we can summarize these findings generally. We find that early abortion access does have independent effects on many
(but not all) of the outcomes we examine. The coefficients on the interactions are consistent with the Pill and abortion acting as
substitutes, which agrees with Ananat and Hungerman (2012), although the estimates are seldom statistically significant. The
inclusion of these abortion controls has a negligible effect on the ELA point estimates, as can be seen by comparing estimates
here to those without abortion controls in Appendix C.
11
Using data from the National Archives on the Vietnam Conflict, the specification in equation (1’) is augmented with controls
for state-level casualties. These controls include state-specific annual death rates lagged one, two, and three years; and cohortspecific, state-level death rates within two years of a woman’s date of birth.

Opt-In Revolution – 12

another using state where the respondent attended high school to match to ELA rather than state of
residence at 21.12
C. The Relevance of Early Legal Access for Pill Use
Testing the importance of ELA for women’s use of the Pill is more difficult, because the NLS-YW
contains no information on young women’s contraceptive decisions. Goldin and Katz (2002) examined
this question with a single cross-sectional dataset (1971 National Study of Young Women, NSYW71) and
found that ELA increased Pill use among 17 to 19-year-olds by 4 percentage points (40 percent), but it is
unclear how this evidence bears upon this analysis. Goldin and Katz (2002) use a different legal coding,
which means their estimates may not generalize for our analysis. In addition, their single cross-section of
data in the NSYW71 cannot be used to estimate the implicit first stage of this analysis, because state and
cohort fixed effects cannot be included. Key for our investigation is that ELA increased Pill use at ages 18
to 20 after conditioning on year-of-birth and state fixed effects.
The 1970 NFS, which asked ever-married women to recall Pill use over the decade of the 1960s,
allows us to examine this question directly for the subset of women who were ages 17 to 21 in the 1960s
and married by 1970. Using a linear probability model, we estimate equation (2) where X is a binary
dependent variable equal to 1 if a respondent first used the birth control pill before age a, which we
estimate separately for a = 18, 19, …, 22. So that we observe each of the birth cohorts at each of these
ages, the analysis restricts the sample to the birth cohorts of 1942 (age 18 in 1960) to 1948 (age 22 in
1970). Thus, estimates of

are based upon the subset of states that transition to ELA before 1970

(Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Ohio, and Washington), which are different than the full set used in the
remainder of the analysis.
Panel A of table 2 uses these data to show that ELA increased Pill use at the appropriate ages. By
chance, it appears that women in the five states that transitioned to ELA before 1968 were significantly
less likely to use the Pill before age 18. However, women with ELA were 17 percentage points more

12

Due to disclosure requirements on implicit sample sizes, we cannot include all of these controls and restrictions in one
specification. More details on each specification can be found in Appendix A.

Opt-In Revolution – 13

likely to use the Pill before age 19.13 Pill use before age 21 was 16 percentage points higher among
women with ELA, a statistically significant 42 percent increase over the national mean. This difference
falls to a statistically insignificant 5 percentage points at age 21 (before 22), when women without ELA
could also obtain the Pill legally.14 A chi-squared test rejects at the 5-percent level (2(4)=11.03) that the
effects of ELA on Pill use before ages 19, 20, 21, and 22 are jointly equal to zero.
Panel B of table 2 explores heterogeneity in this effect by the community size of the primary
sampling unit. We implement this by augmenting equation (2) with a dummy variable for nonmetropolitan area as well as the interaction of this variable with ELA. Not surprisingly the strongest
responses to ELA occurred in metropolitan areas. Consistent with changes in ELA increasing access to the
Pill at age 18, use of the Pill in metropolitan areas with ELA was 30.4 percentage points higher—2.5
times the national mean in metro areas. This difference was 13.7 percentage points in less populated
areas. Use of the Pill before age 21 was 26.9 percentage points, or 77 percent, higher among women with
ELA in metro areas and 12.7 percentage points, or 31 percent higher, in non-metro areas, and these
estimates are virtually unchanged with the inclusion of state linear time trends (see Appendix C). For
metro and non-metro areas, the difference in Pill use for women with ELA fell to 10 percentage points and
3 percentage points, respectively, by age 22, when early access laws ceased to bind. Stronger results in
metropolitan areas are consistent with the difficulty of getting contraceptives anonymously in small towns
or rural areas (even when legal).15

13

An astute reader might puzzle over the divergence of the reported standard errors from what might be inferred using the
reported mean dependent variable and R2, especially the small standard error in column 1. The difference in the standard error
estimates across columns reflects both the role of the Huber-White correction for heteroskedasticity and for serial correlation (in
year-of-birth cohort) within states. In column 1, the standard error increases to 0.042 when calculated under the (false)
assumption of homoskedasticity (we are estimating linear probability models). Additionally correcting for serial correlation in
birth cohort, the standard error becomes 0.017, which is the standard error reported in column 1. In contrast, the correction for
heteroskedasticity plays a less important role in columns 2 through 5, where corrections for serial correlation are more important.
14
Although omitted here for brevity, we also find that these differences in use translated into meaningful differences in marriage
timing (cf. Goldin and Katz 2002) and age at first birth (cf. Bailey 2006, 2009): women with ELA delayed marriage by an
average of 0.42 years and motherhood by 0.25 years.
15
Knowing the town doctor—or knowing that your parents did—or potentially being observed by your neighbor entering the
local Planned Parenthood may have deterred many young women from seeking a prescription for the Pill—even if it was legal.
Moreover, small town physicians may have been less willing to prescribe the Pill to unmarried women even when legal.

Opt-In Revolution – 14

Although these results provide the best evidence in the literature of the relevance of ELA, we
caution against using them as a denominator to approximate average treatment effects for Pill use on the
treated (ATT) for several reasons. First, the retrospective nature of the sample and stigma about reporting
premarital sex and contraceptive use would lead our analysis to understate the true effect of ELA on Pill
use.16 Second, the 1970 NFS does not include unmarried young women. Because women with ELA tended
to delay marriage (cf. Goldin and Katz 2002, Appendix C) and those who delayed the most (presumably
by using the Pill more) are less likely to be sampled by the 1970 NFS, the effects of ELA on Pill use may
also be understated. Understating the effects of ELA on Pill use for either reason would inflate ATT
estimates. Third, the estimates for the subset of states that transition to ELA in the NFS may not represent
the effects for the full set of cohorts (1943 to 1953) considered in the main analysis. Finally, even if the
true effect of ELA on Pill use lies in our estimated range, dividing other ELA effects by this amount yields
the ATT only if ELA has zero effect on women who did not use the Pill. That would not be the case if the
option to use the Pill affects human capital investment or if there are general equilibrium effects in the
marriage or labor market to the Pill’s diffusion. For instance, as more women enter the workplace with
ELA, women in these markets who did not use the Pill may benefit from reductions in employers’
statistical discrimination. Whereas the NFS estimates of ELA on the use or oral contraception do not
measure the Pill’s effects on expectations or demand side responses in general equilibrium, the intentionto-treat estimates in the next sections measure its effects on outcomes through all of these channels.
V.

RESULTS: HOW THE PILL AFFECTED WOMEN’S LIFECYCLE WAGES
A. The Effect of the Pill on Women’s Wages

Figure 3 plots the effect of ELA on women’s life cycle wage earnings for four dependent
variables in each of four panels. The figure includes our baseline specification (using equation 1), a
specification with abortion controls (using equation 1’), and the four alternative specifications described

16

See also Goldin and Katz (2002, footnote 11, p. 734), who note that the 1970 NFS question about retrospective pill use was
only supposed to be asked for women who were married “a month before the date of the question.” This provides an additional
survey-based reason that Pill use would be underreported for unmarried women in the age range of interest.

Opt-In Revolution – 15

above. Throughout the results section, our discussion focuses on the magnitudes of our estimates with
abortion controls (1’), but it is important to note that the estimates from each of the other five
specifications are generally not statistically different from those in (1’). (See Appendix C for a tabular
presentation of estimates for each of these five specifications.)
Across the six specifications, samples (including and excluding nonworking women), and
definitions of the dependent variable, figure 3 shows a consistent pattern. Women with ELA earned less in
terms of hourly and annual wages in their early twenties, but their wage and salary earnings grew more
rapidly than their counterparts as they aged.17 At ages 20 to 24, working women with ELA earned 3
percent less in hourly terms (table 3 columns 1 and 2) and 9 percent less on an annual basis (table 3
columns 3 and 4). By their early forties, women with ELA earned a statistically significant premium of 5
percent hourly and 11 percent annually. This implies they earned 63 cents more per hour and roughly
2,200 dollars more per year. Notice that the annual amount is substantially larger than the 1,300 dollars
implied by the hourly increase for a full-time, full-year worker, which is consistent with ELA also
affecting labor-force participation.18 Column 5 confirms this. Including women who did not work
increases the ELA annual wage premium to 2,700 dollars per year.
Although previous work links the diffusion of the Pill among younger, unmarried women to
increased educational attainment (Hock 2008), women’s lifecycle labor-force participation (Bailey 2006),
and marital outcomes and occupational upgrading among college graduates (Goldin and Katz 2002), none
of these studies explores the implications of these changes for women’s wages, which is this paper’s
objective. The following sections extend the literature by reexamining these mechanisms and explicitly
linking them to wages. For thoroughness, we replicate previous findings in the literature for a sample of

17

Although the estimates are not statistically different, it is noteworthy that using high school state rather than state at age 21
reduces the effect of ELA on wages. This is the case because we are less likely to have information on high school state for
women who left the state for college. (Note that our estimates of college enrollment in table 4 are also much smaller for this
sample.) Because women attending out-of-state colleges may have been the most able or ambitious, it makes sense that our
wages estimates are slightly smaller when we omit them.
18
The annualized value of the hourly premium may also differ from the annual wages because the compensation information
represents different pay periods. Hourly wages are from the most recent job, whereas annual wage and salary earnings reflect
earnings in the previous calendar year from 1968 to 1993 and in the previous 12 months after 1994.

Opt-In Revolution – 16

all women and compare our findings, which are based on different cohorts and measures of ELA, to
previous estimates. In addition, we add to the literature on the Pill’s labor-market effects by examining
novel outcomes such as on-the-job training and cumulative labor-market experience (section V.B) and by
considering how the Pill changed selection into human capital investments and paid work across ages
(section V.C).
B. Mechanisms for the Pill’s Effect on Wages
Our earlier discussion provides three potentially reinforcing explanations for ELA’s effects on
wage profiles. The experience mechanism suggests that the initial increase in women’s labor-force
participation could have depressed wages at younger ages but increased wages later as these women
accumulated labor-market experience and/or job/firm-specific capital. The on-the-job training mechanism
requires no initial or longer-run differences in labor-force participation, but suggests that workers with
ELA increased their on-the-job human capital investments, which would also result in steeper wage
earnings profiles. The formal human capital investment mechanism is consistent with women reducing
their initial labor-force participation as they invested in their education or training and then reaping the
returns to these early investments when they returned to the labor market, which would also result in
steeper wage earnings profiles. Each of these explanations likely operated to some degree in practice, so
our exploration of the Pill’s labor-force participation effects here aims to shed light on the predominant
mechanism for its observed wage effects. Importantly, each of these explanations postulates different
labor-force participation and human capital investment patterns.
As a starting point, we examine the effect of ELA on women’s labor market participation at the
extensive (1=in the labor force) and intensive margins (using “usual weekly hours” for working women)
and find that women with ELA participated less in their early twenties and more in their late twenties and
thirties.19 These differences in labor-force participation resulted in different cumulative experience

19

These findings are consistent with Bailey’s (2006) results using repeated cross-sections from the March CPS, but the
magnitudes in the NLS-YW are larger than in the CPS but less precisely estimated owing to significantly smaller sample sizes.

Opt-In Revolution – 17

profiles as shown in figure 4A and column 1 of table 4, which define women’s cumulative work
experience as weeks worked multiplied by usual weekly hours summed across survey waves (see
Appendix A for more details). The results show that women with ELA had worked 18 percent fewer hours
by their late twenties but erased this deficit during their thirties. By their early forties, women with ELA
had amassed the equivalent of 1.15 years more of full-time, full-year work (2,300 more hours)—an
increase of over 10 percent relative to their same-aged peers without ELA, and about 30 percent larger
than the increase found by O’Neill and Polachek (1993) between cohorts born in the mid-1930s and those
born a decade later.20
This pattern of reduced labor-force participation is the reverse of the labor-supply shift needed to
decrease wages at younger ages. Similarly, the on-the-job training channel is also inconsistent with early
career dips in labor supply: if fewer women are working for pay, more cannot be accumulating on-the-job
training at these ages. The Pill-induced accumulation of experience is most consistent with the formal
human-capital investment channel, which postulates that ELA women used the Pill to make more
investments in formal schooling and training early in their careers and enjoyed the returns on these
investments in terms of steeper wage profiles, which also encouraged greater labor-force attachment, as
they aged.
Panels B through F of figure 4 examine ELA’s effect on these more formal human capital
investments including women’s college enrollment, years of education, occupational training, and

These differences in magnitude are expected because Bailey’s (2006) use of current state of residence (rather than residence at
age 21) should attenuate her results. For brevity, we omit estimates for labor-force participation from this paper and compare our
NLS-YW estimates to Bailey (2006) in this footnote. At ages 25 to 34, women with ELA were roughly 3.8 percentage points, or 6
percent, more likely to work for pay in the NLS-YW; Bailey reports an almost identical estimate (3.9 percentage points for women
ages 26 to 30) but her estimate is smaller at 1.6 percentage points for women ages 31 to 35. The NLS-YW also shows a larger
effect in the late thirties than the CPS, although the NLS-YW estimate is statistically insignificant. The effect of ELA on hours
worked (excluding zeros) in the NLS-YW is not as comparable, because it asks usual hours worked whereas the CPS asks the
number of hours worked in the CPS reference week. The effects at older ages are larger for usual hours worked in the NLS-YW,
where women 30 to 34 years old worked one additional hour per week on average, 2.5 percent more than their counterparts
without ELA; 35 to 44 year olds worked 1.3 to 1.7 additional hours, or 3.5 to 4.8 percent more. Full results are available upon
request.
20
The comparison with O’Neill and Polachek is approximate, both because they analyze slightly different groups of women and
because their measure of labor market experience is different. In particular, they count years in which at least 26 weeks were
worked as a full year of experience; changes at the extensive margin or changes on the intensive margin that do not cross the 26week threshold are thus missed by their measure.

Opt-In Revolution – 18

professional occupations for the six specifications; table 4 presents estimates in tabular form. The results
provide a rich picture of Pill-induced changes in women’s career investments. College enrollment was 4.9
percentage points, or 20 percent, higher for women with ELA in their early twenties but not at later ages
(table 4 column 2; figure 4B).21 Their advantage in grades completed (table 4 column 3; figure 4C) peaks
in their late twenties, at a little more than one quarter of a year and erodes a bit as women without ELA
returned to school in their thirties. A difference of one quarter of a year of schooling, however, persists
through the early forties. In addition to completing more formal education in their early twenties, women
with ELA were 15 percent more likely to report occupational training (table 4 column 4, figure 4D) in
their late twenties. Although reports of occupational training remain modestly elevated for ELA women at
older ages, the estimates are not statistically different from zero.
Women’s greater human capital investments also appear in their occupational choices, which
capture both observed (more formal education) as well as unobserved career investments (such as more
career commitment or effort) (see Appendix A for more information on occupational coding). With ELA,
women were 17 to 30 percent (4 to 6 percentage points) more likely to be working in a professional or
managerial job during their late twenties and thirties, respectively (table 4 column 5, figure 4E). Half of
this increase in the late twenties, and all of it during the thirties, was due to entry into non-traditionally
female professional occupations—professions other than nursing or teaching (table 4 column 6, figure
4F). It is also interesting that differences in professional work erode with age, as female professionals
with ELA retire.22

21

Estimates are 30 percent larger than our baseline estimate (0.066 for a 27 percent increase) when we include controls for
Vietnam mobilization. Estimates are 50 percent smaller (0.026 for an 11 percent increase) when we use high school state. Using
high school state reduces our estimates because we are less likely to have information on high school state for women who went
out of state to college. Thus, our sample of women for whom we have high school state disproportionately drops out-of-state
college enrollees. These estimates are larger than reported in Hock’s (2008) working paper. Using the October CPS, he finds—
using a different measure of ELA—that college enrollment was roughly 2.5 percentage points higher among 21 and 22 year olds
with ELA.
22
Our estimates are larger than those found in Goldin and Katz (2002, Table 5), who use a sample of U.S. born college graduate
women ages 30 to 49 and find that the Pill increased the share in professional occupations, excluding teachers and nurses, by 0.4
percentage point (3 percent). One reason for the difference may be that their estimate includes women in their forties, where we
find smaller effects.

Opt-In Revolution – 19

Together, more investments in formal human capital and greater labor-market attachment
contributed to women’s steeper age-earnings profiles. But given ELA’s reduction in labor-supply during
women’s early twenties, the decrease in working women’s wages at those ages remains an open question.
It is also unclear to what extent changes in the composition of women investing in their human capital and
working for pay drive the increase in women’s wages at older ages. We address both questions in the next
section.
C. Heterogeneous Effects of the Pill and the Role of Workforce Composition in Wage Growth
In addition to shifting women’s investments in their human capital, early access to the Pill may
have shifted which women pursued an education, went to graduate or professional school, and got
promoted. If higher ability women disproportionately used the Pill to make career investments, and thus
were initially more likely to be out of the labor force, then women working during their early twenties
may have been negatively selected. As higher-ability women entered the work force in their later twenties
after having made their career investments, their greater skills (unobserved and observed) would lead
their earnings profiles to be steeper than those of less skilled women. Moreover, less skilled women may
have seen their earnings fall as their more skilled counterparts began working. In short, access to the Pill
may have altered selection into the labor market at younger ages, which could help explain the effect of
the Pill on age-earnings profiles shown in figure 3.
To examine the importance of selection, we use a composite of respondents’ performances on
aptitude tests from their high school transcripts, which was reported to the NLS-YW in 1968 and called an
“IQ score” in the documentation. IQ is available for only two-thirds of the sample, so we divide
respondents into IQ tertiles (low, middle, and high) to maintain samples sizes large enough for
disclosure.23 Equation (1’) is then estimated for each of the IQ tertiles separately. We also examine
heterogeneous effects of ELA by educational attainment (any versus no college) and, for education

23

Griliches, Hall and Hausman (1978) point out that these IQ composite scores are missing “almost at random” in the National
Longitudinal Survey of Young Men, which is also the case in the NLS-YW. See Appendix A for details on the composite score.

Opt-In Revolution – 20

outcomes, family background (socio-economic status tertiles of families when the respondent was 14).
Whereas IQ tertile measured in high school is not affected by ELA directly (cf. table 1), educational
attainment is (table 4). The latter breakdown should be viewed as a description to help us explore how
different groups of women differentially benefitted from early access to the Pill.
Table 5 begins this analysis by examining the effect of ELA on women’s hourly wages by IQ
tertile and college attainment.24 Whereas ELA reduces or has no significant effect on earnings for the
lowest IQ tertile (column 1), it increases them in the middle and upper third of the IQ distribution
(columns 2 and 3) for women aged 30 to 49. Almost all of the wage gains accrued to women in the
middle of the IQ distribution, where the effects are largest both absolutely and relatively. For this group,
women with ELA enjoyed greater hourly wages throughout their twenties and the premium grew to a
statistically significant 20 percent at ages 30 to 49.
It is worth noting that the estimates in this table are from a more flexible version of the regression
model that allows the state, cohort and age group fixed effects to vary by IQ group. The fact that ELA had
an effect within the middle IQ group suggests that the labor market gains described previously are not the
sole result of shifts in the composition of the workforce. Furthermore, if the wage effects of ELA were
driven by changing selection into the labor market by women with different ability levels, we would
expect the overall wage effects from models without IQ controls to be substantially larger than those from
table 5’s models that stratify by IQ tertile. Instead, table 3 and table 5 imply similar average estimates
(compare the ELA estimates averaged across the three IQ tertiles in table 5 to the overall population
estimates in table 3).25

24

We note that the results in table 5 are from samples that included observations with zero earnings, unlike table 3, which
included only observations with positive earnings. This change was unfortunately necessary for disclosure reasons but does not
affect the patterns we observe.
25
There are two other reasons why the averages of the estimates in table 5 might differ from those in table 3: the smaller sample
in table 5 (excluding women with missing IQ information) and the different outcome variable (including women with zero
earnings). We further confirmed that the averages of the ability-group specific ELA estimates are also similar to the overall
estimates when the samples both include women with zero earnings: the former tend to be smaller at younger ages but larger for
women in their forties.

Opt-In Revolution – 21

The fact that the wage effects are strongest for women attending some college suggests that one
mechanism for these middle-IQ women was college enrollment. Although ELA conferred little if any
wage premium for women without college (column 4), women with some college (column 5) experienced
lower wages in their early twenties (perhaps as they worked at temporary jobs) but a 12-percent wage
premium in their late thirties.26 The effects for the highest IQ group are considerably smaller and not
statistically significant at any age below 44, which suggests these women may have already been taking
advantage of their educational and career opportunities without ELA. In contrast to these positive effects,
the lowest IQ women with ELA suffered a statistically significant wage reduction of roughly 15 percent in
their early thirties. Although this negative effect is consistent with the Pill increasing crowding in jobs
where lower IQ women were working or decreasing the relative skills of lower IQ women, the estimate is
not robust to the inclusion of state linear time trends (appendix table C5B). The lack of wage benefits for
lower IQ women may be related to the limited returns to human capital investments in low-skilled jobs or
the absence altogether of these women’s investments in their human capital, which we examine next.
The next set of tables explores how the Pill affected human capital investments and paid work by
IQ and childhood SES. The estimates in table 6, which uses highest grade completed as a dependent
variable, are roughly consistent with the pattern of ELA’s effects on wages. ELA’s effects on education
are large and positive in the middle of the IQ distribution and negative for the lowest IQ group. (These
negative effects may reflect higher IQ women crowding out lower IQ women in colleges.) Unlike the
wage estimates, however, ELA’s effects on education are also large and statistically significant for the
highest IQ tertile. By age forty, ELA’s effects for the middle and upper IQ groups translate into a 0.4 to
0.5 year schooling advantage. The right side of the table shows that ELA’s effects are largest for women
from the lowest SES households (columns 4 through 6). Women with ELA from the most disadvantaged

26

The estimated effects of ELA by college attainment in tables 5 (for wages) and 7 (for experience) may be smaller than for
affected woman if the marginal women who attended college (because of ELA) had higher IQs on average than the women with
ELA who did not attend college but lower IQs than women who attended college without ELA.

Opt-In Revolution – 22

backgrounds attained roughly half of a year more education than their peers (column 4). This is a large
effect, amounting to roughly one third of the difference in grades completed between women in the low
and middle SES groups.27 Although our data do not reveal whether these effects arise at the stage of high
school completion, college admission, or class standing and persistence, it is clear that higher IQ women
with access to the Pill—especially those from disadvantaged households—were more likely to continue
their educations. Thus, ELA shifted women’s educational attainment into more of a meritocracy.
Is the heterogeneity in the Pill’s effects by IQ apparent for labor-force attachment as well? Table
7 uses cumulative labor-force experience to examine this question. As with education, the effect of ELA
on labor-force experience is largest for women in the middle and upper thirds of the IQ distribution and
those with some college. Middle IQ women (column 2) with ELA had accumulated 3,500 additional hours
of work experience by their early forties, a 16-percent increase over the mean. Women in the highest IQ
group (column 3) with ELA accumulated 2,800 additional hours by their early forties, an 11.5 percent
increase over the mean. Echoing the wage results, the effects of ELA on labor-force experience are largest
for women with some college (column 5).28
In summary, the data support that the Pill influenced which women invested in their careers and
shifted into paid work. Given the lack of labor-supply or schooling gains for low IQ women, the Pill
appears to have induced positive selection into higher education and into the labor market. This analysis
also shows different responses to early access to the Pill across IQ tertiles. While lower IQ women with
ELA did not gain ground in terms of education or experience, both middle and higher IQ women raised
their educational attainment and accumulated greater work experience. Women with some college
27

The effect of ELA on college enrollment among 20 to 24 year olds for the lowest IQ group was 0.9 percentage points (s.e. 3.6,
mean 12 percent); it was 3.9 (s.e. 3.5, mean 19 percent) and 5.9 percentage points (s.e. 2.7, mean 37 percent) for the middle and
upper IQ groups, respectively. The effect of ELA on college enrollment among 20 to 24 year olds for the lowest SES group was
11.3 percentage points (s.e. 3.8 percentage points), an implied increase of 108 percent (of the mean of 10.5 percent). It was 3.9
percentage points (s.e. 4.1, mean 21 percent) and 2.1 percentage points (s.e. 3.0, mean 36 percent), respectively, for the middle
and upper SES groups.
28
We also directly estimated the effect of ELA by IQ tertile and college attendance on labor force participation. The
heterogeneity in effects is similar: women in the middle IQ tertile in their late twenties and early thirties show the largest
increases in participation. Higher IQ women also show increased participation at these ages, but the estimates are smaller and less
precise. Women with some college show significant participation responses to ELA as well, with significantly lower rates in their
early twenties, followed by significantly higher rates over the next decade.

Opt-In Revolution – 23

became more likely to work for pay. Interestingly, the Pill’s larger effects on work experience accrued to
women in the middle of the IQ distribution, not only to the high achievers who have been the focus of
other studies. Thus, our findings highlight the different ways in which women across the IQ distribution
used the flexibility conferred by early access to the Pill to opt into paid work.29
VI.

DECOMPOSING PILL-INDUCED WAGE GAINS

To quantify the contribution of each of these different human capital investments to the estimated
Pill premium in wages, we decompose women’s ELA-induced log hourly wage premium in their late
forties into five components: formal education, on-the-job training, cumulative experience, occupational
choice, and changes in marital status (that affect wages through the income of a spouse). We present
results using the standard Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition at the mean (Blinder 1973; Oaxaca 1973) and
the recentered influence function procedure (RIF) proposed in Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009), which
generalizes Blinder-Oaxaca to other quantiles. This approach has the advantage of not being sensitive to
the decomposition order and permits a richer characterization of the importance of Pill-induced changes
in productive characteristics at different points in the skill distribution. To implement both procedures, we
restrict the estimation sample to the last available wage observation for each woman in the 45 to 49 age
group and use women without ELA as the reference group.
Table 8 quantifies how much of the difference in the log hourly wage premium of women with
ELA at various points along the wage distribution can be explained (in an accounting sense) by each of
the characteristics. Panel A reports the Blinder-Oaxaca decompositions at the mean and shows that
cumulative experience accounts for just under two-thirds of the Pill premium. Education and occupation

29

Another potential mechanism for the Pill’s wage effects is its interaction with the marriage market and the size of spousal
earnings. To investigate this “marriage-market channel,” appendix table C4 in online Appendix C examines the relationship of
ELA with both the likelihood of never having married (panel A) and the likelihood of having divorced (panel B) by IQ group and
college attendance. In almost all cases, we cannot reject that the likelihood of having married is unrelated to ELA. In contrast,
divorce rates were significantly higher for women with ELA in the lower IQ groups and among women without any college.
Women in the lowest third of the IQ distribution with ELA were almost twice as likely to divorce (9.7 percentage points) by their
late twenties (panel B, column 1). Similarly, ELA women with no college were almost 34 percent (4.4 percentage points) more
likely to divorce. However, these effects are for the wrong groups of women to be driving the wage effects. Although they are
strong for women in the middle of the IQ distribution, they appear for those without any college—not the middle IQ women who
pursued college. In short, little evidence points to divorce and the absence of a second earner as the explanation for the wage
effects.

Opt-In Revolution – 24

each account for another sixth of the gap, with both job training and marriage having negligible effects.
Together, these five factors explain over 90 percent of the ELA wage premium at the mean.
What do our estimates imply about the returns to education and experience for women? Women
with ELA obtained 0.18 years more schooling by their late forties (table 4, col. 3), which increased their
wages by 0.015 log-points (table 8, panel A), for an implied return of 0.083 (=0.015/0.18). If we also
attribute the entire 0.014 log-point increase in wages (table 8, panel A) from occupational upgrading to
schooling, the total return to women’s schooling would be 0.161 (=0.029/0.18). These estimates are both
within a plausible range of Heckman, Lochner and Todd’s (2006) 0.128 estimate of the returns to
education for white men in 1990 (p. 326). For the same group, Heckman, Lochner and Todd estimate
coefficients on experience and experience squared of 0.1301 and −0.0023, respectively (Ibid). Applying
these returns to experience to our estimates indicates that, from an initial experience level of 15 years,
0.57 years more experience (table 4, col. 1) would increase women’s log-wages by 0.034 (0.1301*0.57 0.0023*(15.572-152)). Our decomposition attributes more than that, 0.056 log points, to the 0.57 years of
additional experience, which is also reasonable if the returns to women’s experience are higher than the
returns for men or level off less quickly (cf. Weinberger and Kuhn 2010).
The results of the RIF procedure, shown in panel B, are consistent with the Oaxaca-Blinder
decompositions, with experience accounting for the largest share of the premium, followed by education
and occupation.30 The relative roles of experience and education-occupation, however, vary at different
points in the wage distribution. Consistent with table 5’s result that the largest wage effects occur for
women in the middle of the IQ distribution, panel B shows that the total log-wage differential associated
with ELA varies non-monotonically across the distribution and is largest (0.106) at the median.
Furthermore, education and occupation explain relatively more of the wage gap (and cumulative
experience relatively less) higher in the wage distribution. At the 25th percentile the five components

30

The decomposition results are also similar if we use the semi-parametric approach of DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) to
re-weight the characteristics of women without ELA to resemble those of women with ELA at different points in the distribution.

Opt-In Revolution – 25

explain nearly all of the wage gap while at the median they explain about 85 percent of the gap; at the 75th
percentile, they actually over-explain the gap, which suggests they may be offset by other factors near the
top of the wage distribution.
VII.

THE “OPT-IN” REVOLUTION

In 2003, Lisa Belkin’s New York Times Magazine article, “The Opt-Out Revolution,” reopened
the debate about the reasons for persistent differences in women’s and men’s labor market outcomes. In
particular, she argued that the women who might have been the professional equals of men chose not to
be—these women “opted out” to raise their children. Shang and Weinberg (2009) find some evidence that
college graduate women have begun to have more children, but these changes seem small relative to the
Opt-In Revolution that began 50 years ago.
This paper quantifies the role of the Pill in catalyzing this revolution. As the Pill provided women
with cheaper and more effective control over childbearing in late adolescence, they invested more in their
human capital and careers. Most affected were women in the middle of the IQ distribution and with some
college, who experienced remarkable wage gains over their lifetimes. To put our results into perspective,
the Pill-induced effects on wages amount to roughly one-third of the total wage gains for women in their
forties born from the mid-1940s to early 1950s.31 Our decomposition shows that almost two thirds of
these Pill-induced gains (at the mean) can be attributed to increasing labor-market experience and another
third is due to greater educational attainment and occupational upgrading.
What do our estimates imply about the importance of the Pill in narrowing the gender gap from
1980 to 2000? To answer this, we simulate a counterfactual hourly wage distribution from the 1980,
1990, and 2000 population censuses by removing age-specific estimates of early legal access to the Pill

31

This estimate is obtained by comparing the coefficients for ELA*40-44 and ELA*45-49 in table 3 to the total change in wage
rates for women in their 40s between the 1943-46 and the 1951-1954 cohorts in the NLS-YW. Weinberger and Kuhn (2010)
distinguish between changing “levels,” the starting wage at labor-force entry, and “slopes,” the growth in wages after entry, and
argue that changes in “slopes” can account for one third of the narrowing in the gender gap over the last 40 years—a number they
argue provides a reasonable upper bound for the importance of all post-schooling investments. Our measures of career investment
combine both pre-market investments (e.g., college and occupational choice, which should shift levels) and post-market
investments (e.g., labor market experience and on-the-job training, which should shift slopes).

Opt-In Revolution – 26

from the earnings of cohorts born after 1940 (table 3, column 2) and compute the actual hourly wage
distribution for men and women in 1980, 1990 and 2000.32 From 1980 to 1990, the actual gender gap in
real hourly wages for 25 to 49 year olds closed by 0.126 log points, and the simulated gender gap closed
by 0.113 log points. From 1990 to 2000, the actual gender gap in real hourly wages closed by 0.074 log
points, and the simulated gender gap closed by 0.051 log points. Our main estimates, therefore, imply that
10 percent of the narrowing in the gender gap during the 1980s and 31 percent during the 1990s can be
attributed to early access to the Pill. While improvements in contraception play an important role in
increasing women’s earnings, our results implicitly highlight the importance of other factors. The
unexplained component of cross-cohort changes due to, for example, shifts in the demand for women’s
labor (e.g., anti-discrimination legislation and enforcement or changes in preferences) as well as shifts in
the quality of women’s education remain substantial.
Did the Pill unleash the Opt-In Revolution? Our results provide no conclusive answer. They may
understate the Pill’s broader influence because our empirical strategy does not allow us to explore the
effect of changes in access to the Pill beyond age 20 and fails to capture the potentially large social
multiplier effects. For instance, the Pill’s availability likely altered norms and expectations about
marriage and childbearing and firms’ decisions to hire and promote women—even among cohorts without
legal access to the Pill. Thus, the effects of the Pill may be larger than we find, but it is not clear how
much larger. Even these conservative estimates, however, suggest that the Pill’s power to transform
childbearing from probabilistic to planned shifted women’s career decisions and compensation for
decades to come.

32

Real hourly wage is total wage and salary earnings of last year divided by the product of weeks worked last year and usual
hours worked per week and divided by the PCE deflator to get year 2000 dollars. The estimates use IPUMS person weights and
exclude real hourly wage outliers of less than $2 or more than $200. The sample contains native-born women ages 25 to 49
whose wages were not imputed and who were not self-employed. The simulated log hourly earnings values are adjusted by
subtracting the estimates in column 2 of table 3 for women who were born in or after 1940 and born in a state where they would
have had early access to the Pill.

Opt-In Revolution – 27

VIII.

REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, David H. Autor, and David Lyle. (2004). “Women, War and Wages: The Effect of
Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Mid-Century.” Journal of Political Economy 112(3):
497-551.
Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans and Daniel M. Hungerman. (2012). “The Power of the Pill for the Next
Generation: Oral Contraception’s Effects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal and Child
Characteristics.” Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1): 37-51.
Bailey, Martha J. (2006). “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women's
Life Cycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1): 289-320.
Bailey, Martha. (2009). "More Power to the Pill: Erratum and Addendum." Available at http://wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~baileymj/Bailey_Erratum.pdf, downloaded 9/1/2009.
Belkin, Lisa. (2003). “The Opt-Out Revolution,” New York Times Magazine, Sunday, Oct. 26.
Black, Sandra E. and Chinhui Juhn. (2000). “The Rise of Female Professionals: Are Women Responding
to Skill Demand” American Economic Review 90(2): 450-455.
Black, Sandra E. and Alexandra Spitz-Oener. (2010). “Explaining Women's Success: Technological
Change and the Skill Content of Women's Work.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1): 187-194.
Blau, Francine D. and Marianne A. Ferber and Anne E. Winkler. (2010). The Economics of Women, Men
and Work. (Prentice Hall).
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. (1997). “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender Wage
Differential in 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 15(1): 1-42.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. (2004). “The U.S. Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s: Slowing
Convergence.” NBER Working Paper 10853.
Blinder, Alan S. 1973. “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Variables.” Journal of
Human Resources 8(4): 436-455.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (2009). National Income Product Accounts, Table 1.1.4: Personal
Consumption Expenditures Price Index. Available at:
http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/SelectTable.asp?Selected=Y, accessed 8/17/2009.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, and Sonia Oreffice. (2008). “Birth Control and Female Empowerment: An
Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy 116(1): 113-140.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. (1996). “Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica 64(5): 1001-44.
Duncan, O. (1961). “A Socioeconomic Index for All Occupations.” Occupations and Social Status.
Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli. (2009). “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 146-177.
Fernandez, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti. (2004). “Mothers and Sons: Preference
Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4): 1249-99.
Firpo, Segio, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. (2009). “Unconditional Quantile Regressions.”
Econometrica 77(3): 953-973.
Fortin, Nicole. (2009). “Gender Role Attitudes and Women’s Labor Market Participation: Opting-Out,
AIDS, and the Persistent Appeal of Housewifery.” University of British Columbia Working Paper,
http://www.econ.ubc.ca/nfortin/Fortin_Gender.pdf, accessed 9/1/2009.
Ge, Suqin. 2011. "Women's College Decisions: How Much Does Marriage Matter?" Journal of Labor
Economics 29 (4): 773-818.
Goldin, Claudia. (1990). Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women.
(New York: Oxford University Press).
Goldin, Claudia. (2004). “The Long Road to the Fast Track: Career and Family.” Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 596(1): 20-35.
Goldin, Claudia. (2006). “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and
Family.” American Economic Review 96(2): 1-21.

Opt-In Revolution – 28

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. (2002). “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110(4): 730-770.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. (2010). “Putting the Co in Education: Timing, Reasons, and
Consequences of College Coeducation from 1835 to the Present.” NBER Working Paper 16281.
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence Katz and Ilyana Kuziemko. (2006). “The Homecoming of American College
Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(4):
133-156.
Guldi, Melanie. 2008. "Fertility Effects of Abortion and Birth Control Pill Access for Minors."
Demography 45 (4): 817-827.
Griliches, Zvi, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Jerry A. Hausman. (1978). “Missing Data and Self-Selection in
Large Panels.” Annales de l’inséé 30/31: 137-176.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner and Petra Todd (2006). “Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and
Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond.” In eds. Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welsh.
Handbook of the Economics of Education, vol. 1 (Elsevier: Amsterdam): 307-358.
Joyce, Theodore, Ruoding Tan, and Yuxiu Zhang. (2010). "Changes in birth rates of young women
following access to the pill and abortion in the early 1970s." CUNY Working Paper.
Loughran, David S. and Julie M. Zissimopoulous (2009). “Why Wait? The Effect of Marriage and
Childbearing on the Wages of Men and Women.” Journal of Human Resources 44(2): 326-49.
Miller, Amalia (2011). “The Effects of Motherhood Delay on Career Path.” Journal of Population
Economics 24(3): 1071-1100.
Mulligan, Casey and Yona Rubinstein (2008). “Selection, Investment and Women’s Relative Wages over
Time.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(3): 1061-1110.
Oaxaca, Ronald. 1973. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.” International
Economic Review 14: 693-709.
O’Neill, June and Solomon Polachek (1993). “Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in the 1980s.”
Journal of Labor Economics 11(1): 205-228.
Paul, Eve, Harriet Pilpel, and Nancy Wechsler (1974). “Pregnancy, Teenagers and the Law, 1974.”
Family Planning Perspectives 6(3): 142-147.
Paul, Eve, Harriet Pilpel, and Nancy Wechsler (1976). “Pregnancy, Teenagers and the Law, 1976.”
Family Planning Perspectives 8(1): 16-21.
Shang, Qingyan and Bruce Weinberg. (2009). “Opting for Families: Recent Trends in the Fertility of
Highly Educated Women.” Mimeo, November.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. (2007). “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving
Forces,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2):27-52.
Weinberg, Bruce. (2000). “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 53(2): 290-308.
Weinberger, Catherine and Peter Kuhn. (2010). “Changing Levels or Changing Slopes? The Narrowing of
the U.S. Gender Earnings Gap, 1959-1999.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 63 (3): 384-406.
Welch, Finis. (2000). “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality among Men: One
Phenomenon or Two?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90: 444–449.
Wellington, Allison. (1993). “Changes in the Male/Female Wage Gap, 1976-85.” Journal of Human
Resources 28(2): 383-411.

Opt-In Revolution – 29

Figure 1. The Evolution of the Real Annual Wage Earnings of Women Relative to Men by Age
and Birth Cohort
0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

1922-1927
1943-1946

1928-1932
1947-1950

1933-1937
1951-1954

1938-1942

0.2
20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70

Annual labor earnings include income from all jobs, including self-employment. The series is adjusted for
inflation to year 2000 dollars using the personal consumption expenditures deflator (BEA 2009). Data are
weighted using CPS sample weights and collapsed into two-year age groups. Source: 1964-2009 March
CPS.

Opt-In Revolution - 31

Figure 2. The Evolution of Human Capital Investments by Age and Birth Cohort
A. Share of Women Participating in the Labor Force Relative to Men
0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

1922-1927

1928-1932

1933-1937

1943-1946

1947-1950

1951-1954

1938-1942

0.3
20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70

B. Share of Women Working in Professional and Managerial Jobs Relative to Men
1.2

1922-1927
1943-1946

1928-1932
1947-1950

1933-1937
1951-1954

1938-1942

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70

Share participating in the labor force is constructed from a binary variable indicating whether the respondent
was employed or looking for a job at the time of the survey. Job groups are coded using the 3-digit Census
occupational codes in the CPS. Women are counted in a job category only if they are employed at the time of
the survey. Data are weighted using CPS sample weights and collapsed into two-year age groups. Source:
1964-2009 March CPS.

Opt-In Revolution - 32

Figure 3. The Effects of Early Access to the Pill on Lifecycle Wage Earnings
A. Real Hourly Wages (excl. zeros)

2

0.13

Base Specification
Base Specification + Abortion Controls
Base Specification, High School State
Base Specification + Linear Trend
Base Specification +Vietnam Controls
Base Specification, Balanced Panel

1

B. Log Hourly Wages

0.11
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.03

0
20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

0.01
-0.01

20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

-0.03
-1
3000

-0.05

C. Real Wage Earnings/Salary Last Year (excl. zeroes)

2500

D. Log Wage Earnings/Salary Last Year

0.25
0.2

2000

0.15

1500

0.1

1000

0.05

500
0

0
-500

20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

-0.05

-1000

-0.1

-1500

-0.15

-2000

-0.2

Wage earnings are in 2000 dollars using the personal consumption expenditures deflator (BEA 2009). Each panel plots ߚ௚ from six different regressions:
baseline specification (equation 1), baseline + abortion controls (equation 1’) which corresponds to our tables, and four variants of equation (1’): one with
linear, state-specific time trends; another including controls for Vietnam casualties; another using only a balanced sample of respondents (those missing
information in any year or attriting are omitted); and another using state where the respondent attended high school to match to ELA (see footnote 21
regarding selection problems with this sample). Source: NLS-YW.

Opt-In Revolution - 33

Figure 4. The Effects of Early Access to the Pill on Lifecycle Human Capital Investments
A. Cumulative Experience in Hours

3000

B. Enrolled in College

0.07
2500
0.06

Base Specification
Base Specification + Abortion Controls
Base Specification, High School State
Base Specification + Linear Trend
Base Specification +Vietnam Controls
Base Specification, Balanced Panel

2000
0.05

1500

0.04

1000

0.03

500

0.02

0
20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

-500

0.01

-1000

0

-1500

-0.01

-2000

-0.02

20-24

0.07

C. Highest Grade Completed

0.5

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

D. Occupational Training since Last Interview

0.06
0.4

0.05
0.04

0.3
0.03
0.02

0.2

0.01
0.1

0
-0.01

0
20-24
-0.1

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

20-24

-0.02
-0.03

Opt-In Revolution - 34

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

F. Share in Non-tradionally Female Profession

0.1

E. Share in Professional job

0.1

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0
20-24

-0.02

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

20-24
-0.02

See notes to figure 3.

Opt-In Revolution - 35

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

Table 1. Relationship of ELA to Pre-Treatment Respondent Characteristics

ELA
Observations
R-squared
Mean of D.V.

ELA
Observations
R-squared
Mean of D.V.

ELA
Observations
R-squared
Mean of D.V.

Father worked
for pay

Father held
professional job

Mother worked
for pay

Mother held
professional job

-0.020
(0.012)
4352
0.01
0.929
Magazines
available

0.023
(0.029)
3930
0.04
0.195
Newspapers
available

-0.017
(0.029)
4341
0.07
0.637
Highest grade
completed by
father in 1968

-0.019
(0.022)
4345
0.09
0.833
Highest grade
completed by
mother in 1968

0.003
(0.029)
3754
0.03
0.387
Respondent
held library
card
-0.012
(0.033)
4346
0.13
0.695
Parents' desired
education for
respondent

0.046
(0.029)
1426
0.05
0.126
Lived in twoparent
household
-0.016
(0.025)
4354
0.03
0.816
Index of
atypicality of
mother's job

0.065
(0.241)
3228
0.12
10.044

0.101
(0.210)
3893
0.09
10.313

-0.105
(0.179)
3907
0.02
13.337

0.033
(2.490)
1786
0.05
29.909

Duncan index
of occupation of
head
0.692
(1.617)
3930
0.07
31.625
Number of
siblings in 1968

Family socioeconomic status
in 1968
-0.288
(1.664)
4100
0.14
99.917
Father born in
U.S

-0.138
(0.194)
4323
0.07
3.586
Respondent's
IQ score in
1968 (ageadjusted)
1.189
(1.430)
2879
0.08
102.091

-0.017
(0.012)
4353
0.05
0.959
Rural residence

0.027
(0.030)
4348
0.09
0.256

See Appendix A for more information on survey questions and variable coding. Characteristics are measured at age 14, unless
otherwise indicated. Each of the separate regressions also includes a set of state of residence and birth cohort fixed effects.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are corrected for serial correlation at the state level and are presented in parentheses below
each estimate

Opt-In Revolution - 36

Table 2. The Impact of ELA on Pill Use among Women Married by 1970

Mean of DV

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1=Used Pill
before age 18

1= Used Pill
before age 19

1= Used Pill
before age 20

1= Used Pill
before age 21

1= Used Pill
before age 22

0.034

0.119

0.226

0.369

0.506

-0.056
(0.017)
0.048

0.171
(0.204)
0.105

0.188
(0.142)
0.124

0.158
(0.084)
0.136

0.050
(0.040)
0.127

-0.052
(0.020)
-0.004
(0.014)
0.049

0.304
(0.168)
-0.167
(0.060)
0.108

0.254
(0.117)
-0.084
(0.057)
0.125

0.269
(0.088)
-0.142
(0.067)
0.137

0.105
(0.061)
-0.073
(0.055)
0.128

1,985
S, Y

1,985
S, Y

1,985
S, Y

1,985
S, Y

1,985
S, Y

Panel A: Pill Use
ELA
R-squared
Panel B. Pill Use Heterogeneity
ELA
ELA x Non-metro area
R-squared
Observations
Fixed effects

Panel A presents the estimates of equation (2), while Panel B presents estimates from equation (2) augmented with a dummy for non-metropolitan area and
the interaction of this dummy with ELA. Both panels are estimated with a linear probability model on the 1942 to 1948 birth cohorts from the 1970 National
Fertility Survey, which sampled ever married women. These cohorts are chosen so that the youngest women (born in 1948) were at least 22 in 1970 and that
the oldest women (born in 1942) would have varied in their legal access to the Pill by age 21. All regressions include state fixed effects (S) and cohort fixed
effects (Y). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are corrected for serial correlation at the state level and are presented in parentheses below each
estimate.

Opt-In Revolution - 37

Table 3. The Impact of Early Access to the Pill on Wages and Annual Incomes

Mean real
hourly wages
excl. zeros
ELA * Ages 20-24

7.88

ELA * Ages 25-29

9.60

ELA * Ages 30-34

10.62

ELA * Ages 35-39

11.74

ELA * Ages 40-44

12.84

ELA * Ages 45-49

14.29

Fixed effects
Observations
Unique women
R-squared

(1)
Real hourly
wage (excl.
zeros)

(2)
Log real
hourly
wage

-0.160
(0.315)
-0.126
(0.347)
0.332
(0.332)
0.420
(0.333)
0.634*
(0.334)
0.980**
(0.448)

-0.025
(0.025)
-0.001
(0.028)
0.036
(0.028)
0.038
(0.027)
0.052**
(0.024)
0.078**
(0.031)

Mean real
wages/salary
last year
excl. zeros

(3)
Wage or
salary last
year
(excl. zeros)

(4)
Log real
annual wage

-804
(681)
469
(741)
978
(731)
1,878**
(749)
2,196**
(919)
1,526*
(781)

-0.093*
(0.053)
0.107**
(0.046)
0.136**
(0.059)
0.126**
(0.050)
0.113**
(0.045)
0.078*
(0.047)

9,943
15,610
18,116
21,173
24,493
28,148

Y, S, A
Y, S, A
Y, S, A
Y, S, A
46,388
46,388
51,277
51,277
4,210
4,210
4,245
4,245
0.22
0.27
0.01
0.10
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Mean real
wages/salary
last year
incl. zeros
7,661
10,911
12,452
15,442
19,184
25,238

(5)
Wage or salary
last year
(incl. zeros)
-1,187*
(625)
202
(721)
803
(683)
1,449*
(744)
2,674***
(892)
3,376***
(919)
Y, S, A
68,169
4,351
0.01

Wages are adjusted to 2000 dollars using the PCE deflator (BEA 2009). All regressions include state fixed effects (S); cohort fixed effects (Y); age group fixed
effects (A); controls for abortion access; and abortion access controls interacted with ELA as described in equation (1’). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
are corrected for serial correlation at the state level and presented in parentheses below each estimate.

Opt-In Revolution - 38

Table 4. The Impact of Early Access to the Pill on Human Capital Accumulation and Occupational Upgrading
(1)
Cumulative
Experience in
Hours
-876**
(369)
-1,062**
(443)
263
(405)
836
(550)
2,282***
(784)
1,143
(988)

(2)
1= Enrolled in
College

(3)
Highest Grade
Completed

0.049**
(0.022)
0.004
(0.008)
0.002
(0.013)
0.002
(0.010)
-0.007
(0.010)
-0.007
(0.007)

Fixed Effects
Observations
Unique women
(Pseudo) R-squared

Y,S,A
61,736
4,329
0.62

Y,S,A
57,373
3,702
0.15

Mean of DV for 20-24
Mean of DV for 25-29
Mean of DV for 30-34
Mean of DV for 35-39
Mean of DV for 40-44
Mean of DV for 45-49

2,723
5,929
10,758
16,098
22,609
30,010

ELA * Age 20-24
ELA * Age 25-29
ELA * Age 30-34
ELA * Age 35-39
ELA * Age 40-44
ELA * Age 45-49

(5)
1= in Professional
Job

(6)
1=in Nontraditional Job

0.069
(0.136)
0.284**
(0.131)
0.226*
(0.132)
0.246*
(0.133)
0.243*
(0.129)
0.182
(0.145)

(4)
1=Occupational
training since last
interview
-0.004
(0.013)
0.029***
(0.011)
0.024
(0.016)
0.011
(0.018)
0.019
(0.022)
-0.016
(0.020)

0.009
(0.013)
0.048***
(0.019)
0.057***
(0.021)
0.035
(0.023)
0.031
(0.027)
-0.002
(0.021)

0.007
(0.008)
0.019*
(0.011)
0.059***
(0.016)
0.039**
(0.019)
0.029
(0.020)
-0.009
(0.018)

Y,S,A
78,809
4,354
0.15

Y,S,A
63,013
4,323
0.03

Y,S,A
73,737
4,354
0.07

Y,S,A
73,737
4,354
0.09

0.241
12.09
0.203
0.086
0.044
0.077
12.52
0.188
0.163
0.080
0.072
12.85
0.245
0.199
0.137
0.065
12.99
0.285
0.242
0.202
0.049
13.13
0.310
0.249
0.225
0.029
13.28
0.324
0.242
0.218
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Columns (2) and (4)-(6) report average marginal effects from probit specifications; columns (1) and (3) report coefficients from OLS regressions. All regressions
include state fixed effects (S); cohort fixed effects (Y); age group fixed effects (A); controls for abortion access; and abortion access controls interacted with ELA
as described in equation (1’). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are corrected for serial correlation at the state level and presented in parentheses below each
estimate.

Opt-In Revolution - 39

Table 5. Heterogeneity in the Impact of Early Access to the Pill on Real Hourly Wages
(1)
Lower third
of IQ
distribution
-0.672
(0.634)
-0.193
(0.580)
-0.956
(0.519)*
-0.123
(0.654)
-0.423
(0.958)
0.722
(1.043)

(2)
Middle third
of IQ
distribution
0.579
(0.623)
0.982
(0.724)
1.873**
(0.759)
1.888**
(0.794)
2.216**
(0.944)
2.302**
(0.939)

(3)
Upper third
of IQ
distribution
-0.393
(0.444)
0.458
(0.477)
0.722
(0.669)
0.543
(0.577)
0.790
(0.632)
3.046***
(1.010)

(4)
No College

(5)
Some
College

-0.255
(0.294)
-0.105
(0.293)
0.062
(0.306)
-0.185
(0.410)
0.553
(0.479)
0.797*
(0.470)

-0.730
(0.529)
0.053
(0.518)
0.757
(0.583)
1.346**
(0.662)
1.347**
(0.611)
2.677***
(0.907)

Observations
Unique women
R-squared

10468
793
0.18

14165
975
0.21

16788
1112
0.23

40229
2895
0.17

21785
1456
0.26

Mean of DV for 20-24
Mean of DV for 25-29
Mean of DV for 30-34
Mean of DV for 35-39
Mean of DV for 40-44
Mean of DV for 45-49

5.59
5.89
6.59
7.44
8.34
10.02

6.49
6.79
7.19
8.40
9.89
12.59

7.18
8.69
8.94
10.79
12.79
16.04

5.49
5.52
6.18
7.16
8.34
10.33

7.21
9.51
9.74
11.42
13.63
16.76

Sample

ELA * Age 20-24
ELA * Age 25-29
ELA * Age 30-34
ELA * Age 35-39
ELA * Age 40-44
ELA * Age 45-49

This table uses a specification similar to column (1) of table 3. Each column presents estimates from a separate
regression. Unlike table 3, this table includes zero wages in the left-hand-side variable. We cannot report
results excluding the zeros among the separate groups for disclosure reasons, but they follow a pattern similar
to that shown above. Columns (1) to (3) break women into thirds of the IQ distribution, and columns (4) and
(5) divide women into no college and some college. All other notes are as in table 3.

Opt-In Revolution - 40

Table 6. Heterogeneity in the Impact of Early Access to the Pill on Highest Grade Completed
(1)
Lower
third of IQ
distribution
-0.507**
(0.205)
-0.409*
(0.207)
-0.431**
(0.206)
-0.401**
(0.197)
-0.494**
(0.215)
-0.377
(0.239)

(2)
Middle
third of IQ
distribution
0.227
(0.217)
0.364
(0.228)
0.386*
(0.224)
0.437*
(0.220)
0.455*
(0.243)
0.326
(0.243)

(3)
Upper third
of IQ
distribution
0.174
(0.185)
0.420**
(0.191)
0.426**
(0.197)
0.505**
(0.202)
0.449**
(0.191)
0.584***
(0.207)

(4)
Lower
third SES
distribution
0.216
(0.141)
0.480***
(0.147)
0.410***
(0.161)
0.434***
(0.161)
0.427**
(0.175)
0.425**
(0.190)

(5)
Middle
third SES
distribution
-0.143
(0.218)
0.021
(0.242)
0.004
(0.246)
0.077
(0.253)
0.079
(0.254)
0.025
(0.267)

(6)
Upper
third SES
distribution
0.202
(0.316)
0.339
(0.274)
0.284
(0.288)
0.266
(0.309)
0.272
(0.274)
0.202
(0.296)

Observations
Unique women
R-squared

13,538
793
0.19

17,550
975
0.19

20,982
1,112
0.23

25,101
1,392
0.12

24,538
1,366
0.19

24,798
1,342
0.26

Mean of DV for 20-24
Mean of DV for 25-29
Mean of DV for 30-34
Mean of DV for 35-39
Mean of DV for 40-44
Mean of DV for 45-49

11.87
12.05
12.28
12.35
12.45
12.55

12.40
12.74
13.02
13.16
13.27
13.45

13.30
14.08
14.39
14.58
14.72
14.87

10.98
11.21
11.53
11.63
11.72
11.86

12.26
12.66
12.94
13.07
13.26
13.39

13.22
14.01
14.35
14.52
14.64
14.77

Sample
ELA * Age 20-24
ELA * Age 25-29
ELA * Age 30-34
ELA * Age 35-39
ELA * Age 40-44
ELA * Age 45-49

This table uses the specification in column (3) of table 4. Each column presents estimates from a separate
regression. Columns (1) to (3) break women into thirds of the IQ distribution, and columns (4) to (6) divide the
sample into thirds of the distribution of family background characteristics. SES is available for more women than
IQ score, so the sample sizes in columns (4)-(6) are larger. All other notes are as in table 4.

Opt-In Revolution - 41

Table 7. Heterogeneity in the Impact of Early Access to the Pill on Cumulative Experience
(1)
Lower third
of IQ
distribution
-874
(1,264)
-1,039
(1,335)
-518
(1,128)
-55
(1,377)
-451
(1,977)
-1,484
(2,669)

(2)
Middle
third of IQ
distribution
-319
(880)
-668
(1,009)
1,208
(1,066)
1,950
(1,322)
3,467**
(1,524)
1,580
(1,950)

(3)
Upper third
of IQ
distribution
218
(826)
176
(873)
1,416
(994)
2,212*
(1,102)
2,808**
(1,265)
2,196
(1,340)

(4)
No College

(5)
Some
College

-1,324**
(545)
-1,516**
(609)
-488
(470)
-319
(748)
1,185
(998)
69
(1,352)

-567
(736)
-539
(777)
1,246
(838)
2,500***
(931)
3,840***
(1,059)
2,793**
(1,361)

Observations
Unique women
R-squared

10,626
788
0.600

14,076
969
0.642

16,597
1,104
0.681

40,555
2,880
0.581

21,181
1,449
0.703

Mean of DV for 20-24
Mean of DV for 25-29
Mean of DV for 30-34
Mean of DV for 35-39
Mean of DV for 40-44
Mean of DV for 45-49

2,577
5,383
9,795
15,017
21,308
28,093

3,167
6,330
10,994
16,078
21,924
29,602

2,811
6,543
11,655
17,502
24,420
32,319

2,867
5,540
9,932
14,876
21,088
28,124

2,442
6,765
12,401
18,434
25,434
33,224

Sample
ELA * Age 20-24
ELA * Age 25-29
ELA * Age 30-34
ELA * Age 35-39
ELA * Age 40-44
ELA * Age 45-49

This table uses the specification in column (1) of table 4. Each column presents estimates from a separate
regression. Columns (1) to (3) break women into thirds of the IQ distribution, and columns (4) and (5) divide
women into no college and some college. All other notes are as in table 4.

Opt-In Revolution - 42

Table 8. Decomposition of the Impact of Early Access to the Pill on Log Hourly Wages
Effect of
Statistic

Total Difference

Education

Job Training

Experience

Occupation

Marriage

Unexplained
Difference

0.015
(17.0)

-0.003
(-3.4)

0.056
(63.6)

0.014
(15.9)

0.000
(0.0)

0.006
(6.8)

Panel A: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition
Mean

0.088

Panel B: Recentered Influence Function Decomposition
10th percentile

0.077

0.003
(3.9)

-0.001
(-1.3)

0.053
(68.8)

-0.003
(-3.9)

-0.001
(-1.3)

0.026
(35.1)

25th percentile

0.077

0.005
(6.5)

-0.004
(-5.2)

0.066
(85.7)

0.007
(9.1)

0.001
(1.3)

0.003
(2.6)

50th percentile

0.106

0.014
(13.2)

-0.005
(-4.7)

0.072
(67.9)

0.013
(12.3)

-0.003
(-2.8)

0.015
(14.2)

75th percentile

0.073

0.017
(23.3)

-0.004
(-5.5)

0.074
(101.4)

0.028
(38.4)

0.000
(0.0)

-0.042
(-57.5)

90th percentile

0.104

0.023
(22.1)

0.000
(0.0)

0.040
(38.5)

0.012
(11.5)

-0.001
(-1.0)

0.028
(26.9)

The numbers represent the difference in log hourly wages at different points in the distribution between women (aged 45 to 49) with and without
ELA after adjusting for the specified factors using the indicated decomposition (reference group is those without ELA). Shares of total differences
are presented in parentheses. The unexplained difference is the residual not accounted for by the five factors. The total difference at the mean
(0.088) differs slightly from the estimate reported in table 3 (0.078) because the numbers here are based on a single observation per woman.

Opt-In Revolution - 43

