NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICES, MARKUPS AND TRADE REFORM
Jan De Loecker
Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Amit K. Khandelwal
Nina Pavcnik
Working Paper 17925
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17925
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

The main work for this project was carried out while Goldberg was a Fellow of the Guggenheim Foundation,
De Loecker was a visitor of the Cowles Foundation at Yale University and a visiting Professor at Stanford
University, and Khandelwal was a Kenen Fellow at the International Economics Section at Princeton
University. The authors thank the respective institutions for their support. We are grateful to Steve
Berry, Elhanan Helpman, Ariel Pakes, Andres Rodriguez-Clare and Frank Wolak for useful discussions
at early stages of this project and seminar participants at several institutions and conferences. We also
thank the Editor, Jean-Marc Robin, and three anonymous referees for insightful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jan De Loecker, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Prices, Markups and Trade Reform
Jan De Loecker, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 17925
March 2012, Revised November 2015
JEL No. F1,L1
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how prices, markups and marginal costs respond to trade liberalization. We develop
a framework to estimate markups from production data with multi-product firms. This approach does
not require assumptions on the market structure or demand curves faced by firms, nor assumptions
on how firms allocate their inputs across products. We exploit quantity and price information to disentangle
markups from quantity-based productivity, and then compute marginal costs by dividing observed
prices by the estimated markups. We use India’s trade liberalization episode to examine how firms
adjust these performance measures. Not surprisingly, we find that trade liberalization lowers factory-gate
prices and that output tariff declines have the expected pro-competitive effects. However, the price
declines are small relative to the declines in marginal costs, which fall predominantly because of the
input tariff liberalization. The reason for this incomplete cost pass-through to prices is that firms offset
their reductions in marginal costs by raising markups. Our results demonstrate substantial heterogeneity
and variability in markups across firms and time and suggest that producers benefited relative to consumers,
at least immediately after the reforms.
Jan De Loecker
Department of Economics
307 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jdeloeck@princeton.edu

Amit K. Khandelwal
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 606, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ak2796@columbia.edu

Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Yale University
Department of Economics
37 Hillhouse Ave.
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
penny.goldberg@yale.edu

Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu

1

Introduction

Trade reforms have the potential to deliver substantial benefits to economies by forcing a more
efficient allocation of resources. A large body of theoretical and empirical literature has analyzed
the mechanisms behind this process. When trade barriers fall, aggregate productivity rises as less
productive firms exit and the remaining firms expand (e.g., Melitz (2003) and Pavcnik (2002)) and
take advantage of cheaper or previously unavailable imported inputs (e.g., Goldberg et al. (2010a),
Amiti and Konings (2007), Halpern et al. (2011)). Trade reforms have also been shown to reduce
markups (e.g., Levinsohn (1993) and Harrison (1994)). Based on this evidence, we should expect
trade reforms to exert downward pressure on firm prices. However, we have little direct evidence
on how prices respond to liberalization because they are rarely observed during trade reforms. We
fill this gap by examining how prices, and their underlying markup and cost components, adjust
during India’s comprehensive trade liberalization. To obtain the markup and cost components we
develop a unified framework to estimate jointly markups and marginal costs from production data.
Our paper makes three main contributions. First, we develop a unified framework to estimate
markups and marginal costs of multi-product firms across a broad set of manufacturing industries.
Since these measures are unobserved, we must impose some structure on the data. However, our
approach does not require parametric assumptions on consumer demand, market structure or the
nature of competition common in industrial organization studies. This flexibility is particularly
appealing in settings when one wants to infer the full distribution of markups across firms and
products over time in different manufacturing sectors. Since prices are observed, we can directly
recover marginal costs from the markup estimates. Data containing this level of detail are becoming
increasingly available, so this methodology is useful to researchers studying other countries and industries. The drawback of this approach is that we are unable to perform counterfactual simulations
since we do not explicitly model consumer demand and firm pricing behavior.
The second and key contribution of our study is towards the methodology to estimate production
functions. In order to infer markups, the proposed approach requires estimates of production
functions. Typically, these estimates have well-known biases if researchers use revenue rather than
quantity data. Estimates of “true” productivity (or marginal costs) are confounded by demand
shocks and markups, and these biases may be severe (see Foster et al. (2008) and De Loecker (2011)).
We address the output price-bias by estimating a quantity-based production function using data
that contain the prices and quantities of firms’ products over time. The focus on a quantity-based
production function highlights the need for the estimation to address two additional biases that have
not received much attention in the literature: the bias stemming from the unobserved allocation of
inputs across products within multi-product firms and the bias stemming from unobserved input
prices (due to the use of quality-differentiated inputs) by firms - the so-called input price bias.
Our study contributes an approach to address these biases. This is important as future waves
of plant- and firm-level data may start providing information on physical quantities of output
forcing researchers to confront the challenges associated with multi-product production function
estimation. Moreover, researchers may want to start combining data from firm-level production
2

surveys with fine-grained product-level information from consumer scanner data, which will also
require an explicit treatment of multi-product firms in the production function estimation.
Third, existing studies that have analyzed the impact of trade reforms on markups have focused
exclusively on the competitive effects from declines in output tariffs (e.g., Levinsohn (1993) and
Harrison (1994)). Comprehensive reforms also lower tariffs on imported inputs and previous work,
particularly on India, has emphasized this aspect of trade reforms (e.g., Goldberg et al. (2009)).
These two tariff reductions represent distinct shocks to domestic firms. Lower output tariffs increase
competition by changing the residual demand that firms face. Conversely, firms benefit from lower
costs of production when input tariffs decline. It is important to account for both channels of liberalization to understand the overall impact of trade reforms on prices and markups. In particular,
changes in markups depend on the extent to which firms pass these cost savings to consumers, the
pass-through being influenced by both the market structure and nature of demand. For example, in
models with monopolistic competition and CES demand, markups are constant and so by assumption, pass-through of tariffs on prices is complete. Arkolakis et al. (2012) demonstrate that several
of the influential trade models assume constant markups and by doing so, abstract away from the
markup channel as a potential source of gains from trade. This is the case in Ricardian models that
assume perfect competition, such as Eaton and Kortum (2002), and models with monopolistic competition such as Krugman (1980) and its heterogeneous firm extensions like Melitz (2003). There
are models that can account for variable markups by imposing some structure on demand and market structure.1 While these studies allow for richer patterns of markup adjustment, the empirical
results on markups and pass-through ultimately depend on the underlying parametric assumptions
imposed on consumer demand and nature of competition. Ideally, we want to understand how trade
reforms affect markups without having to rely on explicit parametric assumptions of the demand
systems and/or market structures, which themselves may change with trade liberalization.
The structure of our analysis is as follows. We use production data to infer markups by exploiting
the optimality of firms’ variable input choices. Our approach is based on Hall (1988) and De Loecker
and Warzynski (2012), but we extend their methodology to account for multi-product firms and
to take advantage of observable price data and physical quantity of products. In order to infer
markups we assume that firms minimize cost; then, markups are the deviation between the elasticity
of output with respect to a variable input and that input’s share of total revenue. We obtain this
output elasticity from estimates of production functions across many industries. The use of physical
quantity data alleviates the concern that the production function estimation is contaminated by
prices, yet presents different challenges that we discuss in detail in Section 3. Most importantly,
using physical quantity data forces us to conduct the analysis at the product level since without a
demand system to aggregate across products, prices and physical quantities are only defined at the
product level.
The approach we propose calls for an explicit treatment of multi-product firms. We show
1

See Goldberg (1995), Bernard et al. (2003), Goldberg and Verboven (2005), Atkeson and Burstein (2008), Melitz
and Ottaviano (2008), Feenstra and Weinstein (2010), Nakamura and Zerom (2010), Edmonds et al. (2011), Goldberg
and Hellerstein (2013), Arkolakis et al. (2012), Mayer et al. (2014) and Atkin and Donaldson (2014).

3

how to exploit data on single-product firms along with a sample selection correction to obtain
consistent estimates of the production functions. The benefit of using single-product firms at the
production function estimation stage is that it does not require assumptions on how firms allocate
inputs across products, something we do not observe in our data.2 This approach assumes that the
physical relationship between inputs and outputs is the same for single- and multi-product firms that
manufacture the same product. That is, a single-product firm uses the same technology to produce
rickshaws as a multi-product firm that produces rickshaws and cars. While this assumption may
appear strong, it is already implicitly employed in all previous work that pools data across singleand multi-product firms (e.g., Olley and Pakes (1996) or Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)). Once we
estimate the production functions from the single-product firms, we show how to back out allocation
of inputs across products within a multi-product firm. We obtain the markups for each product
manufactured by firms by dividing the output elasticity of materials by the materials share of total
revenue.3 Finally, we divide prices by the markups to obtain marginal costs.
The estimation of the production function provides plausible results and highlights the importance of addressing the input price bias. We also observe that firms have lower markups and higher
marginal costs on products that are farther from their core competency, a finding consistent with
recent heterogeneous models of multi-product firms. Foreshadowing the impact of the trade liberalizations, we find that changes in marginal costs are not perfectly reflected in changes in prices
because of variable markups (i.e., incomplete pass-through).
Our main results focus on how prices, marginal costs, and markups adjust during India’s trade
liberalization. As has been discussed extensively in earlier work, the nature of India’s reform provides
an identification strategy that alleviates the standard endogeneity concerns associated with trade
liberalization. Perhaps not surprisingly, we observe price declines during the reform period, but these
declines appear modest relative to the size of the reform. On average, prices fall 18 percent despite
average output tariff declines of 62 percentage points. Marginal costs, however, decline on average
by 31 percent due primarily to input tariff liberalization; this finding is consistent with earlier work
demonstrating the importance of imported inputs in India’s trade reform. The predominant force
driving down marginal costs are lower input tariffs reducing the costs of imported inputs, rather than
output tariffs reducing X-inefficiencies. The importance of input tariffs is consistent with earlier
results by Amiti and Konings (2007) on Indonesia and Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) on India
who find that firm-level productivity changes were predominantly driven by input tariff declines.
Since our prices decompose exactly into their underlying cost and markup components, we can show
that the reason the relatively large decline in marginal costs did not translate to equally large price
2
Suppose a firm manufactures three products using raw materials, labor and capital. To our knowledge, no
dataset covering manufacturing firms reports information on how much of each input is used for each product. One
way around this problem is to assume input proportionality. For example, Foster et al. (2008) allocate inputs based on
products’ revenue shares. Their approach is valid under perfect competition or the assumption of constant markups
across all products produced by a firm. While these assumptions may be appropriate for the particular homogeneous
good industries they study, we study a broad class of differentiated products where these assumptions may not apply.
Moreover, our study aims to estimate markups without imposing such implicit assumptions.
3
For multi-product firms, we use the estimated input allocations in the markup calculation.

4

declines was because markups increased: on average, the trade reform raised relative markups by
13 percent. The increases in markups are due to the fact that prices do not respond fully to cost,
a finding that has been studied extensively in the exchange rate literature and is consistent with
any model with variable markups. Finally, we observe that firms’ ability to raise markups even
further is mitigated by the pro-competitive impact of output tariff declines, particularly for those
firms with very high initial markups. Our analysis is based on data representative of larger firms,
so our results are representative of these larger firms.
Our results suggest that the most likely beneficiaries of the trade liberalization in the short-run
are domestic Indian firms who benefit from lower production costs while simultaneously raising
markups. The short-run gains to consumers appear small, especially considering that we observe
factory-gate prices rather than retail prices. However, the additional short-run profits accrued to
firms may have spurred innovation in Indian manufacturing, particularly in the introduction of
many new products, that benefit consumers in the long run. These new products accounted for
about a quarter of overall manufacturing growth (see Goldberg et al. (2010b)). In earlier work, we
showed that the new product introductions were concentrated in sectors with disproportionally large
input tariff declines that allowed firms access to new, previously unavailable imported materials (see
Goldberg et al. (2010a)). In the present paper, we find that firms with larger increases in average
markups were more likely to introduce new products, which suggests that higher profits may have
financed the development of new products that contributed to long run gains to consumers. In
addition, our empirical findings are consistent with an increase in the quality of existing products,
which would have further benefited consumers. A more detailed investigation of these channels is
beyond the scope of the present paper.
In addition to the papers discussed earlier, our work is related to a wave of recent papers
that focus on productivity in developing countries, such as Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and
Hsieh and Klenow (2009). The low productivity in the developing world is often attributed to
lack of competition (see Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom and Van Reenen (2010)) or the
presence of policy distortions that result in a misallocation of resources across firms (Hsieh and
Klenow (2009)). Against this background, it is natural to ask whether there is any evidence that an
increase in competition or a removal of distortions reduces production costs. India’s reforms are an
excellent context to study these questions because of the nature of the reforms and the availability
of detailed data. Trade protection is a policy distortion that distorts resource allocation. Limited
competition benefits some firms relative to others, and the high input tariffs are akin to the capital
distortions examined by Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Our results suggest that the removal of barriers
on inputs lowered production costs, so the reforms did indeed deliver gains in the form of lower
production costs. However, the overall picture is more nuanced as firms do not appear to pass
the entirety of the cost savings to consumers in the form of lower prices. Our findings highlight
the importance of jointly studying changes in prices, markups and costs to understand the full
distributional consequences of trade liberalization.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide a brief

5

overview of India’s trade reform and the data used in the analysis. In Section 3 we lay out the
general empirical framework that allows us to estimate markups and marginal costs. Section 3.1
presents the theoretical framework, Section 3.2 presents the empirical methodology to estimate the
production function and discusses identification, and Section 3.3 explains the process to recover
the allocation of inputs across products for multi-product firms. Section 4 presents the results and
Section 5 concludes.

2

Data and Trade Policy Background

We first describe the Indian data since it dictates our empirical methodology. We also describe key
elements of India’s trade liberalization that are important for our identification strategy. Given
that the Indian trade liberalization has been described in a number of papers (including several by
a subset of the present authors), we keep the discussion of the reforms brief.

2.1

Production and Price data

We use the Prowess data that is collected by the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE).
Prowess includes the usual set of variables typically found in firm-level production data, but has
important advantages over the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), India’s manufacturing census
over the 1989-2003 period that spans India’s trade liberalization. First, unlike the repeated cross
section in the older versions of the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), Prowess is a panel that
tracks firm performance over time. Second, the data span India’s 1991 trade liberalization. Third,
Prowess records detailed product-level information for each firm. This enables us to distinguish
between single-product and multi-product firms, and track changes in firm scope over the sample
period. Fourth, Prowess collects information on quantity and sales for each reported product, so
we can construct the prices of each product a firm manufactures. These advantages make Prowess
particularly well-suited for understanding the mechanisms of firm-level adjustments in response to
trade liberalizations that are typically hidden in other data sources, and deal with measurement
issues that arise in most studies that estimate production functions.4
Prowess enables us to track firms’ product mix over time because Indian firms are required by
the 1956 Companies Act to disclose product-level information on capacities, production and sales
in their annual reports. As discussed extensively in Goldberg et al. (2010b), several features of the
database give us confidence in its quality. Product-level information is available for 85 percent of the
manufacturing firms, which collectively account for more than 90 percent of Prowess’ manufacturing
output and exports. Since product-level information and overall output are reported in separate
modules, we can cross check the consistency of the data. Product-level sales comprise 99 percent of
4

The ASI has recently released panel data that contain similar product-level information. These data have the
advantage of being a representative survey of Indian manufacturing activity and contain both the wage bill and
number of employees, but because these recent waves do not span the Indian trade liberalization period, we are
unable to use them for our analysis.

6

the (independently) reported manufacturing sales. We refer the reader to Appendix C and Goldberg
et al. (2010a,b) for a more detailed discussion of the data.
The definition of a product is based on the CMIE’s internal product classification, which is
based on India’s national industrial classification (NIC). There are 1,400 products in the sample
for estimation.5 Table 1 reports basic summary statistics by two-digit NIC (India’s industrial
classification system) sector. As a comparison, the U.S. data used by Bernard et al. (2010), contain
approximately 1,500 products, defined as five-digit SIC codes across 455 four-digit SIC industries.
Thus, our definition of a product is similar to earlier work that has focused on the U.S. Table 2
provides a few examples of products available in our data set. In our terminology, we will distinguish
between “sectors” (which correspond to two-digit NIC aggregates), “industries” (which correspond to
four-digit NIC aggregates) and “products” (the finest disaggregation we observe); we emphasize that
since the “product” definition is available at a highly disaggregated level, unit values are plausibly
interpreted as “prices” in our application.
The data also have some disadvantages. Unlike Census data, the CMIE database is not well
suited for understanding firm entry and exit. However, Prowess contains mainly medium large
Indian firms, so entry and exit is not necessarily an important margin for understanding the process
of adjustment to increased openness within this subset of the manufacturing sector.6
We complement the production data with tariff rates from 1987 to 2001. The tariff data are
reported at the six-digit Harmonized System (HS) level and were compiled by Topalova (2010). We
pass the tariff data through India’s input-output matrix for 1993-94 to construct input tariffs. We
concord the tariffs to India’s national industrial classification (NIC) schedule developed by Debroy
P
output
output
, where τkt
and Santhanam (1993). Formally, input tariffs are defined as τitinput = k aki τkt
is the tariff on industry k at time t, and aki is the share of industry k in the value of industry i.

2.2

India’s Trade Liberalization

A key advantage of our approach is that we examine the impact of openness by relying on changes
in trade costs induced by a large-scale trade liberalization. India’s post-independence development
strategy was one of national self-sufficiency and heavy government regulation of the economy. India’s
trade regime was amongst the most restrictive in Asia, with high nominal tariffs and non-tariff
barriers. In response to a balance-of-payments crisis, India launched a dramatic liberalization of
the economy as part of an IMF structural adjustment program in August 1991. An important
part of this reform was to abandon the extremely restrictive trade policies it had pursued since
independence.
Several features of the trade reform are crucial to our study. First, the external crisis of 1991,
which came as a surprise, opened the way for market oriented reforms (Hasan et al. (2007)).7 The
5

We have fewer products than in Goldberg et al. (2010b) because we require non-missing values for quantities
and revenues rather than just a count of products, and drop small sectors that do not have enough observations to
implement the methodology.
6
Firms in Prowess account for 60 to 70 percent of the economic activity in the organized industrial sector and
comprise 75 percent of corporate taxes and 95 percent of excise duty collected by the Government of India (CMIE).
7
Some commentators (e.g., Panagariya (2008)) noted that once the balance of payments crisis ensued, market-

7

liberalization of the trade policy was therefore unanticipated by firms in India and not foreseen
in their decisions prior to the reform. Moreover, reforms were passed quickly as sort of a “shock
therapy” with little debate or analysis to avoid the inevitable political opposition (see Goyal (1996)).
Industries with the highest tariffs received the largest tariff cuts implying that both the average
and standard deviation of tariffs across industries fell. While there was significant variation in the
tariff changes across industries, Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) show that tariff changes through
1997 were uncorrelated with pre-reform firm and industry characteristics such as productivity, size,
output growth during the 1980s and capital intensity. The tariff liberalization does not appear to
have been targeted towards specific industries and appears relatively free of usual political economy
pressures until 1997 (which coincides with an election that changed political power). We estimate
the production function and markups on the full sample, but restrict our analysis of the trade reform
to the 1989-1997 period when trade policy did not respond to pre-existing industry- or firm-level
trends. We again refer the reader to previous publications that have used this trade reform for a
detailed discussion (Topalova and Khandelwal (2011); Topalova (2010); Sivadasan (2009); Goldberg
et al. (2010a,b)).

3

Methodology: Recovering Markups and Marginal Costs

This section describes the framework to estimate markups and marginal costs using product- and
firm-level production data. Section 3.1 presents the theoretical framework and explicitly states the
assumptions required to implement the approach. The computation of markups and marginal costs
requires estimates of production function coefficients and information about the allocation of inputs
across products. Section 3.2 describes the methodology to estimate the production function and
identification. Once the production function parameters are estimated, Section 3.3 explains how we
recover the allocation of inputs across products for multi-product firms. In section 3.4 we discuss
how we compute markups and marginal costs. Section 3.5 comments on the assumptions required
to implement our methodology.

3.1

Theoretical Framework

Consider a production function for a firm f producing a product j at time t:
Qf jt = Fjt (Vf jt , Kf jt )Ωf t

(1)

where Q is physical output, V is a vector of variable inputs that the firm can freely adjust and K is
a vector of fixed inputs that face adjustment costs. The firm’s productivity is denoted Ωf t . A firm
produces a discrete number of products Jf t . Collect the inputs into a vector X = {V, K}. Let
based reforms were inevitable. While the general direction of the reforms may have been anticipated, the precise
changes in tariffs were not. Our empirical strategy accounts for this shift in broad anticipation of the reforms, but
exploits variation in the sizes of the tariff cuts across industries.

8

Wfvjt denote the price of a variable input v and Wfkjt denote the price of a dynamic input k, with
v = {1, ..., V } and k = {1, ..., K}.
We begin by characterizing conceptual assumptions necessary to estimate markups and marginal
costs for multi-product firms. We refer to these assumptions as conceptual because they are independent of the particular data and setting. Implementing the approach requires additional assumptions
dictated by particular features of our data and our focus on India’s trade reforms (e.g., functional
form and identification assumptions), and we describe these in the next section. The approach
requires the following assumptions:
Assumption 1: The production technology is product-specific. Our notation reflects
this assumption. The production function F (.) is indexed by product j. This assumption implies
that a single-product firm and a multi-product firm that produce the same product have the same
production technology, although their productivities Ωf t might differ.
Assumption 2: Fjt (.) is continuous and twice differentiable w.r.t. at least one element
of Vf jt , and this element of Vf jt is a static (i.e., freely adjustable or variable) input in
the production of product j. This assumption restricts the technology so that the firm can
adjust its output quantity by changing a particular variable input.8 Furthermore, this assumption
implies that firm cost minimization involves at least one static first order condition with respect to
a variable input of production.
Assumption 3: Hicks-neutral productivity Ωf t is log-additive and firm-specific. This
assumption implies that a multi-product firm has the same productivity Ωf t in the production of all
its products.9 This assumption follows the tradition of modeling productivity in the multi-product
firm literature in this manner (e.g., Bernard et al. (2011)). For single-product firms, this assumption
is of course redundant.
Assumption 4: Expenditures on all variable and fixed inputs are attributable to
products. This assumption implies that we can
always write the expenditure on input X atP  X
X
tributable to product j as Wf jt Xf jt = ρ̃f jt j Wf jt Xf jt where WfXjt is the price for input X
with X ∈ X, and ρ̃f jt is the share of input expenditures attributable to product j with the reP
striction that j ρ̃f jt = 1. Note that ρ̃f jt is not observed in the data. Assumption 4 allows for
economies (or diseconomies) of scope in costs of production; we discuss this issue below in Section
3.5.
Assumption 5: The state variables of the firm are
sf t = {Jf t , Kf,j=1,t , ..., Kf,Jf t ,t , Ωf t , Gf , rf jt }
8

Assumption 2 rules out a fixed proportion technology (e.g., Leontief) in all variable inputs. The assumption
seems reasonable at the level of aggregation of our data. We observe total labor, capital and intermediate inputs
at the firm level, and so there is ample room for firms to substitute, say, workers for capital while keeping output
constant.
9
In principle, we can allow for Fjt (Vf jt , Kf jt , Ωf jt ) to derive a theoretical expression for markups. However,
assumption 3 is required to estimate markups for multi-product firms.

9

The state variables include the number of products produced (Jf t ), the dynamic inputs for all
products (Kf jt ), productivity (Ωf t ), exogenous factors (e.g., location of the firm) (Gf ),10 and all
payoff relevant serially correlated variables, such as tariffs and the firm’s export status (EXPf t ),
which we collect in rf jt .
Assumption 6: Firms minimize short-run costs taking output quantity and input prices Wf jt at time t as given. Firms face a vector of variable input prices Wfvjt =
Wtv (νf jt , Gf ,af jt−1 ), which depends on the quality νf jt of product j, exogenous factors Gf , and
firm/product-level actions af jt−1 taken prior to time t. The latter can capture pre-negotiated input
prices through contracts, for example, as long as the contracts do not specify input prices as a
function of current input purchase quantities (i.e., quantity discounts). The important assumption
is that a firm’s variable input price does not depend on input quantity. This assumption rules out
static sources of market power in input markets. We discuss this assumption in more detail at the
end of this subsection.
We consider the firm’s cost minimization problem conditioning on state variables. From assumptions 2 and 6, firms minimize costs with respect to variable inputs. Assumptions 4 and 6
imply that costs are separable across products since a firm’s product mix is a dynamic choice and
pre-determined at time t when variable inputs are chosen. Hence, we can minimize costs productby-product for multi-product firms.
The associated Lagrangian function for any product j at time t is:
L(Vf jt , Kf jt , λf jt ) =

V
X

Wfvjt V vf jt +

v=1

K
X

Wfkjt Kfkjt

k=1

+λf jt [Qf jt − Qf jt (Vf jt , Kf jt , Ωf t )]

(2)

The first order condition for any variable input V v used on product j, is
∂Lf jt
∂Qf jt (.)
= Wfvjt − λf jt
= 0,
∂Vfvjt
∂Vfvjt
where the marginal cost of production at a given level of output is λf jt since
ranging terms and multiplying both sides by

Vf jt
Qf jt ,

(3)
∂Lf jt
∂Qf jt

= λf jt . Rear-

provides the following expression:

v
v
v
∂Qf jt (.) Vf jt
1 Wf jt Vf jt
=
.
∂Vfvjt Qf jt
λf jt Qf jt

(4)

The left-hand side of the above equation represents the elasticity of output with respect to variable
input Vfvjt (the “output elasticity”): θ =

v
∂Qf jt (.) Vf jt
v
∂Vf jt Qf jt

10

. Define the markup µf jt as µf jt ≡

Pf jt
λf jt .

In our data we only observe the location of the firms’ headquarters, and not the site of production, so in practice
we exclude this from the analysis. But the general framework can nevertheless account for differences in locations of
firms (which may affect, for instance, exogenous spatial differences in factor prices).

10

The cost-minimization condition can be rearranged to express the markup for each product j
as:
µf jt =

θfv jt

Pf jt Qf jt
Wfvjt Vfvjt

!
= θfv jt (αfv jt )−1

(5)

where αfv jt is the share of expenditure on input V v allocated to product j in the total sales of
product j. This expression forms the basis for our approach to compute markups. To compute the
markup, we need the output elasticity on V v for product j, and the share of the input’s expenditure
allocated to product j in the total sales of product j, αfv jt .
The expression for the markup in (5) looks similar to the one derived in De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) with one crucial difference: all variables are indexed by j. This seemingly small distinction
has significant ramifications for the analysis and precludes us from using the existing approach in
De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) to obtain the subcomponents of (5). De Loecker and Warzynski
(2012) focus on firm-level markups and implement the conventional production function methodology using revenue data. Because of their focus and data, they do not need to confront the challenges
posed by multi-product firms. Specifically, the firm-specific expenditures shares are directly observed
in their data and the output elasticity is obtained by estimating a firm-level production function
using deflated revenues. In contrast, our framework utilizes product-specific information on quantities and prices. This forces us to conduct the analysis at the product-level because aggregation to
the firm-level is not possible without an explicit model of market demand.
The focus on products rather than firms calls for an explicit treatment of multi-product firms.
In a multi-product setting, both components in equation (5) are unobserved. In contrast to a
single-product firm setting, we must estimate the output elasticity separately for each product
manufactured by each firm. Furthermore, the product-specific input expenditure shares αfv jt cannot
be calculated from the data because firms do not report the input expenditure allocations ρ̃f jt .11
Our framework, presented below, confronts these two challenges by proposing a methodology for
estimating production functions that explicitly deals with multi-product firms and allows one to
impute the input expenditure allocations across the products of a multi-product firm.
An additional advantage of focusing on products rather than firms is that once we derive estimates of product-level markups, we can calculate marginal costs using information on product-level
prices, which are observed directly in the data:
mcf jt =

Pf jt
.
µf jt

(6)

A brief discussion of the assumptions underlying the analysis is in order. Assumptions 1-5 have
been explicitly or implicitly assumed throughout the literature estimating production functions.12
For example, Assumption 1 is made implicitly whenever researchers pool single- and multi-product
firm data to estimate production functions, which is almost always the case. The only difference is
11
12

We are unaware of any data set that provides this information for all inputs.
See Ackerberg et al. (2006) for an overview of this literature.

11

that the standard approach uses firm-level deflated sales and expenditure data; this practice does
not force the researcher to confront multi-product firms in the data since the analysis is conducted at
the firm level. Our framework strictly nests this approach, but since we use price data, and because
prices are only defined at the product level (unless one is willing to make additional assumptions on
demand that will allow aggregation to the firm level), we must specify physical production functions
at the product level. We therefore explicitly state the assumptions that underlie the treatment of
multi-product firms (Assumptions 1, 3 and 4).
Variants of Assumption 4 have been invoked in the few studies that have addressed the price bias
in production function estimation (e.g., Foster et al. (2008) and De Loecker (2011)). Foster et al.
(2008) allocate input expenditures according to revenue shares, while De Loecker (2011) allocates
them based on the number of products. These variants are considerably stronger than, and are
strictly nested within, Assumption 4. Relaxing these input allocation assumptions is one of the
methodological contributions of this paper.
The product-by-product short-run cost minimization with respect to variable inputs in (2) follows from Assumptions 2, 4 and 6. Assumption 2 assures the existence of a variable input and is
essential for our approach. If all inputs are dynamic, we can still estimate the production function,
but we cannot derive markups using the approach we described above. However, the assumption
that there is at least one factor of production that the firm can freely adjust over the period of a
year (we have annual production data) is both plausible and standard in empirical work.
Our framework allows for economies (or diseconomies) of scope. While physical synergies in
production are ruled out by Assumption 1, other forms of economies (or diseconomies) of scope are
consistent with Assumptions 1 and 4. Economies of scope can operate through the Hicks-neutral
productivity shocks Ωf t , through pre-negotiated firm-level contracts for input prices Wfvjt (as long as
these input prices do not depend on quantity of inputs), and also through the spreading of fixed costs
(unrelated to physical synergies in production) across multiple products in multi-product firms.13
Finally, an important assumption we maintain throughout the analysis is that input prices do
not depend on input quantities (Assumption 6). While restrictive, this assumption is more general
than the one employed in almost all production function studies, in which it is assumed that all
firms face the same input prices (in contrast, we allow for input prices to differ across firms because
of locational differences and/or quality differentiation). If firms have monopsony power in input
markets, Assumption 6 will be violated. In this case, one can show that our approach will tend
to understate the level of markups. However, the approach can still be used to trace and explain
changes in markups, as long as there are no contemporaneous changes in firms’ monopsony power,
or, even if there are such changes, as long as changes in firms’ monopsony power are uncorrelated
with trade policy changes. Appendix D provides a detailed discussion of the conditions under which
our approach is valid in the case of monopsony power.14
13

We discuss economies of scope in more detail in Section 3.5.
In principle, one could make the argument that trade policy might lead to exit of smaller, less productive firms,
which might give monopsony power to the remaining firms in the market. In practice, we do not observe firm exit in
our sample, so we do not consider such a scenario as a likely explanation for our empirical results. We have explored
14

12

In sum, our approach to recover estimates of markups and marginal costs requires estimates
of the parameters of the production function Fjt (.) at the product level and the input allocations
ρ̃f jt across products within each multi-product firm. Section 3.2 discusses the production function
estimation method and the identification strategy we employ in order to obtain the output elasticities
for both single- and multi-product firms.

3.2

Estimation

We take logs of equation (1) and allow for log-additive measurement error and/or unanticipated
shocks to output (f jt ). To simplify notation, and since we do not have enough data to estimate
different production functions for different time periods, we assume that the production function
coefficients remain constant over the sample period and drop the subscript t in the writing of the
production function f (.) Log output is given by: qf jt = ln (Qf jt exp (f jt )) . Letting xf jt be the
vector of (log) physical inputs, xf jt = {vf jt , kf jt }, and ωf t be ln(Ωf t ), we obtain:
qf jt = fj (xf jt ; β) + ωf t + f jt .

(7)

By writing the production function in terms of physical output rather than revenue, we exploit
separate information on quantities and prices that is available in the data. The use of physical
output in equation (7) eliminates concerns of a price bias that arises if output is constructed by
deflating firm revenues by an industry-level price index.15
Unobserved productivity ωf t potentially leads to well known simultaneity and selection biases.
These two biases have been the predominant focus of the production function estimating literature
and we follow the insights of Olley and Pakes (1996), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), and Ackerberg
et al. (2006) in addressing them. Note that if we theoretically had data on the physical inputs
(vf jt , kf jt ) for all products, these existing approaches to estimating production functions would in
principle suffice to obtain consistent estimates of the production function coefficients β.
In reality, no dataset records product-specific inputs, so estimating equation (7) requires dealing
with two additional issues: (a) we do not observe input allocations across products in multi-product
firms; and (b) we observe industry-wide deflated firm-level input expenditures rather than firm-level
input quantities. The latter is not merely a measurement problem because firms typically rely on
differentiated inputs to manufacture differentiated products, so physical input and output are not
readily comparable across firms.
To understand the implications of these two issues for estimation, let x̃f t denote the (observed)
vector of deflated input expenditures, deflated by a sector-specific price index. From Assumption
heterogeneity in our results by identifying business groups in our sample who may have some degree of monopsony
power, but we do not find differential effects with respect to the impacts of tariffs on their prices, markups and
marginal costs (results available upon request).
15
For a detailed discussion, see De Loecker (2011) and Foster et al. (2008).

13

4, product-level input quantities, xf jt , for each input x relate to firm-level expenditures as follows:
xf jt = ρf jt + x̃f t − wfxjt

(8)

where ρf jt = ln ρ̃f jt is the (log) share of firm input expenditures allocated to product j and wfxjt denotes the deviation of the unobserved (log) firm-product-specific input price from the (log) industrywide input price index.16 By substituting this expression for physical inputs into equation (7) and
defining wf jt as the vector of log firm-product-specific input prices, we obtain:17
qf jt = fj (x̃f t ; β) + A(ρf jt , x̃f t , β) + B(wf jt , ρf jt , x̃f t , β) + ωf t + f jt

(9)

Compared to equation (7), there are two additional unobserved terms in (9). First, the term
A(.) that arises from the unobserved product-level input allocations ρf jt and second, the term B(.)
that captures unobserved firm-product-specific input prices wf jt . The exact form of terms A(.)
and B(.) depends on the functional form of f (.). Both terms depend on the vector of coefficients
β, the input expenditures x̃f t , and the unobserved product-level input allocation shares ρf jt . It
is evident from (9) that even after controlling for the unobserved productivity ωf t using standard
estimation techniques, the presence of the terms A(.) and B(.) leads to biased production function
coefficients since both terms are correlated with the deflated input expenditures x̃f t . We refer to
the bias arising from the term A(.) as the “input allocation” bias and the bias arising from B(.) as
the “input price” bias. The methodology we develop in this subsection addresses these biases.
Neither the “input allocation” nor the “input price” bias have received much attention in the
literature on production function estimation to date because the standard practice regresses deflated
sales on deflated expenditures at the firm level.18 De Loecker and Goldberg (2014) discuss the
conditions under which these biases interact so as to produce reasonable estimates. But although
such estimates may look plausible, this does not imply that the coefficients are consistent estimates
of the production function. Failing to correct these biases traces the elasticity of sales with respect
to input expenditures, but that elasticity is not useful in our approach because equation (5) requires
the elasticity of output quantities with respect to input quantities.
To deal with these biases, we proceed in four steps. Subsection 3.2.1 explains how the estimation
addresses the unobserved input allocation bias. Subsection 3.2.2 explains how to address the bias
arising from unobserved input prices. Subsection 3.2.3 explains our treatment of the unobserved
productivity shock and selection correction. Subsection 3.2.4 explains the moment conditions and
further elaborates on identification and estimation. The first two steps are new to the literature on
16
We allow for multi-product firms to face different input prices in the production of their various products.
Accordingly, the input prices w are indexed by both f and j. This would be the case if a multi-product firm
manufactured products of different qualities that relied on inputs of different qualities; see subsection 3.2.2 for a
discussion of the relationship between output and input quality.
17
To simplify notation, we will always use wf jt to denote the deviations of firm-product-specific input prices from
industry input price indexes. Similarly, from now on, we will use the term “firm input prices” to denote firm-specific
deviations from industry averages.
18
Katayama et al. (2009) is the only study to our knowledge that acknowledges the existence of the input price
bias.

14

production function estimation; the last two steps build on existing work.
3.2.1

Unobserved Input Allocations: The Use of Single-Product Firms

Assumptions 1 and 4 imply that a firm f ’s technology used to produce product j is independent
of the other products manufactured by the firm. This also implies that a multi-product firm uses
the same technology as a single-product firm producing the same product.19 We can therefore rely
on single-product firms to estimate the product-level production function in (9), without having to
address the unobserved input allocations in multi-product firms. For single-product firms, A(·) = 0
because by definition, ρ̃f jt = 1. Since estimation is based on the single-product sample, we omit
the product subscript j for the remainder of the exposition of the estimation algorithm.
Equation (9) simplifies to:
qf t = f (x̃f t ; β) + B(wf t , x̃f t , β) + ωf t + f t .

(10)

The approach of using the single-product firm estimates to infer the production function coefficients for all firms raises the concern that the estimates may suffer from a selection bias since
we rely only on single-product firms in the estimation. The selection bias arises if firms’ choice to
add a second product and become multi-product depends on the unobserved firm productivity ωf t
and/or firms’ input use. Our estimation procedure utilizes the selection correction insights from
Olley and Pakes (1996) to address this potential selection bias in two ways. First, we use an unbalanced panel that consists of firms that are single-product at a given point in time. At time t,
the unbalanced panel includes both firms who always remain single-product firms and those that
manufacture a single product at t but add additional products at a later date. This feature of the
sample is important since many firms start off as single-product firms and add products during our
sample. The use of the unbalanced panel is helpful in addressing the selection concern arising from
the non-random event that a firm becomes a multi-product producer based on unobserved productivity ωf t .20 Second, to account for the possibility that the productivity threshold determining the
transition of a firm from single- to multi-product status is correlated with production inputs (in
particular, capital), we additionally apply a sample selection correction procedure. We describe the
details of the sample selection correction procedure in subsection 3.2.3.21
We consider three inputs in the (deflated) input expenditure vector x̃f t : labor (˜l), intermediate
19
For example, imagine a single-product firm produces a t-shirt using a particular technology, and another singleproduct firm produces carpets using a different combination of inputs. We assume that a multi-product firm that
manufactures both products will use each technology on its respective product, rather than some third technology.
20
This non-random event of adding a second product results in a sample selection issue analogous to the nonrandom exit of firms discussed in Olley and Pakes (1996). In their context, Olley and Pakes (1996) are concerned
about the left tail of the productivity distribution; here, a balanced panel of single-product firms would censor the
right tail of the productivity distribution. The use of the unbalanced panel of single-product firms improves upon
this selection problem.
21
Firms in our sample very rarely drop products, so we do not observe the reverse transition from multi- to singleproduct status. We refer the reader to Goldberg et al. (2010b) for a detailed analysis of product adding and dropping
in our data. Unlike Olley and Pakes (1996), we are also not concerned with firm exit. Firm exit is rare in our data
because Prowess covers the medium and large firms in India.

15

inputs (m̃) and capital (k̃). It is clear from equation (10) that we still need to correct for the term
related to unobserved firm-specific input price variation, B(wf t , x̃f t , β) and the unobserved firmlevel productivity (ωf t ) in order to obtain consistent estimates of the production function parameters
β, and hence the output elasticities that are used to compute markups and marginal costs. We turn
to these issues next.
3.2.2

Unobserved Input Prices

The treatment of unobserved input prices is important for two reasons. First, we need to control for
them in B(wf t , x̃f t , β) in equation (10) to recover consistent estimates of the production function
parameters β.22 Second, the input demand equation that is used to control for productivity ωf t
naturally depends on input prices (see next subsection 3.2.3).
In our framework (see Assumption 6), firm-specific input price variation can arise through exogenous variation in input prices across local input markets (Gf ) and/or variation in input quality
(νf t ).23 This implies that two firms in the same industry that produce in the same location only
face the exact same input prices if they buy the exact same input quality. We propose an approach
to control for unobserved input price variation across firms using information on observables, particularly (but not exclusively) output prices. The intuition is that output prices contain information
about input prices. For example, using data from Colombia that uniquely record price information for both inputs and outputs, Kugler and Verhoogen (2011) document that producers of more
expensive products also use more expensive inputs.
We provide a formal model that rationalizes our approach to control for input prices in Appendix
A. We show that in a large class of models of consumer demand and imperfect competition used in
the Industrial Organization and International Trade literatures, we can proxy for unobserved input
prices using a function of the firm’s output price, market share, and product dummies. Here, we
sketch the main argument and provide the economic intuition underlying our empirical strategy.
We define product quality as the mean utility associated with consuming a product net of price.
Product quality can be modeled as a function of observable and unobservable product characteristics.
Intuitively, our quality concept encompasses all attributes that increase the utility consumers receive
from consuming the product, conditional on its price. The main premise of our correction procedure
is that manufacturing high-quality products requires high-quality inputs, and that high-quality
inputs are expensive. We further assume complementarity in input quality: manufacturing highquality products requires combining high-quality materials with high-quality labor and capital. This
is a common assumption in the literature and underlies ‘O-Ring’-type theories of production (e.g.,
Kremer (1993), Verhoogen (2008) and Kugler and Verhoogen (2011)). This complementarity implies
that the prices of all inputs facing a firm can be expressed as functions of a single index of product
22

This subsection considers single-product firms since we use only these firms to estimate the production functions,
but all relationships described below also apply to multi-product firms (in which case all relevant variables should be
indexed by j).
23
We abstract from lagged action variables af t−1 , since we do not have rich enough data to measure these (e.g.,
past contracts specifying input prices independent of quantities).

16

quality. We assume that all firms producing the same product category (e.g., apparel) face the
same production function for quality, but allow the production function for quality to differ across
product categories (e.g., between apparel and food products). Appendix A shows that input prices
are an increasing function of product quality in this setting. Accordingly, we can control for input
price variation across firms using differences in output quality across firms.
Given that input prices are an increasing function of input quality, which is an increasing function
of output quality, we can use the variables proxying for output quality (i.e., output price, market
share and product dummies) to proxy for input prices. Formally, we write input prices wfxt as a
function of output quality νf t and firm location Gf :24
wfxt = wt (νf t , Gf ).

(11)

This expression for input prices generalizes Assumption 6 to all inputs. Appendix A shows
that the input price control function wt will generally be input-specific (so it should be indexed by
x). As we discuss in Appendix A and elaborate in section 3.5.2, allowing for input-specific input
price control functions always allows one to identify the coefficients of the production function β.
However, in this general case, one will not be able to identify the coefficients of the input price
control function, which are needed in our application to compute the input allocations ρf jt (and
markups) for multi-product firms in sections 3.3 and 3.4. Therefore, we impose the same control
function wt across all inputs.
Using the results from Appendix A we get:
wfxt = wt (pf t , msf t , Df , Gf , EXPf t ),

(12)

where pf t is the output price of the firm, msf t is a vector of market shares, Df captures the vector of
product dummies, and EXPf t denotes the export status of a firm.25 It is important to note that our
approach to control for unobserved input quality does not assume that products are only vertically
differentiated. It allows for horizontal differentiation, but horizontal differentiation is costless. In
contrast, differentiation along the vertical dimension requires higher quality inputs that have higher
input prices. This assumption is common in trade models (e.g., Verhoogen (2008) and Khandelwal
(2010)). Moreover, because we model output quality as a flexible function of output prices, market
share, and product dummies, the approach does not require us to commit to a particular demand
function since it encompasses a large class of demand models used in the literature. For example,
in a purely vertical differentiation model, there is a one-to-one mapping between product quality
and product prices, so output prices perfectly proxy for quality; in this case, one would not require
24
We remind the reader that we have defined the input price wfxt for input x as the deviation of the actual input
price from the relevant input price index (i.e., the weighted industry mean), and therefore wfxt = 0 for the producer
x
paying exactly the (weighted) average w̄tx . Formally wfxjt = wfx∗jt − w̄jt
, where ∗ denotes the actual input price faced
by firm f for its product j at time t.
25
We include the export status of a firm to allow for market demand conditions in export destinations to differ from
the domestic market. In our data we do not observe the product-destination trade flows for each firm. Otherwise
this information could be included here.

17

controls for market share or product characteristics. In the simple logit model, quality is a function
of output prices and market shares (see Khandelwal (2010) for a detailed exposition). In more
general models, such as the nested logit or random coefficients models, quality is a function of
additional variables, such as product characteristics, conditional market shares, etc. While product
characteristics are typically not observed in manufacturing surveys, product dummies can proxy for
the unobserved product characteristics (as long as these do not change over time) and accommodate
these more general demand specifications as in Berry (1994). Finally, using output prices as a proxy
for quality does not imply that we assume complete pass-through of input to output prices; the
degree of pass-through is dictated by the (unspecified) underlying demand and market structure
and by the firm behavioral assumptions. Accordingly, the approach is consistent with any degree
of pass-through between input and output prices.
The final step is to substitute the input price control function from (12) into the expression for
wf t in B(wf t , x̃f t , β) in equation (10), we get:
B(wf t , x̃f t , β) = B((pf t , msf t , Df , Gf , EXPf t ) × x̃cf t ; β, δ)

(13)

A few words on notation are in order. The function B(.) is different from the input price
function w(.) as described in equation (12). The function B(.) depends on the input prices wf t and
will therefore take as arguments the elements of w(.). However, it also contains interactions of the
input prices (wf t ) with the vector of deflated input expenditures x̃f t . We use the notation x̃cf t to
highlight the fact that the input price term w(.) enters also by itself, without being interacted with
the input expenditures x̃f t , and thus we include a constant term: x̃cf t = {1, x̃f t }. The notation
highlights that the use of the input price control function requires us to estimate an additional
parameter vector δ alongside the production function parameters β .
3.2.3

Unobserved Productivity and Selection Correction

The only remaining source of potential bias in (10) is the unobserved firm-level productivity ωf t .
Firms’ choices of inputs and number of products are in part affected by this (to the econometrician)
unobserved productivity, potentially leading to simultaneity and selection bias in estimation. We
control for unobserved productivity ωf t in (10) using a control function based on a static input
demand equation. In addition, we implement a selection correction for the potential selection bias
stemming from the use of single-product firms in the estimation procedure, discussed in subsection
3.2.1. We describe both procedures here.
We follow the literature on production function estimation, as initiated by Olley and Pakes
(1996) and extended by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), and control for unobserved productivity ωf t
in (10) using a static input demand equation. The materials demand function in our setting will
take as arguments all state variables of the firm noted in Assumption 5, including productivity, and
all additional variables that affect a firm’s demand for materials. These include firm location (Gf ),
output prices (pf t ), product dummies (Df ), market shares (msf t ), input prices (wt (.)), the export

18

status of a firm (EXPf t ) and the input (τitinput ) and output tariffs (τitoutput ) that the firm faces on
the product it produces. From (12) input prices are themselves a function of output price, market
share and product dummies26 , so materials demand is given by:
m̃f t = mt (ωf t , k̃f t , ˜lf t , Gf , pf t , Df , msf t , EXPf t , τitinput , τitoutput ).

(14)

We collect all the variables determining intermediate input demand, except for the input expenditures and unobserved productivity, in zf t = {Gf , pf t , Df , msf t , EXPf t , τitinput , τitoutput }. The
number of products (Jf t ) is omitted from the set of state variables since the sample we use for
estimation contains only single-product firms. The subscript i on the tariff variables denotes an
industry to indicate that tariffs vary at a higher level of aggregation than products. Inverting (14)
gives our control function for productivity:27
ωf t = ht (x̃f t , zf t ).

(15)

Our approach also encompasses a selection correction to address the potential selection bias
stemming from the use of only single-product firms in the estimation discussed in subsection 3.2.1.
The selection bias arises if a firm’s choice to add a second product and become a multi-product firm
depends on unobserved firm productivity ωf t in equation (10) and/or the firm’s input use. Following
Olley and Pakes (1996), who address the selection bias due to plant exit in their setting, we model
the probability that a firm continues to produce one product non-parametrically as a function of
the firm’s productivity forecast and all state variables sf t .
The underlying model behind our sample selection correction is one where the number of products manufactured by firms increases with productivity. Several multi-product firm models generate
this correlation, with Mayer et al. (2014) matching our setup most closely. In that model, the number of products a firm produces is an increasing step function of the firms’ productivity. Firms have
a productivity draw which determines their core product. Conditional on entry, the firm produces
this core product and incurs an increasingly higher marginal cost of production for each additional
product it manufactures. This structure generates a competence ladder that is characterized by a
set of cutoff points, each associated with the introduction of an additional product.28
26
Note that we consider (log) intermediate input expenditure, defined as the sum (in logs) of the intermediate input
demand and the input price. This implies that the materials expenditure function m̃t (.) takes as arguments the same
variables as the physical materials demand function mt (.): mf t = mt (wfmt , .) and m̃f t = mt (.) + wfmt = m̃t (wfmt , .),
where wfmt is the input price.
27
As discussed in Olley and Pakes (1996), the proxy approach does not require knowledge of the market structure
for the input markets; it simply states that input demand depends on the firm’s state variables and variables affecting
input demand. By using a static control to proxy for productivity, we do not have to revisit the underlying dynamic
model and prove invertibility when modifying Olley and Pakes (1996) for our setting to include additional state
variables (e.g., tariffs). See De Loecker (2011) and Ackerberg et al. (2006) for an extensive discussion. A recent
literature has discussed alternative estimation procedures that do not rely on this inversion. In the absence of shocks
to output f t , these procedures can be implemented without additional assumptions. However, the f t shocks end up
being important, especially when estimating physical output production functions, where the f t 0 s absorb unit fixed
effects.
28
Alternative models such as Bernard et al. (2010) introduce firm-product-specific demand shocks that generate
product switching (e.g., product addition and dropping) in each period. We avoid this additional complexity since

19

The cutoff point relevant to our sample selection procedure is the one associated with the
introduction of a second product. We denote this cutoff by ω̄f t . Firms with productivity that
exceeds ω̄f t are multi-product firms that produce two (or more) products while firms below ω̄f t
remain single-product producers and are included in the estimation sample.
If the threshold ω̄f t is independent of the right-hand side variables in the production function in
equation (10), there is no selection bias and we obtain consistent estimates of production function
coefficients (as long as we use the unbalanced panel of single product firms, i.e., the sample of firms
that are single-product at any point in time, but may become multi-product in the future). A bias
arises when the threshold is a function of capital and/or labor. For example, it is possible that even
conditional on productivity, a firm with more capital finds it easier to finance the introduction of
an additional product; or, a firm that employs more workers may have an easier time expanding
into new product lines. In these cases, firms with more capital and/or labor are less likely to be
single-product firms, even conditional on productivity, and this generates a negative bias in the
capital and labor coefficients.
To address the selection bias, we allow the threshold ω̄f t to be a function of the state variables
sf t and the firm’s information set at time It−1 (we assume the decision to add a product is made in
the previous period). The selection rule requires that the firm make its decision to add a product
based on a forecast of these variables in the future. Define an indicator function χf t to be equal to
1 if the firm remains single-product (SP) and 0 otherwise. The selection rule can be written as:
Pr(χf t = 1) = Pr [ωf t ≤ ω̄f t (sf t )|ω̄f t (sf t ), ωf t−1 ]

(16)

= κt−1 (ω̄f t (sf t ), ωf t−1 )
= κt−1 (x̃f t−1 , if t−1 , zf t−1 )

(17)

≡ SPf t
Note that the variables included in z are a subset of the state variables that appear in s (the
latter include the dynamic inputs that are part of x̃). We use the fact that the threshold at t
is predicted using the firm’s state variables at t − 1, the accumulation equation for capital, and
ωf t = ht (x̃f t , zf t ) from equation (15) to arrive at the last equation.29 As in Olley and Pakes (1996),
we have two different indexes of firm heterogeneity, the productivity and the productivity cutoff
point. Note that SPf t = κt−1 (ωf t−1 , ω̄f t ) and therefore ω̄f t = κ−1
t−1 (ωf t−1 , SPf t ).
product dropping is not a prominent feature of our data (Goldberg et al. (2010b)). Moreover, in Section 4 we find
strong support that firms’ marginal costs are lower on their core competent products (products that have higher sales
shares).
29
The accumulation equation for capital is: Kf t = (1 − δ)Kf t−1 + If t−1 , where δ is the depreciation rate of capital.
The specification of the selection rule takes into account that firms hire and/or fire workers based on their labor
force at time t − 1 and their forecast of future demand and costs captured by z and ω. So all variables entering the
nonparametric function κt−1 (.) help predict the firm’s employment at time t.

20

3.2.4

Productivity Process, Moment Conditions, and Identification

To estimate the parameter vectors β and δ, we follow Ackerberg et al. (2006) and form moments
based on the innovation in the productivity shock ξf t . We consider the following law of motion for
productivity:
output input
ωf t = g(ωf t−1 , τit−1
, τit−1 , EXPf t−1 , SPf t ) + ξf t .

(18)

The tariff variables and export dummy are included in the law of motion to account for the
fact that trade policy and exporting may affect productivity. As De Loecker (2013) shows, if one
expects these variables to have an effect on productivity, then the theoretically consistent treatment
is to include them directly in the law of motion. Otherwise, their omission may lead to biased
production function coefficients. Of course, the fact that these variables are allowed to have an
impact on productivity does not mean that they will in fact have an effect. It is entirely possible
that the empirical estimates indicate that the trade variables have no effect on productivity. Hence,
including trade variables in the law of motion does not assume a particular result regarding the
effects of tariffs or exporting on productivity.
Trade related variables are expected to affect productivity both through exporting and importing
channels. For example, a large literature suggests “learning by exporting” effects. Likewise, trade
economists have postulated that a reduction in output tariffs that exposes firms to intensified import
competition may lead to reduction in X-inefficiencies and adoption of better management practices.
In this case, output tariff reductions may lead to productivity improvements. On the input side,
input tariff reductions may lead to the import of new, previously unavailable intermediate products,
which will lead to increases in productivity (see Halpern et al. (2011) for a formalization of this
argument). We emphasize that the specification we adopt for the law of motion for productivity in
equation (18) allows for these mechanisms to generate productivity improvements, but by no means
assumes the result. The inclusion of the probability that a firm remains single-product in the next
period SPf t in the law of motion addresses the selection correction from equation (16). In principle,
there could be additional variables that affect firm productivity (e.g., a firm’s R&D), but we do not
include those in the law of motion as we have no information on them in our data.
To form moments based on the innovation in the productivity shock in (18), one needs to express
the productivity ωf t as a function of data and parameters. Plugging the expressions for the input
price correction from (13) and for unobserved productivity from (15) into the production function
equation (10), we get:
qf t = φt (x̃f t , zf t ) + f t ,

(19)

where we remind the reader that the vector zf t includes all variables that affect intermediate input
demand, except for the input expenditures and unobserved productivity:
zf t = {Gf , pf t , Df , msf t , EXPf t , τitinput , τitoutput },
an the term φt (.) is equal to f (x̃f t ; β) + B(wf t , x̃f t , β) + ωf t and captures output net of noise f t .

21

Estimation of (19) enables one to get rid of unanticipated shocks and/or measurement error f t .
We note that although the variables proxying for input prices (see equation (12)) also enter the input
demand equation in equation (15), this has no implications for the identification of the production
function parameters. The only purpose of the first stage estimation is to purge the output quantity
data from unanticipated shocks and/or measurement error (i.e., purge f t in equation (10)).30 For
example, output prices (pf t ) enter this first stage both to control for unobserved productivity and
input price differences, but we do not need to distinguish between them when forecasting output.
Note that even if we observed (quality-corrected) input prices, we would still include output prices
and the function φt (.) would reflect this.
The first stage of the estimation in (19) yields an estimate of predicted output φ̂f t .31 One can
then express productivity ωf t as a function of data and parameters. In particular, using equations
(10), (13) and (19) we have:
ωf t (β, δ) = φ̂f t − f (x̃f t ; β) − B((pf t , msf t , Df , Gf , EXPf t ) × x̃c f t ; δ),

(20)

where the last term, the function B(.), represents the input price control function.32
It is important to note that even though the input expenditures x̃f t enter both the production
function f (.) and the input price control function B(.), the coefficients of the production function β
are identified because x̃f t enter the input price control function in (13) only interacted with input
prices, or put differently, the input expenditures do not enter the input price function w(.) in (12).
This identification insight does not rest on any functional form assumptions; it results from the fact
that the control function for quality, and hence input prices, rests on the demand side alone and
hence does not include input expenditures.
The main parameters of interest to compute markups are the vector of production function
coefficients β. However, from (13), note that the parameter vector δ allows us to identify the input
prices: after we have estimated β and δ, we can recover the input prices from equation (12).33
To estimate the parameter vectors β and δ, we form moments based on the innovation in the
productivity shock ξf t in law of motion in equation (18). We use (20) to project ωf t (.) on the
30

We could set f t = 0; in this case, we no longer need to invert the input demand function to control for unobserved
productivity. However, we feel that the input demand specification addresses first-order empirical issues with the
data: measurement error in output and differences in units across products within sectors, which are absorbed by
unit fixed effects in the first stage.
31
In practice we approximate the function φt (.) with a third-order polynomial in all its elements, with the exception
of product dummies. We add the product dummies linearly to avoid having to estimate all cross terms. This seems
innocuous since the first stage R2 is very close to one.
32
We approximate B(.) with a flexible third-order polynomial. At this point the reader might find it useful to
consider a special case of a Cobb-Douglas production function and a vertical differentiation model of consumer
demand. In this special case equation (20) reduces to: ωf t (β, δ) = φf t − x̃0f t β − Γwt (pf t ; δ), where Γ denotes the
returns to scale parameter. Please see Appendix B for details.
33
In other words, we specify the function w(.) and therefore the δ parameters are a function of both the production
function coefficients β , and the parameters in w(.). It is at this stage where we need the assumption that the function
w(.) does not vary across inputs. If we allowed for input-specific w(.) functions, we would still be able to consistently
estimate the parameter vectors β and δ, but we would not be able to identify the input-specific coefficients of the
w(.) functions from β and δ. See Appendix B for a more detailed discussion based on a Cobb-Douglas production
function.

22

elements of g(.) to obtain the innovation ξf t as a function of the parameters ξf t (β, δ):


output input
ξf t (β, δ) = ωf t (β, δ) − E ωf t (β, δ)|ωf t−1 (β, δ), τit−1
, τit−1 , EXPf t−1 , SPf t

(21)

The moments that identify the parameters are:
E (ξf t (β, δ)Yf t ) = 0,

(22)

where Yf t contains lagged materials, current capital and labor, and their higher order and interaction
terms, as well as lagged output prices, lagged market shares, lagged tariffs, and their appropriate
interactions with the inputs.
This method identifies the production function coefficients by exploiting the fact that current
shocks to productivity will immediately affect a firm’s materials choice while labor and capital do
not immediately respond to these shocks; moreover, the degree of adjustment can vary across firms
and time. These moments that rely on adjustment costs in inputs are by now standard in this
literature. In our context, we assume that firms freely adjust materials and treat capital and labor
as dynamic inputs that face adjustment costs. In other settings, one may choose to treat labor as
a flexible input. Since materials are the flexible input, we use lagged materials when we construct
moments.34
We use lagged output prices, market shares, and tariffs and their interactions with appropriately
lagged inputs to form additional moment conditions to identify jointly the production function
coefficients β and the coefficients δ capturing the input price variation. For example, the parameter
related to the output price is identified off the moment E(ξt pt−1 ) = 0; this moment condition is
based on the insight that current prices do react to productivity shocks, so we need to use lagged
output prices which exploit the serial correlation of prices.
We estimate the model using a GMM procedure on a sample of firms that manufacture a single
product for at least three consecutive years.35 We choose three years since the moment conditions
require at least two years of data because of the lagged values; we add an additional (third) year
to allow for potential measurement error in the precise timing of a new product introduction. We
discuss the timing assumptions further in subsection 3.5.2. In principle, one could run the estimation
separately for each product. In practice, our sample size is too small to allow estimation at the
product level, so we estimate (10) at the two-digit sector level.36
Estimation of equation (10) requires choosing a functional form for f . We adopt a translog specification because of its flexibility.37 Specifically, the translog offers the advantage that it generates
output elasticities that are not constant over time and across firms (though the production coeffi34

In our setting, input tariffs are serially correlated and since they affect input prices, input prices are serially
correlated over time, creating a link between current and lagged intermediate input usage.
35
We follow the procedure suggested by Wooldridge (2009) that forms moments on the joint error term (ξf t + f t ).
36
This follows the standard practice in the literature where production functions are estimated at the industry
level. For example, see Levinsohn and Petrin (2003).
37
The translog production function is qf t = βl lf t + βll lf2 t + βk kf t + βkk kf2 t + βm mf t + βmm m2f t + βlk lf t kf t +
βlm lf t mf t + βmk mf t kf t + βlmk lf t mf t kf t + ωf t .

23

cients are constrained to be the same across years and firms); hence, large firms can have different
elasticities than small firms. The exact functional form for f (.) does not generate any identification
results. The crucial assumption is that productivity enters in a log-additive fashion (Assumption 3
in Section 3.1).
Finally, the standard errors on the coefficients are obtained using block-bootstrapping, where
we draw an entire firm time series. Since our ultimate objective is to estimate the impact of the
trade reforms on markups and marginal costs, we correct the standard errors of the regressions in
Section 4 by block-bootstrapping over our entire empirical procedure.

3.3

Recovering Input Allocations

As shown in equations (5) and (6), computing markups and marginal costs requires the productspecific output elasticity and product-specific revenue shares on a variable input (in our case, materials). We obtain the output elasticity from the estimation outlined in Section 3.2 based on singleproduct firms, but we do not know the product-specific revenue shares of inputs for multi-product
firms. Here, we show how to compute the input allocations across products of a multi-product firm
in order to construct αfMjt .

From Assumption 6, recall that ρf jt = ln

WfXjt Xf jt
ef t
X


∀X ∈ {V, K}, is product j’s input cost

share. We solve for ρf jt in multi-product firms as follows. We first eliminate unanticipated shocks
and measurement error from the product-level output data by following the same procedure as in
the first stage of our estimation routine for the single-product firms in (19). We project qf jt on the
exact same variables used in the first stage of the estimation procedure, qbf jt ≡ E (qf jt |φt (x̃f t , zf t )),
which allows us to eliminate any measurement error and unanticipated shocks to output from the
recorded output data.
Given the aforementioned assumptions that productivity is firm-specific and log-additive and
that inputs are divisible across products, we can n
rewrite the production
function as:
o
J
qbf jt = f (x̃f t , β̂, w
bf jt , ρf jt ) + ωf t , and recover {ρf jt }j=1 , ωf t using:
qbf jt − f1 (x̃f t , β̂, w
bf jt ) = f2 (x̃f t , w
bf jt , ρf jt ) + ωf t
X
exp (ρf jt ) = 1,

(23)
(24)

j

where f1 and f2 depend on the functional form of the production function and the input prices w
bf jt
for each product j are computed based on the input price function (12). In other words, to recover
the input allocations ρf jt , we separate the production function into a component f1 that captures
all terms that do not depend on ρf jt and a component f2 that collects all terms that involve ρf jt .
Because the input allocation shares have to sum up to 1 across all products in a multi-product firm,
this yields a system of Jf t + 1 equations (where Jf t is the number of products produced by firm f
at time t) in Jf t + 1 unknowns (the Jf t input allocations ρf jt and ωf t ) for each firm-year pair.

24

Let ω
bf jt = qbf jt − f1 (x̃f t , β̂, wf t ). Applying our translog functional form to (23), we obtain:
ω
bf jt = ωf t + âf jt ρf jt + b̂f jt ρ2f jt + ĉf jt ρ3f jt

(25)

The terms âf t , b̂f t , and ĉf t are functions of the estimated parameter vector β̂ and the estimated
input price correction w
bf jt .38
For each year, we obtain the firm’s productivity and input allocations, the J + 1 unknowns
(ωf t , ρf 1t , . . . , ρfJt ), by solving a system of J + 1 equations:
ω
bf 1t

=

ωf t + âf 1t ρf 1t + b̂f 1t ρ2f 1t + ĉf 1t ρ3f 1t

...
J
X

(26)
(27)

ω
b f Jt t

=

ωf t + âf Jt t ρf Jt t +

exp (ρf jt )

=

1,

b̂f Jt t ρ2f Jt t

exp (ρf jt ) ≤ 1

+

ĉf Jt t ρ3f Jt t

∀f jt

(28)
(29)

j=1

This system imposes the economic restriction that each input share can never exceed one and
they must together sum up to one across products in a firm. We numerically solve this system for
each firm in each year.

3.4

Markups and Marginal Costs

We can now apply our framework to compute markups and marginal costs using the estimates of
the production function coefficients (β) and the input allocations (ρ). We calculate the markup for
each product-firm pair f, j in each time period t using:
µ̂f jt = θ̂fMjt

Pf jt Qf jt
,
eM
exp(ρ̂f jt )X

(30)

ft

e M denotes the firm’s expenditure on materials.
where θ̂fMjt = θ(β̂, x̃f t , w
bf j , ρ̂f jt ) and X
ft
The product-specific output elasticity for materials θ̂fMjt is a function of the production function
coefficients and the materials allocated to product j . Hence, it can be easily computed once the
allocation of inputs across products has been recovered.39 Marginal costs mcf jt are then recovered
38

For the translog, these terms are

âf t

=





β̂k + β̂l + 3ŵf2 jt β̂lmk + ˜
lf t β̂lk + 2β̂ll + β̂lm + k̃f t β̂lmk + m̃f t β̂lmk − 2ŵf jt β̂lmk + β̂m + k̃f t 2β̂kk + β̂lk + m̃f t β̂lmk






+k̃f t −2ŵf jt β̂lmk + β̂mk + ŵf jt −2β̂kk − 2β̂lk − 2β̂ll − 2β̂lm − 2β̂mk − 2β̂mm + m̃f t β̂lm − 2ŵf jt β̂lmk + β̂mk + 2β̂mm

b̂f t

=

β̂kk + β̂lk + β̂ll + β̂lm + β̂lmk k̃f t + β̂lmk ˜
lf t + β̂lmk m̃f t − 3ŵf jt β̂lmk + β̂mk + β̂mm

ĉf t

=

β̂lmk

39

The expression for the materials output elasticity for product j at time t is: θbfMjt = β̂m + 2β̂mm mf jt + β̂lm lf jt +
β̂mk kf jt + β̂lmk lf jt kf jt . As before, to obtain the physical inputs, we rely on our estimates of the input prices w
bf jt

25

by dividing price by the relevant markup according to equation (6).
Note that both markups and marginal costs are estimates since they depend on the estimated
production function coefficients and the input cost allocation parameters, which are estimates themselves since they depend on the production function coefficients. Hence, the only source of uncertainty in our markup (and marginal cost) estimates comes from using estimated coefficients (the
production function coefficients β̂ and the input price correction coefficients δ̂). We account for
the measurement error in these variables when we estimate the reduced form regressions in Section 4 by bootstrapping over the entire procedure. We execute the following steps in sequence: 1)
estimate the production function, 2) recover the input allocations, 3) calculate markups (marginal
costs), and 4) project markups and costs on trade policy variables. We then repeat this procedure
500 times, using bootstrapped (with replacement) samples that keep the sample size equal to the
original sample size. This allows us to compute the bootstrapped standard error on the trade policy
coefficients in Section 4.

3.5

Discussion

In addition to the conceptual assumptions discussed in Section 3.1, the actual implementation of
the approach requires a set of assumptions to accommodate limitations of the data. Some of these
limitations are specific to our data set (for example, we do not have information on physical labor
units and wages, but only the wage bill) and may be of little general relevance. But other limitations
are present in every firm-level data set and will need to be addressed by any study using such data.
To our knowledge, no dataset reports the allocation of input expenditures across products in multiproduct firms or contains the complete information on the firm-specific input prices (including
firm-specific price of capital). The additional assumptions we impose are needed in order to deal
with these features of the data. Apart from measurement issues, the assumptions we employ also
address challenges that arise from product differentiation.
In this section we discuss these additional assumptions and our identification strategy. We start
by discussing the way we deal with the unobserved input allocations in multi-product firms.
3.5.1

The Use of Single-Product Firms: Economies of Scope and Relationship to Cost
Function Estimation

This subsection expands on the discussion of economies of scope in our setting and relates it to
discussion of economies of scope in the cost function literature. Our approach does not rule out
economies (or diseconomies) of scope, which may be important for multi-product firms. Panzar
(1989) defines economies of scope in terms of cost. Baumol
of economies of scope
 et al. (1983) speak

2
in production if the cost function is sub-additive: cf t [q1 , q2 ], wf t , ωf t ≤ cf t ([q1 , 0], wf t , ωf1t ) +
cf t ([0, q2 ], wf t , ωf1t ) where cf t (.) is a firm’s cost function, ωf t is (log) factor-neutral productivity,
and wf t denotes a vector of (log) input prices. The superscripts in the productivity denote the
and the input allocation shares ρ̂f jt .

26

number of products produced by a firm. Our framework allows for factor-neutral productivity to
depend on the number of products produced by a firm.
The assumption we impose is that the function c (.) is the same across single- and multiproduct firms producing the same product. However, costs between the two types of firms can
still differ if there are factor-neutral productivity differences between multi- and single-product
firms. To see this, consider the thought experiment of splitting a firm that produces two products to two sub-firms,
 each of which produces only one product. Economies of scope will exist if
2
cf t q1 , q2 , wf t , ωf t < cf t (q1 , wf t , ωf1t ) + cf t (q2 , wf t , ωf1t ). Note that this condition is conceptually
distinct from the equation implied by Assumption 4, which states that it is possible
to allocate


all input expenditures of a multi-product firm to individual products, i.e., cf t q1 , q2 , wf t , ωf2t =
cf t (q1 , wf t , ωf2t ) + cf t (q2 , wf t , ωf2t ). The indexing of productivity by the number of products is important here. When we allocate expenditures of a multi-product firm to individual products, we
hold the firm’s productivity constant. In contrast, in the counterfactual of splitting a firm into two
subdivisions, we allow for the productivity of each subdivision to be different than the productivity
of the original multi-product firm. The dependence of productivity on the number of products a
firm produces could arise for several reasons. For example, it is possible that there is learning associated with the production of multiple products or additional managerial experience that makes the
firm more efficient; and vice versa, it is possible that the production of multiple lines overwhelms
managers resulting in a decline in total factor-productivity.
A further possibility (not borne out in our notation) is that factor prices w differ across the
two types of firms because of pre-negotiated contracts. Such differences are consistent with our
assumptions regarding input prices as long as the contracts do not specify bulk discounts that
would make current input prices a function of current input quantities. For example, it is possible
in our framework for a firm such as Walmart to have lower input prices because it has negotiated
good deals with its suppliers in the past; but we do not allow the price Walmart faces on each delivery
of supplies to be a function of the size of the delivery. We do not have any data on pre-negotiated
prices that would allow us to investigate this possibility, so we do not go down this road empirically.
Finally, economies of scope can arise in the short run because of the amortization of fixed costs F
across multiple products for multi-product firms.We emphasize that we allow for economies of scope
rather than assume it. For example, our results could find no productivity differences between singleand multi-product firms, or find that multi-product firms are less productive implying diseconomies
of scope. Likewise, finding economies of scope in the range of our data does not imply existence of
economies of scope over any range of products produced by a firm; it is possible that economies of
scope switch to diseconomies once a firm reaches a certain number of products. This paper does
not attempt to provide a theory of multi-product firms. We simply point out that our approach
does not a priori rule out economies or diseconomies of scope in the range of our data.
The discussion above raises the natural question of why we do not exploit the duality between
production and cost function and estimate a multi-product cost function. The main reason for
focusing on the production function is that we do not have information on firm costs (as we do not

27

observe the firm-specific user cost of capital) or wages. Furthermore, a multi-product cost function
estimation would require additional identification assumptions in order to deal with the endogeneity
of multiple product outputs on the right-hand side. Finally, even if one could come up with such
identification assumptions, the product portfolios in our particular context are not stable. While
Indian firms very rarely drop products, they often add products during this period (see Goldberg
et al. (2010b)). These frequent additions require explicitly modeling a firm’s decision to add a
particular product (in contrast, our approach requires us to model only the change from single- to
multi-product status). Given these challenges, the approach to estimate production functions from
single-product firms while accounting for the potential selection bias is an appealing alternative.
3.5.2

Control Function for Input Prices and Timing Assumptions

This subsection explains how the control function for input prices, the law of motion for productivity
and the timing assumptions allow us to identify the coefficients. Recall that the identification
strategy involves two control functions for the two unobservables: input prices and productivity:
wf t = wt (pf t , msf t , Df , Gf , EXPf t )
ωf t =

output input
g(ωf t−1 , τit−1
, τit−1 , EXPf t−1 , SPf t )

(31)
+ ξf t .

(32)

While ωf t enters the production function (10) linearly, the input prices enter non-linearly as
part of the term B(.). By substituting the input price control function into the expression for w,
we get equation (13).
First, note that we make use of the input price control function in the first stage of the estimation,
when we purge the data from the noise . At this stage, we use materials as a proxy for productivity.
Given that materials demand depends on input prices, it is important to control for the input prices
using the control function specified above. However, the first stage has no implications for the
identification of the production function coefficients; its sole purpose is to net out .
Next, consider the identification of the production function coefficients β and the coefficients
associated with the input price correction term δ. These are identified off our timing assumptions.
To review these assumptions, we assume that materials are a freely adjustable input and hence they
will be correlated with contemporaneous productivity. Similarly, output prices will be correlated
with current productivity. In contrast, capital and labor are dynamic inputs. Therefore, they will
be uncorrelated with the productivity innovation ξf t . We rely on these assumptions to form moment
conditions.40
40

These timing assumptions are standard in the production function estimation literature. For example, both Olley
and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) assume that capital is a dynamic input and use this assumption to
identify the capital coefficient. Our treatment of capital is identical to its treatment in those papers. Our treatment
of labor differs as we treat labor as a dynamic input, while the aforementioned papers assume that labor is static.
This difference is due to our effort to use assumptions that match the institutional setting in India, a country
characterized by significant labor market rigidities. However, the assumption that labor is a dynamic input has no
significant implications for our identification strategy; we can easily modify the assumptions to treat labor as a static
input and adjust the moment conditions accordingly.

28

There are two remaining identification issues that need to be discussed. First, as we noted earlier,
the term B(.) will in general include input expenditures x̃f t . This raises the question of whether
the production coefficients β are identified. They are identified because the input expenditures x̃f t
enter the input price term B(.) only through interaction with the input prices. It is because of the
complexity of the translog that x̃f t appear in B(.) through interactions with input prices. In a
Cobb-Douglas specification, the input expenditures do not appear in B(.). In fact, under a constant
returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function the input correction term B(.) simplifies to
w(.).41
The second question is how the coefficients on variables that enter both the law of motion for
productivity and the input price control function are identified. One example of such a variable is
the export dummy. The law of motion for productivity includes a dummy for exporting in t − 1,
while it is also included in the input price control. The answer is that these coefficients are again
identified off timing assumptions. We assume that productivity responds with a lag to changes
in a firm’s environment, since it plausibly takes time for a firm to take the actions required to
increase its efficiency (e.g., hiring better managers, adopting better management practices, changing
organizational structure, importing new intermediate inputs, etc.). Accordingly, variables that may
influence a firm’s productivity, such as tariffs or exporting, enter with a lag in the law of motion of
productivity. In contrast, output and input prices respond immediately to changes in the economic
environment. Accordingly, the variables included in the input price control function enter with
their current values. As noted earlier, it is precisely because these variables enter with their current
values that we face an identification problem; the current values will be correlated with ξf t since
by assumption they respond to contemporaneous shocks. It is this potential correlation that leads
us to form moment conditions based on the lags, and not the current values, of the corresponding
variables (the vector Yf t contains lagged output prices, lagged market shares, etc.).
As noted in section 3.2.2, we assume that there is a single input price control function across
all inputs, wt (.). This assumption allows us to identify the coefficients of the input price control
function once the parameter vectors β and δ have been estimated. The coefficients of the wt (.)
function are required to compute firm- and product-specific input prices that are then used to
obtain input allocations ρf jt in multi-product firms in section 3.3. Without the assumption of a
common control function for the prices of all inputs, we would still be able to estimate the production
function coefficients consistently, but the parameter vector δ would in this case be a function of all
parameters of the input-specific input price control functions. Because our data does not report
firm-specific input prices, it would be impossible to identify the parameters of each input pricecontrol function in our case (see the particular example of a Cobb-Douglas production function
in Appendix B). However, some data sets report input prices for a subset of (though never for
all) firms’ inputs. With this additional information, it would be possible to specify and estimate
input-specific input price control functions.
41

See Appendix B for details of the special case of Cobb-Douglas.

29

4

Empirical Results

4.1

Output Elasticities, Marginal Costs and Markups

In this subsection, we present the output elasticities recovered from the production function estimation procedure. We describe how failing to correct for input price variation or account for the
selection bias affects the parameters. Finally, we present and discuss our markup and marginal cost
estimates.
The output elasticities are reported in Table 3.42 The nice feature of the translog is that unlike in
a Cobb-Douglas production function, output elasticities can vary across firms (and across products
within firms). We report both the average and standard deviation of the elasticities across sectors,
and the final column reports the returns to scale. We note that a few sectors appear to have low
returns to scale, but these are driven by outliers; Table 4 reports median output elasticities which
are less influenced by outliers. Since the returns to scale vary across firms, it is possible for many
firms in a sector to have increasing returns to scale, while the estimate of the industry-average
returns to scale is close to one. At the firm level, 68 percent of the sample exhibits increasing
returns to scale.
The left panel of Table 5 repeats the production function estimation without implementing the
correction for the unobserved input price variation discussed in subsection 3.2.2. The uncorrected
procedure yields nonsensical estimates of the production function. For example, the output elasticities and returns to scale are sometimes negative, very low or very high. These results are to
be expected given that we estimate a quantity-based production function using deflated input expenditures, i.e., we relate physical output to input expenditures. It is clear that failing to account
for input price variation yields distorted estimates. To understand the source of the distortion,
consider the following concrete example from our data: in 1995, Ashnoor Textile Mills and Delight
Handicrafts Palace sold 71,910 and 67,000,000 carpets, respectively. Ashnoor, however, had about
three times higher input expenditures and three times higher revenues. It is easiest to understand
the implications of this example for the estimates using a Cobb-Douglas specification. A quantity
production function estimation that ignores input price variation would result in very large and
negative output elasticities (more input expenditures result in lower quantity for Ashnoor). In the
more general translog specification, it is impossible to sign this bias because there are three inputs
which interact in complicated ways with each other and input prices, but it is clear that one needs
to correct for input price variation across firms. By introducing the input price control, we are effectively comparing output quantities to input quantities, and the resulting output elasticities then
look reasonable.
The importance of the input price correction is not apparent in the earlier literature, which
traditionally estimates a Cobb-Douglas specification of the form: q + p = x̃β + ω̃. This specification
relates deflated sales to deflated expenditures and implies that ω̃ = ω + p − w(.). That is, the
42

The output elasticities for capital and labor are defined analogous to the materials elasticity reported in Footnote

39.

30

unobserved productivity measure includes both (unobserved) output price p and (unobserved) input
prices w. If one does not control for either output or input price variation (the typical practice in
this literature until recently), there is no apparent problem as the two price biases tend to work
in opposite directions. To obtain some intuition for the combined impact of these biases on the
estimation, suppose that higher input prices were completely passed through to higher output
prices, so that p = w(.). In this case, ω̃ = ω, and a regression of revenues (q + p) on input
expenditures x̃ would deliver unbiased estimates of the coefficients β. De Loecker and Goldberg
(2014) discuss the conditions under which this happens, which turn out to be highly restrictive.43 In
the general case, the output and input biases will not completely offset each other, but they will still
partially neutralize each other as higher input prices will generally be partially passed through to
higher output prices. This will lead to output elasticities that appear plausible without immediately
calling for a correction. In fact, when we estimate a firm-level revenue-based production function
using the standard approach, we obtain production function coefficients that look similar to the
previous literature (see Appendix E). Of course, this does not mean that the two biases exactly
cancel each other, so the final estimates will generally still be biased. Moreover, estimation of
the production function using the revenue-based approach implies that one can only conduct the
analysis at the firm-level. Such firm-level analysis would not allow one to obtain marginal costs and
markups at the product level and exploit product-specific variation in tariffs in order to identify the
effects of the trade reforms.
The right panel of Table 5 presents the median output elasticities from an estimation of the
production function that does not include the sample selection correction described in Section 3.2.3.
The coefficients change slightly when the selection correction is not implemented. The stability of
the coefficient estimates with and without selection correction for the unbalanced panel suggests
that the use of the unbalanced panel of single-product firms (which includes firms that are always
single-product and firms that ultimately transition to a multi-product status) likely alleviates most
of the concerns about the selection bias. This is consistent with the findings in Olley and Pakes
(1996).
The markups are reported in Table 6. The mean and median markups are 2.70 and 1.34,
respectively, but there is considerable variation across sectors and across products and firms within
sectors. Some firms report markups below one for individual products, but multi-product firms
maximize profits across products, so they may lose money on some products while being profitable
on others. To get a better sense of the plausibility of our estimates, we aggregate the productlevel markups to the firm level using the share of sales as weights. The firm-level markups are
below one for only about 8 percent of the sample and the median firm-level markup is 1.60. In
fact, we find a strong positive (and statistically significant) relationship between firm markups and
reported accounting profits, measured as operating profits divided by total sales (results available
upon request). Importantly, for our main results below, we rely on changes in markups over time
by exploiting variation within firm-product pairs rather than variation in levels across firms.
43

See Sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.4 in De Loecker and Goldberg (2014) for a discussion of this issue.

31

The methodology provides measures of markups and marginal costs without a priori assumptions
on the returns to scale. The estimates show that many firms are characterized by increasing returns
to scale, so we expect to observe an inverse relationship between a product’s marginal cost and
quantity produced. Accordingly, another way to assess the plausibility of the measures is to plot
marginal costs against production quantities in Figure 1 (we de-mean each variable by product-year
fixed effects in order to facilitate comparisons across firms). The figure shows indeed that marginal
costs vary inversely with production quantities. The left panel of the figure shows that quantities
and markups are positively related indicating that firms producing more output also enjoy higher
markups (due to their lower marginal costs).
We also examine how markups and marginal costs vary across products within a firm. Our analysis here is guided by the recent literature on multi-product firms. Our correlations are remarkably
consistent with the predictions of this literature, especially with those of Eckel and Neary (2010) and
the multi-product firm extension of Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) developed by Mayer et al. (2014).
A key assumption in these models is that multi-product firms each have a “core competency”. The
core product has the lowest (within a firm) marginal cost. For the other products, marginal costs
rise with a product’s distance from the core competency. Mayer et al. (2014) assume a linear demand system which implies that firms have non-constant markups across products. Furthermore,
firms have their highest markups on their “core” products with markups declining as they move
away from their main product. Figure 2 provides evidence supporting these implications. They plot
the de-meaned markups and marginal costs against the sales share of the product within each firm
(markups and marginal costs are de-meaned by product-year and firm-year fixed effects in order to
make these variables comparable across products within firms). Marginal costs rise as a firm moves
away from its core competency while the markups fall. In other words, the firm’s most profitable
product (excluding any product-specific fixed costs) is its core product. Despite not imposing any
assumptions on the market structure and demand system in our estimation, these correlations are
remarkably consistent with the predictions from the multi-product firm literature.

4.2

Pass-Through

Foreshadowing the results in the next subsection, we also find evidence of imperfect pass-through of
costs on prices because of variable markups. This subsection explains how we estimate pass-through.
Consider the identity that decomposes the (log) price of a firm f producing product j into its
two subcomponents: (log) marginal cost, ln mcf jt , and (log) markup, ln µf jt :
ln Pf jt = ln mcf jt + ln µf jt

(33)

This identity can also be written as:
ln Pf jt = ln µf j + ln mcf jt + (ln µf jt − ln µf j )

(34)

where ln µf j is the (time-invariant) average (log) markup for this particular firm-product pair and
32

(ln µf jt − ln µf j ) is the deviation of the markup from its average. If markups are constant, then
the last term becomes zero. This is the case of complete pass-through: a proportional change in
marginal cost is passed entirely to prices. If markups are variable, then marginal costs are correlated
with the term in parenthesis and pass-through is incomplete. For example, if the price elasticity of
demand is increasing in price, then an increase in marginal cost (which will tend to raise the price)
will lead to an increase in the price elasticity of demand and a decrease in the markup. In this case,
the marginal cost is negatively correlated with the (variable) markup and the pass-through of a
marginal cost change onto price is below one. This correlation between marginal costs and markups
is not an econometric issue since the equation above is an identity. Rather, it is a correlation
dictated by economic theory: any model that implies variable markups will also imply a correlation
between marginal cost and markup and result in incomplete pass-through.
To understand the implications of variable markups and incomplete pass-through in our setting,
first consider the hypothetical case where marginal cost can be measured exactly. Suppose we run
the following pass-through regression:
ln Pf jt = af j + ζ ln mcf jt + εf jt

(35)

where af j is a firm-product fixed effect. In this setup, the error term εf jt has a structural interpretation. It reflects the deviation of the actual markup in period t from the average (i.e., it corresponds
to (ln µf jt − ln µf j )) .
If markups are constant, then we would expect to find that ζ = 1 and εf jt = 0 (i.e., an exact fit).
The firm-product fixed effect af j would accurately measure the constant markup and the coefficient
ζ would measure the pass-through of marginal cost to price which would be complete (ζ = 1). The
deviation of the actual markup from the average, εf jt , would be zero if markups were constant. Of
course, in reality we would never get an exact fit of the regression line. But as long as εf jt captures
random variation in price (due for example to recording errors) that is orthogonal to the marginal
cost, we would estimate complete pass-through.
If markups are variable, then the error term εf jt will be correlated with the marginal cost
ln mcf jt .44 We again emphasize that this correlation is dictated by theory and not by econometrics.
If the price elasticity facing the firm is increasing in price, then a marginal cost increase will lead to
a price increase, which will raise the price elasticity and lower the markup. Hence, εf jt and ln mcf jt
will be negatively correlated and the pass-through coefficient ζ will be below one. This is the case
of incomplete pass-through.
When observing marginal cost, the coefficient ζ reflects markup variability and pass-through.
There would be no need to instrument for marginal costs. In fact, instrumenting marginal costs is
conceptually incorrect because the correlation between marginal costs and the structural error of the
regression (i.e., the markup) is precisely what the coefficient ζ is supposed to capture. However, in
our application (and almost every other empirical study), we only observe an estimate of marginal
44

Variable markups can be generated in many different ways through various combinations of market structure,
firm behavior and demand function. See Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013) for a discussion.

33

cost, ln mc
c f jt = ln mcf jt + σf jt . The pass-through regression becomes
ln Pf jt = af j + ζ ln mc
c f jt + (εf jt − ζσf jt ) = af j + ζ ln mc
c f jt + uf jt

(36)

Measurement error results in a downward bias in the pass-through coefficient ζ leading us to conclude, potentially erroneously, that pass-through is incomplete. We therefore require instruments
to address measurement error in marginal costs. It is important to note that in this setting, instruments must be uncorrelated with the measurement error, σf jt . However, we do not require that
they are uncorrelated with the part of the error term that reflects the deviation in markup, εf jt .
Indeed, such a condition would be inconsistent with the exercise which is precisely to measure the
correlation between marginal cost and markup, that is the correlation between mc
c f jt and εf jt .
We instrument for marginal cost in equation (36) with input tariffs and lagged marginal cost.
Both variables are certainly correlated with marginal cost. The former should be uncorrelated with
the measurement error in our marginal cost estimate, but input tariffs do not vary at the firm level.
The advantage of lagged marginal cost is that it varies at the firm-product-year level. Although
lagged marginal costs contain measurement error, we have no reason to expect this measurement
error to be serially correlated.
Table 7 presents the pass-through results from estimating (36).45 OLS results are reported
in column 1, and the coefficient is 0.337. The second column instruments marginal costs with
both lagged marginal cost and input tariffs. The coefficient becomes 0.305, but is not statistically
different from the OLS estimate. In case one is concerned about first-order serial correlation in
measurement error, the third column uses input tariffs and two-period lagged marginal cost as the
instruments, and the IV estimate is now 0.405 and significant at the 10.1 percent level. Thus,
the results seem robust to the use of alternative instruments and consistently point to low passthrough. This imperfect pass-through means that shocks to marginal costs, for example shocks from
trade liberalization, do not lead to proportional changes in factory-gate prices because of changes
in markups. We examine this markup adjustment in detail in the subsequent section.

4.3

Prices, Markups and Trade Liberalization

We now examine how prices, markups and marginal costs adjusted as India liberalized its economy.
As discussed in Section 2, we restrict the analysis to 1989-1997 since tariff movements after this
period appear correlated with industry characteristics.
We begin by plotting the distribution of raw prices in 1989 and 1997 in Figure 3. Here, we
include only firm-product pairs that are present in both years, and we compare the prices over time
by regressing them on firm-product pair fixed effects plotting the residuals. As before, we remove
outliers in the bottom and top 3rd percentiles. This comparison of the same firm-product pairs
over time exploits the same variation as our regression analysis below. The figure shows that the
distribution of (real) prices did not change much between 1989 and 1997. This might at first be
45

As noted in Section 3.4, we report bootstrap standard errors.

34

a surprising result given nature of India’s economic reforms during this period that were designed
to reduce entry barriers and increase competition in the manufacturing sector. As a first pass, the
figure suggests that prices did not move much despite the reforms.
Of course, the figure includes only firm-product pairs that are present at the beginning and end
of the sample, and summarizes aggregate trends, thereby not controlling for sector-specific factors
that could influence prices beyond the trade reforms. We use the entire sample and control for
macroeconomic trends in the following specification:46
pf jt = λf j + λst + λ1 τitoutput + ηf jt .

(37)

We exploit variation in prices and output tariffs within a firm-product over time through the firmproduct fixed effects (λf j ) and control for macroeconomic fluctuations through sector-year fixed
effects λst . Since the trade policy measure varies at the industry level, we cluster our standard
errors at this level.47 We report the price regression with just year fixed effects in column 1 of Table
8. The coefficient on the output tariff is positive implying that a 10 percentage point decline is
associated with a small–1.36 percent–decline in prices.48 Between 1989 and 1997, output tariffs fall
on average by 62 percentage points; this results in a precisely estimated average price decline of 8.4
percent (=62*0.136). This is a small effect of the trade reform on prices and it is consistent with
the raw distributions plotted in Figure 3. The basic message remains the same if we control more
flexibly for trends with sector-year fixed effects in column 2. The results imply that the average
decline in output tariffs led to a 10.4 (=62*.167) percent relative drop in prices.
These results show that although the trade liberalization led to lower factory-gate prices, the
decline is more modest than we would have expected given the magnitude of the tariff declines.
Since earlier studies (Goldberg et al. (2010a), Topalova and Khandelwal (2011)) have emphasized
the importance of declines in input tariffs in shaping firm performance, we separate the effects of
output tariffs and input tariffs on prices. Output tariff liberalization reflects primarily an increase
in competition, while the input tariff liberalization should provide access to lower cost (and more
variety of) inputs. We run the analog of the regression in (37), but separately include input and
output tariffs:
46

One could try to capture the net impact of tariff reforms using the effective rate of protection (ERP) measure
proposed by Corden (1966). However, this measure is derived in a setting with perfect competition and infinite exportdemand and import-supply elasticities which imply perfect pass-through. As we show below, these assumptions are
not satisfied in our setting, so that the concept of the “effective rate of protection” is not well defined in our case. The
ERP has two further limitations in our context. The first is that the ERP combines the decline in output and input
tariffs which blurs the two thought experiments of reducing the marginal cost and changing the residual demand
facing firms. The second limitation is that a specification with ERP on the right-hand side, by construction, restricts
the marginal effect of a unit decline in output tariff on the outcome of interest to be the same as the marginal effect
of a unit increase in an input tariff. The specifications we employ below are more flexible. We nevertheless report
results using the ERP in Appendix Table A2. The results suggest that prices decline with a decline in ERP, but we
do not find statistically significant effects on marginal costs and markups. As noted above, it is not clear how to
interpret these results given that the ERP is conceptually wrong in the our context.
47
Recall from Section 2 that tariffs vary at a 4-digit level, while sector is defined as a 2-digit industry.
48
Our result is consistent with Topalova (2010) who finds that a 10 percentage point decline in output tariffs results
in a 0.96 percent decline in wholesale prices in India during this period.

35

pf jt = λf j + λst + λ1 τitoutput + λ2 τitinput + ηf jt .

(38)

The results are shown in column 1 of Table 9.49 There are two interesting findings that are important
for understanding how trade affects prices in this liberalization episode. First, there is a positive
and statistically significant coefficient on output tariffs. This result is consistent with the common
intuition that increases in competitive pressures through lower output tariffs will lead to price
declines. The effect is traditionally attributed to reductions in markups and/or reductions in Xinefficiencies within the firm. The point estimates imply that a 10 percentage point decline in
output tariffs results in a 1.56 percent decline in prices. On the other hand, the coefficient on
input tariffs is noisy. Holding input tariffs fixed and reducing output tariffs, we would observe a
precisely estimated decline in prices. Overall, average output tariffs and input tariffs fall by 62
and 24 percentage points, respectively, and using the point estimates in column 1, this implies that
prices fall on average by 18.1 percent (a decline that is statistically significant).
We use the estimates of markups and costs to examine the mechanisms behind these moderate
changes in factory-gate prices. We begin by plotting the distribution of markups and costs in
Figure 4. Like Figure 3, this figure considers only firm-product pairs that appear in both 1989
and 1997. The figure indicates that between 1989 and 1997, the marginal cost distribution shifted
left indicating an efficiency gain. However, this marginal cost decline is offset by a corresponding
rightward shift in the markup distribution. Since (log) marginal costs and (log) markups exactly sum
to (log) prices, the net effect results in little changes to prices. Hence, the raw data point towards
imperfect pass-through of cost declines to prices. As before, these patterns are only suggestive and
presented only for illustrative purposes, given that the figures do not condition on the policy and
other changes that took place over this period.
We re-run specification (38) using marginal costs and markups as the dependent variables to
formally analyze these relationships. Since prices decompose exactly to the sum of marginal costs
and markups, the coefficients in columns 2 and 3 sum to their respective coefficients in column 1 in
Table 9. We first focus on the marginal cost regressions reported in column 2. The coefficient on
output tariffs is statistically insignificant, suggesting that marginal costs are insensitive to output
tariff liberalization. However, the coefficient on input tariffs is both positive and large in magnitude.
This is strong evidence that improved access to cheaper and more variety of imported inputs results
in large cost declines. The final row of Table 9 reports the average effect on marginal costs using
the average declines in input and output tariffs. On average, marginal costs fell 30.7 percent.50
49
The regressions exclude outliers in the top and bottom 3rd percent of the markup distribution. We trim to ensure
that the results are not driven by outliers. Nevertheless, the results are robust (e.g., magnitudes change slightly but
statistical significance is unaffected) to alternative trims (e..g, the top and bottom 1st) and to not trimming at all
(results are available upon request).
50
This decline is sizable, but consistent with earlier work documenting the effects of input tariffs on input prices and
input varieties, with the latter further lowering the exact price index for intermediate inputs in India. Specifically,
calculations from Goldberg et al. (2010a) suggest that prices of imported intermediaries fell by 21 percent as a result
of the tariff reductions, while new varieties of intermediate inputs increased by 8.9 percent. These estimates cannot
be converted to estimates of marginal cost declines without further structure, but they suggest large effects of tariff
reductions on firms’ costs.

36

This magnitude of the marginal costs decline is sizable and would translate to larger prices
declines if markups were constant. However, Figure 4 suggests that markups rose during this period,
and in column 3 of Table 9, we directly examine how input and output tariffs affected markups. The
coefficient on input tariffs is large and negative implying that input tariff liberalization resulted in
higher markups. The results indicate that firms offset the beneficial cost reductions from improved
access to imported inputs by raising markups. The overall effect, taking into account the average
declines in input and output tariffs between 1989 and 1997, is that markups, on average, increased
by 12.6 percent. This increase offsets almost half of the average decline in marginal costs, and as a
result, the overall effect of the trade reform on prices is moderated.51
Although tempting, it is misleading to draw conclusions about the pro-competitive effects of the
trade reform from the markup regressions in column 3 of Table 9. The reason is that one needs to
control for the impacts of the output tariff liberalization on marginal costs in order to isolate the procompetitive effects. For example, if output tariffs affect costs through changes in X-inefficiencies,
firms may adjust markups in response to these cost changes. The simultaneous effects that tariffs
have on both costs and markups make it difficult to identify pro-competitive effects of the reform
based on the specification in column 3.
To isolate the pro-competitive effects, we need to control for simultaneous shocks to marginal
costs. We do this by re-running the markup regression while controlling flexibly for marginal costs.
Conditioning on marginal costs, the output tariff coefficient isolates the direct pro-competitive
effect of the trade liberalization on markups. We report the results in Table 10.52 The coefficient
on output tariffs in column 1 is positive and significant; this provides direct evidence that output
tariff liberalization exerted pro-competitive pressure on markups. The way to interpret the results
in column 1 is to consider the markups of two products in different industries. Conditional on
any (potentially differential) impact of the trade reforms on their respective costs, the product
in the industry that experiences a 10 percentage point larger decline in output tariffs will have a
1.43 percent relative decline in markups.53 Column 2 instruments marginal costs to account for
measurement error (see discussion in Section 4.2) with input tariffs and a second-order polynomial
in lagged marginal costs, and the coefficient increases slightly and remains statistically significant.
In sum, our analysis demonstrates that although India’s trade reform led to large cost reductions,
firms responded by raising markups. Once we control for these cost effects, output tariff reductions
do have pro-competitive effects by putting downward pressure on markups.
The pro-competitive effects might differ across products. For example, output tariffs may exert
more pressure on products with high markups prior to the reform. We explore this heterogeneity
by creating a time-invariant indicator for firm-product pairs in the top decile of their industry’s
51

These results are robust to controlling India’s delicensing policy reform; see Appendix Table A1.
To control for marginal costs as flexibly as possible, we use a second-order polynomial for marginal costs and
suppress these coefficients in Table 10. We find very similar results if we simply include marginal costs as the only
control (results are available upon request).
53
In unreported results, we include input tariffs in the regression. As discussed earlier, input tariffs should affect
markups only through the imperfect transmission of their impact on costs through improved access to imported
inputs. Once we control for marginal costs, input tariffs should have no effect on markups and that is what we find.
52

37

markup distribution in the first year that a product-pair is observed in the data. We interact output
tariffs with this indicator to allow for differential effects of output tariffs on markups for these high
markup products. The results are reported in column 3 of Table 10. The table shows a very strong
effect of output tariffs on these high markup products: a 10 percentage point decline in output
tariffs leads to a 1.29 percent fall in markups for products initially below the 90th percentile in the
markup distribution. For high markup products, the same policy reform results in an additional
3.14 percent decline in markups. In short, once we control for the incomplete pass-through of
costs, output tariffs reduce markups and these reductions are substantially more pronounced on
products with initially high markups. If we instrument marginal costs, the coefficient on output
tariffs increases even further, while the coefficient on the interaction remains positive, but is not
statistically significant.

4.4

Interpretation of Results: Variable Markups and Incomplete Pass-through

Our results call for a nuanced evaluation of the effects of the Indian trade liberalization on markups.
While we do find evidence that the tariff reductions have pro-competitive effects, especially at the
right tail of the markup distribution, our results suggest that the most significant effect of the
reforms is to reduce costs to producers. Due to variable markups, cost reductions are not passed
through completely to consumers.
This last finding raises the question of why prices do not fully respond to cost reductions. Our
results here relate to a voluminous literature on price rigidities and incomplete pass-through in
macroeconomics and international macroeconomics. While this literature has focused primarily
on exchange rate pass-through, its findings are equally relevant to tariff reductions given that
exchange rate and tariff changes have similar effects on firm profits. Structural approaches within
this literature explain incomplete pass-through through a combination of demand side and market
structure assumptions. As discussed in Section 4.2, there is a large class of potential models (i.e.,
combinations of demand side and market structure assumptions) that can generate this phenomenon.
Incomplete pass-through requires the demand elasticity perceived by the firm to be rising in price,
so any model that delivers a demand elasticity increasing in price will also deliver incomplete passthrough. For example, this pattern can be generated in a setting with a linear consumer demand
and monopolistic competition as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). Alternatively, one could assume
CES preferences and Cournot (e.g., Atkeson and Burstein (2008)), or nested logit and Bertrand
(e.g., Goldberg (1995) or Goldberg and Verboven (2005)); or random coefficients and Bertrand
(e.g., Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013) or Nakamura and Zerom (2010)). Which assumptions are
appropriate depends on the industry under investigation. Against this background, the advantage
of our approach is precisely the fact that it establishes the existence of incomplete pass-through
and explores its implications for trade policy without committing to a particular structure. Such
structure may be defensible in the context of Industrial Organization case studies which rely on
a careful study of the industry under consideration and its institutional setting to inform their
assumptions. But it is less defensible in the context of an analysis of the entire Indian manufacturing
38

sector that includes many heterogeneous industries, each likely characterized by different demand
and market conditions. Our study demonstrates that variable markups generate incomplete cost
pass-through in many different sectors, but it cannot answer the question of which fundamentals
in each case generate variable markups. To answer this last question, one would need to impose
more structure along the lines of the aforementioned studies, yet doing so would undermine the
fundamental rationale and advantage of our approach.
Our results suggest that the trade reforms benefited producers relatively more than consumers, at
least in the short run. However, this does not necessarily imply that the reform lowered consumer
welfare. There are two channels through which consumers may have benefited from the trade
reforms, despite the fact that prices did not decrease significantly. First, it is possible that the
quality of existing products improved. The finding that prices did not decline in full proportion to
the decline in trade barriers is consistent with this possibility. Note however that quality upgrading
is costly. In the absence of changes in input prices and productivity due to the trade liberalization,
we would expect quality upgrading to be associated with an increase in marginal costs, while our
study documents a decrease in marginal costs. However, it is possible that in the absence of
quality upgrading, marginal costs would have fallen even further. Our results in Table 9 capture
the composite effect of all these factors (lower input prices, productivity increases and potential
quality changes) on marginal costs. Moreover, the estimates are net of trends, captured by sectoryear fixed effects, so we cannot rule out absolute increases in quality. Similarly, the increase in
markups is consistent with, but cannot be attributed exclusively to quality upgrading. Without
variable markups, a marginal cost change caused by quality changes would have been reflected
in proportional changes to prices. However, Table 7 shows that the pass-through of marginal cost
changes on prices is incomplete; this is direct evidence that markups changed conditional on marginal
cost changes. A model with only quality-upgrading (and no incomplete pass-through) would not
generate such a finding. In general, our results are consistent with quality upgrading in response to
the trade reform, but cannot be explained by quality upgrading alone.
The second channel through which trade liberalization may have benefited consumers is through
long-term dynamic gains. Though such gains are difficult to pin down empirically, they are potentially important. There is an active literature studying the relationship between competition, firm
profitability and innovation (e.g., see Aghion et al. (2005)). In Goldberg et al. (2010a), we show
that firms introduced many new products–accounting for about a quarter of output growth–during
this period. If the cost reductions (and associated markup increases) induced by the trade reform
spurred this product growth, the long-run benefits to consumers are potentially substantially larger.
We also observe a positive correlation between changes in firm markups and product introductions
(results available upon request).54 This suggests that firms used the input tariff reductions and associated profit increases to finance the development of new products, implying potential long-term
gains to consumers. A complete analysis of this mechanism and the impact on welfare lies beyond
54

These findings are consistent with Peters (2012) who develops a model with imperfect competition that generates
heterogeneous markups which determine innovation incentives.

39

the scope of this current paper.

5

Conclusion

This paper examines the adjustment of prices, markups and marginal costs in response to trade
liberalization. We take advantage of detailed price and quantity information to estimate markups
from quantity-based production functions. Our approach does not require any assumptions on the
market structure or demand curves that firms face. This feature of our approach is important in
our context since we want to analyze how markups adjust to trade reforms without imposing ex
ante restrictions on their behavior. An added advantage of our approach is that since we observe
firm-level prices in the data, we can directly compute firms’ marginal costs once we have estimates
of the markups.
Estimating quantity-based production functions for a broad range of differentiated products
introduces new methodological issues that we must confront. We propose an identification strategy
based on estimating production functions on single-product firms. The advantage of this approach
is that we do not need to take a stand on how inputs are allocated across products within multiproduct firms. We also demonstrate how to correct for a bias that arises when researchers do
not observe input price variation across firms, an issue that becomes particularly important when
estimating quantity-based production functions.
The large variation in markups suggests that trade models that assume constant markups may
be missing an important channel when quantifying the gains from trade. Furthermore, our results
highlight the importance of analyzing the effects of both output and input tariff liberalization. We
observe large declines in marginal costs, particularly due to input tariff liberalization. However,
prices do not fall by as much. This imperfect pass-through occurs because firms offset the cost
declines by raising markups. Conditional on marginal costs, we find pro-competitive effects of output
tariffs on markups. Our analysis is based on data representative of larger firms, so our results are
representative of these larger firms. Our results suggest that trade liberalization can have large, yet
nuanced effects, on marginal costs and markups. Understanding the welfare consequences of these
results using models with variable markups is an important topic for future research.
Our results have broader implications for thinking about the trade and productivity across
firms in developing countries. The methodology produces quantity-based productivity measures
that can be compared with revenue-based productivity measures. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) discuss
how these measures can inform us about distortions and the magnitude of misallocation within an
economy. Importantly, our methodology can deliver quantity-based productivity measures purged
of substantial variation in markups across firms, which potentially improves upon our understanding
of the role of misallocation in generating productivity dispersion. We leave the analysis of the role
of misallocation on the distribution of these performance measures for future research.

References
40

Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2006). Structural identification of production functions.
Mimeo, UCLA.
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, and P. Howitt (2005). Competition and Innovation:
An Inverted-U Relationship. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2), 701–728.
Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and productivity:
Evidence from Indonesia. American Economic Review 97 (5), 1611–1638.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2012).
competitive effects of trade. mimeo, Yale University.

The elusive pro-

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2012). New trade models, same old gains?
American Economic Review 102 (1), 94–130.
Arkolakis, C. and M.-A. Muendler (2010). The extensive margin of exporting products: A firm-level
analysis. NBER Working Paper 16641 .
Atkeson, A. and A. Burstein (2008). Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International Relative
Prices. American Economic Review 98 (5), 1998–2031.
Atkin, D. (2013). Trade, Tastes, and Nutrition in India. American Economic Review 103 (5),
1629–63.
Atkin, D. and D. Donaldson (2014). Who is getting globalized? the size and implications of
intranational trade costs. Mimeo, MIT .
Balakrishnan, P., K. Pushpangadan, and M. S. Babu (2000). Trade liberalisation and productivity growth in manufacturing: Evidence from firm-level panel data. Economic and Political
Weekly 35 (41), 3679–3682.
Baumol, W. J., J. C. Panzar, and R. D. Willig (1983). Contestable markets: An uprising in the
theory of industry structure: Reply. American Economic Review 73 (3), 491–96.
Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003). Plants and productivity in international trade. American Economic Review 93 (4), 1268–1290.
Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010). Multiple-product firms and product
switching. American Economic Review 100 (1), 70–97.
Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2011). Multi-product firms and trade liberalization.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3), 1271–1318.
Berry, S. (1994). Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. RAND Journal of
Economics 25 (2), 242–262.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica 63 (4), 841–90.
Besley, T. and R. Burgess (2004). Can labor regulation hinder economic performance? evidence
from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1), 91–134.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices across firms
and countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4), 1351–1408.
41

Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2010). Why do management practices differ across firms and
countries? Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (1), 203–24.
Corden, W. M. (1966). The structure of a tariff system and the effective protective rate. Journal
of Political Economy 74 (3), 221–237.
De Loecker, J. (2011). Product differentiation, multiproduct firms, and estimating the impact of
trade liberalization on productivity. Econometrica 79 (5), 1407–1451.
De Loecker, J. (2013). Detecting learning by exporting. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5 (3), 1–21.
De Loecker, J. and P. K. Goldberg (2014). Firm performance in a global market. Annual Review
of Economics 6 (1).
De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski (2012). Markups and firm-level export status. American Economic
Review 102 (6), 2437–2471.
Debroy, B. and A. Santhanam (1993). Matching trade codes with industrial codes. Foreign Trade
Bulletin 24 (1), 5–27.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica 70 (5), 1741–1779.
Eckel, C. and J. P. Neary (2010). Multi-product firms and flexible manufacturing in the global
economy. Review of Economic Studies 77 (1), 188–217.
Edmonds, C., V. Midrigan, and Y. Xu (2011). Competition, markups and the gains from international trade. Mimeo, Duke University.
Feenstra, R. C. and D. Weinstein (2010). Globalization, markups, and the U.S. price level. NBER
Working Paper 15749 .
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008). Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency:
Selection on productivity or profitability? American Economic Review 98 (1), 394–425.
Freund, C. and M. D. Pierola (2011). Export superstars. Mimeo, The World Bank .
Goldberg, P. K. (1995). Product differentiation and oligopoly in international markets: The case of
the u.s. automobile industry. Econometrica 63 (4), 891–951.
Goldberg, P. K. and R. Hellerstein (2013). A Structural Approach to Identifying the Sources of
Local Currency Price Stability. Review of Economic Studies 80 (1), 175–210.
Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2009). Trade liberalization and
new imported inputs. American Economic Review 99 (2), 494–500.
Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010a). Imported intermediate inputs and domestic product growth: Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125 (4), 1727–1767.
Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010b). Multiproduct firms and
product turnover in the developing world: Evidence from India. The Review of Economics and
Statistics 92 (4), 1042–1049.

42

Goldberg, P. K. and F. Verboven (2005). Market integration and convergence to the Law of One
Price: evidence from the European car market. Journal of International Economics 65 (1), 49–73.
Goyal, S. (1996). Political economy of India’s economic reforms. Institute for Studies in Industrial
Development Working Paper .
Hall, R. E. (1986). Market structure and macroeconomic fluctuations. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 17 (2), 285–338.
Hall, R. E. (1988). The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry. Journal of
Political Economy 96 (5), 921–47.
Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl (2011). Imports and productivity. CEPR Discussion Paper
5139 .
Harrison, A. E. (1994). Productivity, imperfect competition and trade reform: Theory and evidence.
Journal of International Economics 36 (1-2), 53–73.
Hasan, R., D. Mitra, and K. Ramaswamy (2007). Trade reforms, labor regulations, and labordemand elasticities: Empirical evidence from India. The Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (3), 466–481.
Hellerstein, R. (2008, September). Who bears the cost of a change in the exchange rate? Passthrough accounting for the case of beer. Journal of International Economics 76 (1), 14–32.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1403–1448.
Katayama, H., S. Lu, and J. R. Tybout (2009). Firm-level productivity studies: Illusions and a
solution. International Journal of Industrial Organization 27 (3), 403–413.
Khandelwal, A. K. (2010). The long and short (of) quality ladders. Review of Economic Studies 77 (4), 1450–1476.
Klette, T. J. and Z. Griliches (1996). The inconsistency of common scale estimators when output
prices are unobserved and endogenous. Journal of Applied Econometrics 11 (4), 343–61.
Kremer, M. (1993). The o-ring theory of economic development. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3), 551–75.
Krugman, P. (1980). Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of trade. American
Economic Review 70 (5), 950–59.
Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen (2011). Prices, plant size, and product quality. The Review of
Economic Studies 79, 307–339.
Levinsohn, J. (1993). Testing the imports-as-market-discipline hypothesis. Journal of International
Economics 35 (1-2), 1–22.
Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin (2003). Estimating production functions using inputs to control for
unobservables. Review of Economic Studies 70 (2), 317–341.
Mayer, T., M. J. Melitz, and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2014). Market size, competition, and the product
mix of exporters. American Economic Review 104 (2), 495–536.
43

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Melitz, M. J. and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2008). Market size, trade, and productivity. Review of
Economic Studies 75 (1), 295–316.
Nakamura, E. and D. Zerom (2010). Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through. Review of Economic
Studies 77 (3), 1192–1230.
Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment
industry. Econometrica 64 (6), 1263–1297.
Panagariya, A. (2008). India: The Emerging Giant. OUP Catalogue. Oxford University Press.
Panzar, J. C. (1989, 00). Technological determinants of firm and industry structure. In
R. Schmalensee and R. Willig (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 1 of Handbook
of Industrial Organization, Chapter 1, pp. 3–59. Elsevier.
Pavcnik, N. (2002). Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvement: Evidence from
Chilean plants. Review of Economic Studies 69 (1), 245–76.
Peters, M. (2012). Heterogeneous mark-ups and endogenous misallocation. Mimeo, Massachussets
Institute of Technology.
Sivadasan, J. (2009). Barriers to competition and productivity: Evidence from India. The B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 9 (1), 42.
Topalova, P. (2010). Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evidence on
poverty from India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (4), 1–41.
Topalova, P. and A. K. Khandelwal (2011). Trade liberalization and firm productivity: The case of
India. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3), 995–1009.
Verhoogen, E. A. (2008). Trade, quality upgrading, and wage inequality in the Mexican manufacturing sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 489–530.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2009, September). On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy
variables to control for unobservables. Economics Letters 104 (3), 112–114.

44

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Share	  of	  Sample	  
Output
(1)
9%
10%
3%
26%
5%
7%
16%
2%
7%
5%
9%
100%

Sector
15	  Food	  products	  and	  beverages
17	  Textiles,	  Apparel
21	  Paper	  and	  paper	  products
24	  Chemicals
25	  Rubber	  and	  Plastic
26	  Non-­‐metallic	  mineral	  products
27	  Basic	  metals
28	  Fabricated	  metal	  products
29	  Machinery	  and	  equipment
31	  Electrical	  machinery,	  communications
34	  Motor	  vehicles,	  trailers
Total

All	  Firms
(2)
302
303
77
434
139
110
212
74
160
89
71
1,970

Single-­‐Product	  
Firms
(3)
135
161
56
194
85
74
115
48
80
52
47
1,047

Products
(4)
135
78
32
483
83
60
101
45
186
102
95
1,400

Notes: Table reports summary statistics for the average year in the sample. The first column reports the share of output by sector in the
average year. Columns 2 and 3 report the number of firms and number of single-­‐product firms manufacturing products in the average
year.	  Column	  4	  reports	  the	  number	  of	  products	  by	  sector.

Table 2: Example of Sector, Industry and Product Classifications
NIC	  Code
27

Examples	  of	  Industries,	  Sectors	  and	  Products
Description
Basic	  Metal	  Industries	  (Sector	  s)
Manufacture	  of	  Basic	  Iron	  &	  Steel	  (Industry	  i)
Pig	  iron
Sponge	  iron
Ferro	  alloys
Welded	  steel	  tubular	  poles
Steel	  tubular	  structural	  poles
Tube	  &	  pipe	  fittings
Wires	  &	  ropes	  of	  iron	  &	  steel
Stranded	  wire

130106030000
130106030100
130106030101
130106030102
130106030103
130106030104
130106030199

Casting	  of	  iron	  and	  steel	  (Industry	  i)
Castings	  &	  forgings
Castings
Steel	  castings
Cast	  iron	  castings
Maleable	  iron	  castings
S.G.	  iron	  castings
Castings,	  nec

2731

Products	  (j)

130101010000
130101020000
130101030000
130106040800
130106040900
130106050000
130106100000
130106100300

Products	  (j)

2710

Notes: This table is replicated from Goldberg et al. (2010b). For NIC 2710, there are a total of
111 products, but only a subset are listed in the table. For NIC 2731, all products are listed in
the	  table.	  

45

Table 3: Average Output Elasticities, by Sector

Sector
15	  Food	  products	  and	  beverages

Observations	  in	  
Production	  Function	  
Estimation
(1)
795

17	  Textiles,	  Apparel

1,581

21	  Paper	  and	  paper	  products

470

24	  Chemicals

1,554

25	  Rubber	  and	  Plastic

705

26	  Non-­‐metallic	  mineral	  products

633

27	  Basic	  metals

949

28	  Fabricated	  metal	  products

393

29	  Machinery	  and	  equipment

702

31	  Electrical	  machinery	  &	  communications

761

34	  Motor	  vehicles,	  trailers

386

Labor
(2)
0.13
[0.17]
0.11
[0.02]
0.19
[0.12]
0.17
[0.08]
0.15
[0.39]
0.16
[0.26]
0.14
[0.09]
0.18
[0.04]
0.20
[0.08]
0.09
[0.11]
0.25
[0.26]

Materials
(3)
0.71
[0.22]
0.82
[0.04]
0.78
[0.10]
0.79
[0.07]
0.69
[0.29]
0.67
[0.12]
0.77
[0.11]
0.75
[0.08]
0.76
[0.05]
0.78
[0.11]
0.63
[0.20]

Capital
(4)
0.15
[0.14]
0.08
[0.08]
0.03
[0.05]
0.08
[0.06]
-­‐0.02
[0.35]
-­‐0.04
[0.40]
0.01
[0.06]
0.03
[0.17]
0.18
[0.05]
-­‐0.06
[0.22]
0.11
[0.20]

Returns	  to	  
Scale
(5)
0.99
[0.28]
1.01
[0.06]
1.00
[0.06]
1.03
[0.08]
0.82
[0.89]
0.79
[0.36]
0.91
[0.18]
0.96
[0.17]
1.13
[0.14]
0.81
[0.28]
1.00
[0.25]

Notes: Table reports the output elasticities from the production function. The first column reports the number of observations for each
production function estimation. Columns 2-­‐4 report the average estimated output elasticity with respect to each factor of production for
the translog production function for all firms. Standard deviations (not standard errors) of the output elasticities are reported in brackets.
The	  5th	  column	  reports	  the	  average	  returns	  to	  scale,	  which	  is	  the	  sum	  of	  the	  preceding	  three	  columns.

Table 4: Median Output Elasticities, by Sector
Labor
(1)
0.12
0.11
0.18
0.16
0.21
0.18
0.14
0.17
0.17
0.10
0.23

Sector
15	  Food	  products	  and	  beverages
17	  Textiles,	  Apparel
21	  Paper	  and	  paper	  products
24	  Chemicals
25	  Rubber	  and	  Plastic
26	  Non-­‐metallic	  mineral	  products
27	  Basic	  metals
28	  Fabricated	  metal	  products
29	  Machinery	  and	  equipment
31	  Electrical	  machinery	  &	  communications
34	  Motor	  vehicles,	  trailers

Materials
(2)
0.75
0.82
0.79
0.79
0.75
0.69
0.78
0.75
0.75
0.80
0.64

Capital
(3)
0.20
0.09
0.03
0.06
0.04
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.16
0.01
0.10

Returns	  to	  
Scale
(4)
1.09
1.02
0.98
1.02
1.03
0.88
0.96
0.94
1.08
0.91
0.97

Notes: Table reports the median output elasticities from the production function. Columns 2-­‐4 report the
median estimated output elasticity with respect to each factor of production for the translog production
function	  for	  all	  firms.	  The	  5th	  column	  reports	  the	  median	  returns	  to	  scale.

46

Table 5: Output Elasticities, Input Price Variation and Sample Selection

Sector
15	  Food	  products	  and	  beverages
17	  Textiles,	  Apparel
21	  Paper	  and	  paper	  products
24	  Chemicals
25	  Rubber	  and	  Plastic
26	  Non-­‐metallic	  mineral	  products
27	  Basic	  metal
28	  Fabricated	  metal	  products
29	  Machinery	  and	  equipment
31	  Electrical	  machinery,	  communications
34	  Motor	  vehicles,	  trailers

Estimates	  without	  Correcting	  for	  Input	  Price	  
Variation
Returns	  to	  
Labor
Materials
Capital
Scale
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.03
0.75
0.82
1.78
-­‐0.07
0.70
-­‐0.07
0.52
-­‐0.13
0.23
-­‐0.19
-­‐0.23
0.38
0.69
-­‐0.72
0.26
-­‐0.10
0.30
-­‐0.15
0.21
0.08
0.64
0.81
1.50
-­‐0.18
1.11
-­‐0.33
0.69
-­‐1.17
-­‐0.28
1.60
0.28
-­‐0.72
1.18
-­‐0.50
-­‐0.10
-­‐1.59
0.57
-­‐0.13
-­‐0.47
-­‐0.23
-­‐0.39
1.23
0.44

Estimates	  without	  Correcting	  for	  Sample	  
Selection
Returns	  to	  
Labor
Materials
Capital
Scale
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.22
0.63
0.14
1.03
0.11
0.83
0.09
1.03
0.17
0.77
0.03
0.98
0.16
0.79
0.04
0.99
0.17
0.75
-­‐0.05
0.94
0.12
0.71
0.11
0.93
0.12
0.80
0.02
0.94
0.15
0.74
0.04
0.95
0.16
0.76
0.15
1.06
0.10
0.84
0.02
0.95
0.20
0.70
0.04
0.94

Notes: The left table reports the median output elasticities from production function estimations that do not account for input price variation. The
right panel reports the median output elasticities from production function estimations that do not account for sample selection (transition from
single-­‐product	  to	  multi-­‐product	  firms).

Table 6: Markups, by Sector
Markups

Sector
15	  Food	  products	  and	  beverages
17	  Textiles,	  Apparel
21	  Paper	  and	  paper	  products
24	  Chemicals
25	  Rubber	  and	  Plastic
26	  Non-­‐metallic	  mineral	  products
27	  Basic	  metals
28	  Fabricated	  metal	  products
29	  Machinery	  and	  equipment
31	  Electrical	  machinery,	  communications
34	  Motor	  vehicles,	  trailers
Average	  

Mean
1.78
1.57
1.22
2.25
4.52
4.57
2.54
3.70
2.48
5.66
4.64
2.70

Median
1.15
1.33
1.21
1.36
1.37
2.27
1.20
1.36
1.34
1.43
1.39
1.34

Notes: Table displays the mean and median markup by sector for the sample
1989-­‐2003. The table trims observations with markups that are above and below
the	  3rd	  and	  97th	  percentiles	  within	  each	  sector.	  

47

Table 7: Pass-Through of Costs to Prices

(1)
Log	  Marginal	  Costfjt

0.337 ***
0.041 	  	  	  

Log	  Pricefjt
(2)

(3)

0.305 ***
0.084 	  	  	  

0.406 †
0.247

Observations
21,246
16,012
12,334
Within	  R-­‐squared
0.27
0.19
0.09
Firm-­‐Product	  FEs
yes
yes
yes
Instruments
-­‐
yes
yes
First-­‐Stage	  F-­‐test
-­‐
98
5
Notes: The dependent variable is (log) price. Column 1 is an OLS regression on log marginal
costs. Column 2 instruments marginal costs with input tariffs and lag marginal costs. Column 3
instruments marginal costs with input tariffs and two-­‐period lag marginal costs. The
regressions exclude outliers in the top and bottom 3rd percent of the markup distribution. All
regressions include firm-­‐product fixed effects. The regressions use data from 1989-­‐1997. The
standard errors are bootstrapped and are clustered at the firm level. Significance: † 10.1
percent,	  *	  10	  percent,	  **	  5	  percent,	  ***	  1	  percent.

Table 8: Prices and Output Tariffs, Annual Regressions
Log	  Pricesfjt
(1)
(2)
Output	  Tariffit
0.136 **	  
0.167
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
0.056 	  	  	  
0.054
Within	  R-­‐squared
0.00 	  	  	  
0.02
Observations
21,246 	  	  	  
21,246
Firm-­‐Product	  FEs	  
yes
yes
Year	  FEs
yes
no
Sector-­‐Year	  FEs
no
yes
-­‐8.4 **
3.4

Overall	  Impact	  of	  Trade	  Liberalization

***
	  	  	  
	  	  	  
	  	  	  

-­‐10.4 ***
3.3

Notes: The dependent variable is a firm-­‐product's (log) price. Column 1 includes year fixed
effects and Column 2 includes sector-­‐year fixed effects. The regressions exclude outliers in
the top and bottom 3rd percent of the markup distribution. All regressions include firm-­‐
product fixed effects and use data from 1989-­‐1997. Standard errors are clustered at the
industry level. The final row uses the average 62% decline in output tariffs from 1989-­‐
1997 to compute the mean and standard error of the impact of trade liberalization on
prices. That is, for each column the mean impact is equal to the -­‐0.62*100*{coefficient on
output	  tariffs}.	  Significance:	  *	  10	  percent,	  **	  5	  percent,	  ***	  1	  percent.	  

48

Output	  Tariffit
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

Table 9: Prices, Costs and Markups and Tariffs
Log	  Pricesfjt
Log	  Marginal	  Costfjt
(1)
(2)
0.156 ***
0.047
0.059 	  	  	  
0.084 	  	  	  

Input	  Tariffit

0.352
0.302
0.02
21,246
yes
yes
-­‐18.1
7.4

Within	  R-­‐squared
Observations
Firm-­‐Product	  FEs
Sector-­‐Year	  FEs
Overall	  Impact	  of	  Trade	  Liberalization

1.160
0.557
0.01
21,246
yes
yes
-­‐30.7
13.4

	  	  	  
	  	  	  
	  	  	  

**

**

	  	  	  
	  	  	  
	  	  	  

**

Log	  Markupfjt
(3)
0.109
0.076
-­‐0.807
0.510
0.01
21,246
yes
yes
12.6
11.9

‡

	  	  	  
	  	  	  
	  	  	  

Notes: The dependent variable is noted in the columns. The sum of the coefficients from the markup and
marginal costs regression equals their respective coefficient in the price regression. The regressions exclude
outliers in the top and bottom 3rd percent of the markup distribution, and include firm-­‐product fixed effects and
sector-­‐year fixed effects. The final row uses the average 62% and 24% declines in output and input tariffs from
1989-­‐1997, respectively, to compute the mean and standard error of the impact of trade liberalization on each
performance measure. That is, for each column the mean impact is equal to the -­‐0.62*100*{coefficient on
output tariff} + -­‐0.24*100*{coefficient on input tariff}. The regressions use data from 1989-­‐1997. The table
reports the bootstrapped standard errors that are clustered at the industry level. Significance: ‡ 11.3 percent, *
10	  percent,	  **	  5	  percent,	  ***	  1	  percent.

Table 10: Pro-Competitive Effects of Output Tariffs
Log	  Markupfjt
(2)

(1)
Output	  Tariffit
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Output	  Tariffit	  	  x	  Topfp

0.143 ***
0.050 	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  	  	  

0.150 **
0.062 	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

(4)

0.129 **
0.052 	  	  	  

0.149 **
0.062 	  	  	  

0.314 **
0.028
0.134
0.150
	  	  	  
	  	  	  
	  	  	  
	  	  	  
Within	  R-­‐squared
0.59 	  	  	  
0.65 	  	  	  
0.59 	  	  	  
0.65 	  	  	  
Observations
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  21,246
	  
	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  16,012
	  
	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  21,246
	  
	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  16,012
	  
	  	  	  
2nd-­‐Order	  Marginal	  Cost	  Polynomial
yes
yes
yes
yes
Firm-­‐Product	  FEs
yes
	  	  	  
yes 	  	  	  
yes
yes
Sector-­‐Year	  FEs
yes
	  	  	  
yes 	  	  	  
yes
yes
Instruments
no
yes
no
yes
First-­‐stage	  F-­‐test
-­‐
8.6
-­‐
8.6
Notes: The dependent variable is (log) markup. All regressions include firm-­‐product fixed effects, sector-­‐year fixed effects and
a second-­‐order polynomial of marginal costs (these coefficients are suppressed and available upon request). Columns 2 and 4
instrument the second-­‐order polynomial of marginal costs with second-­‐order polynomial of lag marginal costs and input
tariffs. Columns 3 interacts output tariffs and the second-­‐order marginal cost polynomial with an indicator if a firm-­‐product
observation was in the top 10 percent of its sector's markup distribution when it first appears in the sample. The regressions
exclude outliers in the top and bottom 3rd percent of the markup distribution. The table reports the bootstrapped standard
errors	  that	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  industry	  level.	  Significance:	  *	  10	  percent,	  **	  5	  percent,	  ***	  1	  percent.	  

49

	  	  	  

(3)

Figure 1: Marginal Costs and Quantities
Marginal Costs and Quantity

−4

−5

−2

Log Markups
0

Log Marginal Costs
0

2

5

4

Markups and Quantity

−5

0
Log Quantity

5

−5

0
Log Quantity

5

Variables demeaned by product−year FEs.
Markups, cost and quantity outliers are trimmed below and above 3rd and 97th percentiles.

Figure 2: Markups, Costs and Product Sales Share
Marginal Costs vs Sales Share

Multiple−Product Firms

Multiple−Product Firms

−4

−4

−2

Log Markups, demeaned
0
2

Log Marginal Costs, demeaned
−2
0
2

4

4

Markups vs Sales Share

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Within−Firm Product Sales Share

1

0

Markups and marginal costs are demeaned by product−year and firm−year FEs.
Markup and marginal cost outliers are trimmed below and above 3rd and 97th percentiles.

50

.2
.4
.6
.8
Within−Firm Sales Share

1

Figure 3: Distribution of Prices in 1989 and 1997

0

1

Density

2

3

Distribution of Prices

−.6

−.3

0
Log Prices
1989

.3

.6

1997

Sample only includes firm−product pairs present in 1989 and 1997.
Outliers above and below the 3rd and 97th percentiles are trimmed.

Figure 4: Distribution of Marginal Costs and Marginal Costs in 1989 and 1997
Distribution of Markups

0

0

.5

.5

Density

Density
1

1

1.5

2

1.5

Distribution of Marginal Costs

−1.5

−1

−.5

0
.5
Log Marginal Costs
1989

1

1.5

−1.5

1997

Sample only includes firm−product pairs present in 1989 and 1997.
Outliers above and below the 3rd and 97th percentiles are trimmed.

−1

−.5

0
Log Markups

.5

1989

1997

Sample only includes firm−product pairs present in 1989 and 1997.
Outliers above and below the 3rd and 97th percentiles are trimmed.

Appendices
A

A Formal Model of Input Price Variation

This appendix provides a formal economic model that rationalizes the use of a flexible polynomial
in output price, market share and product dummies to control for input prices. The model is a
more general version of the models considered in Kremer (1993) and Verhoogen (2008).
We proceed in the following steps. We first show that under the assumptions of the model, the
51

1

1.5

quality of every input is an increasing function of output quality. Next, we show that this implies
that the price of every input will be an increasing function of output quality. In the final step, we
show that output quality can be expressed as a flexible function of output price, market share and
a set of product dummies. Having established a monotone relationship between input prices and
output quality, this implies that the price of every input can also be expressed as a function of the
above variables.

A.1

Production Function for Output Quality

Let vj indicate quality of product j and ψi indicate the quality of input i used to produce product
j.55 The production function for output quality is given by:
vj =

n
Y

[ψi ]κi ωj

with

X

κi < 1

(A.1)

i=1

For example, with three inputs, the above production function takes the form:
κK κL κM
vj = ψK
ψL ψM ωj

This function belongs to the class of ‘O-Ring’ production functions discussed in Kremer (1993)
and Verhoogen (2008). The particular (multiplicative) functional form is not important; the important feature is that

∂vj
∂ψi ∂ψk

> 0, ∀i, k and i 6= k. This cross-derivative implies complementarity

in the quality of inputs. A direct consequence is that higher output quality requires high quality
of all inputs (e.g., high quality material inputs are used by high-skill workers operating high-end
machinery). The production function for quality can vary across industries, but we assume that all
firms producing in the same industry face the same quality production function.
In addition to the production function for quality, we assume that higher quality inputs are
associated with higher input prices. Let W i denote the sectoral average of the price of input i (e.g.,
sectoral wage) and Wi (ψi ) the price of a specific quality ψ of input i. Then,
Wi (ψi ) − W i = zi ψi

and zi > 0.

(A.2)

In our framework that postulates perfectly competitive input markets, this assumption is tantamount to assuming that input markets are characterized by vertical differentiation only. So while
high quality inputs are expensive, all firms pay the same input prices conditional on input quality.

A.2

Demand

The indirect utility Vnj that consumer n derives from consuming one unit of product j can be
written in general form as:
55

Here, the subscript j denotes a particular product produced by a firm.

52

Vnj = θn vj − αpj + εnj

(A.3)

where pj is output price, θn denotes the willingness to pay for quality and εnj denotes an idiosyncratic
preference shock. This specification is general and encompasses the demand models commonly used
in the literature. In its most general formulation, the specification above corresponds to the random
coefficients model. In models of pure vertical differentiation, the utility will be given by the above
expression with εnj = 0. A simple logit sets θn = θ = 1 (i.e., no observable consumer heterogeneity)
and εnj is assumed to follow the extreme value distribution. In the nested logit, θn = θ = 1
and εnj follows the generalized extreme value distribution. Following the Industrial Organization
literature, it is convenient to define the mean utility δj of product j as δj = vj − αpj . The output
quality vj is typically modeled as a function of observable and unobservable product characteristics.
For example, in Berry (1994) ’s notation with Xj denoting observable product characteristics,ξj
denoting unobservable quality, and a specification of mean utility that is linear in characteristics,
output quality is given by vj = Xj β + ξj .
We now show how to control for quality variation across firms using observable characteristics
using the specification in (A.3). Berry (1994) shows that the actual market share of a product (msj )
is a function of product characteristics and output price:
msj = sj (δ, σ) = sj (v, p, ϑ)

(A.4)

where σ denotes a vector of density parameters of consumer characteristics and ϑ denotes a parameter vector. While the exact functional form is determined by choice of a particular demand
structure, the general insight is that market shares are a function of product characteristics (i.e.,
quality) and prices. Berry (1994) shows that equation (A.4) can be inverted to obtain the mean
utilities δ as a function of the observed market shares and the density parameters to be estimated.56
With the δ 0 s in hand, one can obtain quality as a function of output price and the mean utility.
This insight is exploited by Khandelwal (2010) who uses a nested logit model to express quality
as a function of output price and conditional and unconditional market shares. In a simple logit
model, quality is a function of only output prices and unconditional market shares. Here, we use a
general formulation that specifies quality as a function of output price, a vector of (conditional and
unconditional) market shares and a set of product dummies:
vj = υ(pj , msj , D)

(A.5)

The product dummies are used in lieu of product characteristics (which are not available in our
data) and can accommodate more general demand specifications such as the nested logit and even
the random coefficients model in cases where it is reasonable to assume that product characteristics
do not change from year to year.
56

In the random coefficients model, the δ’s are solved numerically. In simpler models, one can solve for the mean
utilities analytically.

53

A.3

The Firm’s Maximization Problem

Without loss of generality, we assume that firms use prices and quality as strategic variables to
maximize profits. Conditional on exogenous (to the firm) input prices that are determined in
competitive input markets, firms choose input qualities. These choices determine the output quality
according to the quality production function in (A.1). Let mcj denote the marginal cost of producing
a product j of quality vj . The marginal cost can be written as a function of quantity produced qj ,
quality vj , a parameter vector γ and productivity ωj , mcj (qj , vj , γ, ωj ).
The profit function for a firm producing product j is:
πj = N · sj [p − mcj (qj , vj (ψ, ωj ), γ, ωj )]

(A.6)

where N denotes the market size (number of potential consumers). Output quality vj is now
explicitly written as a function of a vector of input qualities ψ and productivity ωj using the
production function for quality in (A.1).
The first order condition with respect to price is
pj = mcj (qj , vj , γ, ωj ) +

sj
.
|∂sj /∂pj |

(A.7)

The term sj /|∂sj /∂pj | represents the markup, and as shown in Berry (1994), p. 254, it equals
1
α [sj /(∂sj /∂δj )].

The first order condition with respect to the quality of each input i, ψi , is:
(pj − mcj ) ·

∂mcj
∂sj
− sj
=0
∂ψi
∂ψi

(A.8)

From the first order condition with respect to price, we have
(pj − mcj ) =

sj
sj
1
=
.
|∂sj /∂pj |
α ∂sj /∂δj

(A.9)

Substituting this latter expression for the markup into the first order condition for input quality,
we obtain:
∂sj
∂mcj
1
− sj
=0
sj [1/(∂sj /∂δj )]
α
∂ψi
∂ψi

(A.10)



∂sj ∂vj
∂mcj
1
[1/(∂sj /∂δj )]
=
α
∂vj ∂ψi
∂ψi

(A.11)

or

From δj = vj − αpj follows that

∂sj
∂vj

=

∂sj
∂δj ,

and the above first order condition simplifies to:

∂mcj
1 ∂vj
=
α ∂ψi
∂ψi

54

(A.12)

Using the production function for quality to obtain the derivative

∂vj
∂ψi

and substituting into (A.12),

we obtain


∂mcj
1
ψi = κi vj 1/
α
∂ψi

∀i

(A.13)

This expression is similar to the one derived in Verhoogen (2008), but with two differences. First, as
we have shown above, the above expression can be derived from a very general demand system and
market structure. Second, we did not assume a Leontief production technology. The last feature of
the model complicates the analysis slightly. With a Leontief production technology, the derivative
∂mcj
∂ψi

is constant, and it will be positive given the assumption that higher quality inputs demand

higher prices. However, with more general production technologies, this derivative will itself depend
on quality. We therefore need to show explicitly that ψi is an increasing function of vj . The latter
can be established using the second order conditions associated with profit maximization:

∂ 2 mcj
1 ∂vj 1
1
1
κi
− κi vj
−
α ∂ψi ψi α
(ψi )2
∂ψi2
vj
∂ 2 mcj
1
1 2 vj
κi
−
κ
−
i
α (ψi )2 α (ψi )2
∂ψi2
Let us define function F ≡ ψi



∂mcj
∂ψi



< 0

(A.14)

< 0

− α1 κi vj . From the implicit function theorem,

∂ψi
∂vj

F

= − Fji

where
1
Fj = − κi < 0
α

(A.15)

and by virtue of the second order condition,
Fi =
It follows that

∂ψi
∂vj

∂mcj
∂ 2 mcj
∂ 2 mcj
1 2 vj
1
1
1 vj
+ ψi
−
κ
=
κ
v
+
ψ
− κ2i
>0
i
j
i
i
2
2
∂ψi
α ψi
α
ψi
α ψi
∂ψi
∂ψi

(A.16)

F

= − Fji > 0. That is, input quality is an increasing function of output quality for

every input.
Given the assumption that higher input quality demands a higher input price, it immediately
follows that input prices will also be an increasing function of output quality for all inputs. From
equation (A.2):


∂mcj
1
Wi (ψi ) = W i + zi ψi = W i + zi κi vj 1/
α
∂ψi
In light of the above discussion, each input price facing a particular firm can be expressed as a
function of the firm’s output quality, Wi = gi (vj ). Moreover, given that output quality is a function
of output price, market share and product dummies, we have: Wi = wi (pj , msj , D). The input
price function will be in general input-specific, as the indexation by i indicates. When estimating the

55

production function, we can allow for input-specific input price functions and the coefficients β and
δ will be still identified. However, in this general case, we are not able to identify the coefficients
of each input price function separately, which are required for computing the firm-specific input
prices w
bf jt needed in the computation of the input allocations ρf jt in section 3.3. Therefore, we
impose the same function Wi = w(pj , msj , D) across all inputs in which case the firm-specific
input prices reduce to a scalar that we can identify once the parameter vectors β and δ have been
estimated. We note however that in other applications that do not require the computation of the
ρ’s , it is possible to consistently estimate the parameters of quantity-based production functions
using input-specific input price control functions. Furthermore, even in applications that require
the estimation of firm-specific input prices like ours, it would be possible to allow for input-specific
input price control functions if one had data on input prices for a subset of inputs. For example, in
many data sets there is information on firm-specific wages and sometimes there is even information
on firm-specific materials prices. In such cases, one would not need to estimate input price control
functions for labor and materials (since the input prices are observed in these cases), so that one
could allow of an input price control function specific to capital.

B

Estimation Procedure under a Special Case: Cobb-Douglas Production Function

We present our estimation procedure under the predominantly used production function specification in applied work: the Cobb-Douglas (CD) production function. While restrictive on the
input-substitution patterns and the output elasticities, it greatly simplifies the estimation routine
and the recovery of the input allocation terms (ρ). In addition, it helps to highlight the fundamental
identification forces as the input price correction term does not include (interactions of) deflated
expenditures.
We follow the structure of the main text (Section 3) and impose the CD functional form:
f (xf jt ) = βl lf jt + βm mf jt + βk kf jt .

(B.1)

Following the same steps as in the main text we get the following estimating equation for the
single-product firms corresponding to equation (10). We omit the product subscript j given that
the firms used in the estimation produce a single product:
qf t = βl ˜lf t + βm m̃f t + βk k̃f t − Γwf t + ωf t + f t ,

(B.2)

where Γw(.) is a special case of the function B(.) in the main text, Γ = βl + βm + βk is the returns
to scale parameter, and as before wf t = x̃f t − xf t ∀x = {l, m, k}.
After running the first stage
qf t = φt (x̃f t , zf t ) + f t ,
56

(B.3)

with x̃f t = {˜lf t , m̃f t , k̃f t }, we have an estimate of predicted output (φ̂f t ). It is then immediate that
the input price correction term B(.) enters in equation (20) in a separate and additive fashion:
ωf t (β, δ) = φ̂f t − βl ˜lf t − βm m̃f t − βk k̃f t − Γw(pf t , msf t , D, Gf t ),

(B.4)

where −Γw(.) is a special case of the function B(.) in the main text. If one assumes a vertical
differentiation model of demand, then the input price control function w(.) will take only output
price as its argument, and the last term in (B.4) becomes Γw(pf t ). We form moments on ξf t (β, δ) by
exploiting the same law of motion of productivity in equation (18), and the same timing assumptions
as in the main text.
In the special case where w(.) is a function of output price only, we can easily demonstrate how
the assumption of a common w(.) across inputs helps identify the coefficients of the single input
control function. Suppose that w(pf t ) = γpf t . In this case δ =Γγ = (βl + βm + βk )γ; therefore,
once the parameters of the production function, βl , βm , βk , and δ are estimated, the coefficient γ
is identified. But suppose we had allowed the input price control function to vary by inputs so
that: wl (pf t ) = γl pf t ; wm (pf t ) = γm pf t ; and wk (pf t ) = γk pf t . Then: δ = (βl γl + βm γm + βk γk ).
Given our timing assumptions, we would still be able to consistently estimate the coefficients of the
production function and δ, but we would not be able to separately identify the coefficients γl ,γm ,
and γk . Hence in this case, we would not be able to obtain the firm-specific input prices.
To estimate markups and marginal costs we need the input allocation terms ρf jt . In the case of
the CD, their derivation is simplified to solving the system of equations given by:
ωf t + Γρf jt w
bf jt = φ̂f jt − βl ˜lf t − βm m̃f t − βk k̃f t

(B.5)

where w
bf jt is the input price term that we compute based on the estimated function w(.) and Γ is
P
defined as above. Taking into account that j exp (ρf jt ) = 1, this results in a system of Jf t + 1
equations (one for each product j produced by firm f at time t, plus the summing up constraint
for the input allocations) in Jf t + 1 unknowns (the Jf t input allocations for each firm-year pair and
firm productivity) and we can solve for ρf jt and ωf t .
We now have all we need to compute markups and marginal costs. The main difference from
the translog is that θfMjt = βm , so that all the variation in markups (and marginal costs) comes from
the materials expenditure share αf jt .

C

Data Appendix

We use the Prowess data, compiled by the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE),
that spans the period from 1989 to 2003. In addition to standard firm-level variables, the data
include annual sales and quantity information on firms’ product mix. Although Prowess uses an
internal product classification that is based on the Harmonized System (HS) and National Industry
Classification (NIC) schedules, our version of Prowess did not explicitly link the product names

57

reported by the firms to this classification. We hired two research assistants, working independently,
to map the codes to the product names reported by firms. The research assistants assigned product
codes with identical NIC codes in 80% of the cases, representing 91% of output. A third research
assistant resolved the differences between the mappings done by the first two research assistants by
again manually checking the classifications.
To estimate the production function, we need firm-level labor, capital and materials. Prowess
does not have reliable employment information, so we use the total wage bill (which includes bonuses
and contributions to employees’ provident funds) as our measure for labor. Materials are defined as
the consumption of commodities by an enterprise in the process of manufacturing or transformation
into product. It includes raw material expenses and consumption of stores and spares. Capital is
measured by gross fixed assets, which includes movable and immovable assets. These variables are
deflated by two-digit NIC wholesale price indexes.
We match the firm variables to tariff data. The tariff data are reported at the six-digit HS level
and were compiled by Topalova (2010). We pass the tariff data through India’s input-output matrix
for 1993-94 to construct input tariffs. We concord the tariffs to India’s NIC schedule developed by
P
output
, where
Debroy and Santhanam (1993). Formally, input tariffs are defined as τitinput = k aki τkt
output
is the tariff on industry k at time t, and aki is the share of industry k in the value of industry
τkt

i.

D

Markups and Monopsony Power

If firms have monopsony power, this would alter the first order conditions in Section 3.1 (equations
3-5). We briefly discuss under which conditions our main results, relating markups to tariff changes,
are not affected.
Consider a firm that produces just one product, and suppose production requires just one flexible
input Vfvt . The Lagrangian in this case would be:
L = Wfvt Vfvt + λf t Qf t − Qf t Vfvt , ωf t



.

(D.1)

Taking first order conditions and allowing for monopsony power gives:
∂Wfvt v
∂L
∂Q(.)
v
=
W
+
Vf t − λf t
= 0.
ft
v
v
∂Vf t
∂Vf t
∂Vfvt
If a firm has no monopsony power,

∂Wfvt
∂Vfvt

= 0. For firms with monopsony power,

(D.2)
∂Wfvt
∂Vfvt

< 0: the

more the firm buys, the lower the price of the input. We can rearrange the FOC as:
Wfvt +

∂Wfvt
∂Vfvt

Vfvt = λf t

58

∂Q(.)
∂Vfvt

(D.3)

The Lagrange multiplier remains: λf t = Pf t /µf t , We get:
µf t

Wfvt

+

∂Wfvt

Vv
∂Vfvt f t

!
= Pf t

∂Q(.)
.
∂Vfvt

(D.4)

If we now compare a firm with and without monopsony power, ceteris paribus, the markup for
the firm with monopsony power will be larger. This implies that we may be under-estimating the
markup by ignoring potential monopsony power.
However, even if our estimates of the markup levels were biased due to the existence of monopsony power, it is still unlikely that our conclusions regarding the effects of tariffs on markups and
costs would be affected. To see this, note that the above expression can be simplified to57
µf t = (θf t αf−1
t )/(1 + υf t ).

(D.5)

where υ is the elasticity of the input price with respect to the quantity of the input purchased
υf t =

∂Wfvt Vfvt
∂Vfvt Wfvt ,

and the other variables are as defined in the main text. If there is no monopsony

power, then υf t = 0, and the markup expression corresponds to the one we use in the main text of
the paper. Taking logs of the more general markup expression implies that in our trade regressions
(see Section 4.3) we run ln µf t + ln (1 + υf t ) against output and input tariffs (in multi-product
firms, markups and input price elasticities would be indexed by both firm f and product j). The
inclusion of firm-product fixed effects implies that we will only bias our results if the input price
elasticity changed post-trade reforms. Moreover, we have two empirical pieces of evidence that our
results are robust to monopsony power. We might expect that the firms that are most likely to have
monopsony power are larger firms or firms that are parts of Indian business groups. However we
do not find differential effects of the trade reform across initial firm sizes or if a firm belongs to a
business group.58 This leads us to believe that monopsony power is not a first order concern in our
setting.

E

Results from the Standard Approach (Online Appendix–Not for
Publication)

In this appendix, we compare our results to what would be obtained if one followed a standard
approach of working with typical firm-level data that captures inputs and sales at the firm level.
We aggregate our data to the firm level and repeat both the production function estimation and
the main specifications that relate prices, markups and costs to trade policy. In Appendix Table
A3, we report estimates of input elasticities from a Cobb-Douglas production function that uses
a standard firm-level deflated revenue-based production function and a standard control function
proxy. In Appendix Figure A1, we plot these sectoral elasticities against the elasticities from our
57
58

Dividing through by W v , and dividing and multiplying the right-hand-side by (V v /Q), and rearranging terms.
Results are available upon request.

59

methodology reported in Table 4. Although there is a positive correlation for each of the factor
elasticities (with the exception of capital), as well as the returns to scale, the estimates produced
by the two approaches are not the same.
Qualitatively similar estimates from the two approaches suggest that the input-price bias is
partly offset by the output-price bias when using standard firm-level data; that is, firms with higher
input prices tend to have higher output prices. Thus, in estimation of production function based on
standard firm-level revenue data, input-price price bias occurs simultaneously with another bias–
the output price bias–which works in the opposite direction and makes the input-price bias less
transparent. However, this does not mean that the two biases necessarily exactly cancel each other.
The extent of the offset will depend on the setting (see De Loecker and Goldberg (2014) for an
extensive discussion). And while the two biases are working in opposite directions to produce
“reasonable” elasticities, we have no way of assessing the exact quantitative net bias. De Loecker
and Goldberg (2014) discuss some conditions under which the two biases would exactly offset each
other: 1) the industry is characterized by monopolistic competition; 2) firms produce a horizontally
differentiated product and face the same CES demand system; 3) production is characterized by
constant returns to scale; and 4) input price variation (across firms and time) is input neutral.
These conditions are violated in our setting (as evidence by the fact that our elasticities are not
identical in the two approaches).
We next use the production function estimates from the “standard approach” to re-examine one
of our main results: how do markups change with the trade liberalization. Once we have an estimate
of the production function coefficient on materials (θM ), we can compute markups at the firm level
µf t =

θM
αf t

where αf t is the firm’s expenditure on materials divided by total sales. While we can

compute markups at the firm level, we cannot compute marginal costs because it is not possible to
construct a firm-level price without further information on demand. This immediately points out
another limitation of not having product-level data: a markup estimate at the firm level cannot be
decomposed into prices and costs.
Nevertheless, we can still examine how firm-level markups adjust to the trade reform. We
regress the (log of) firm-level markups on output and input tariffs, both defined at the firm level
using the firm’s initial main industry, and year and firm fixed effects. We cluster standard errors
at the industry level. Our results, shown in Appendix Table A4, are qualitatively similar to our
main results reported in column 3 of Table 9. Output tariffs appear to have little effect on markups
(recall that we cannot isolate pro-competitive effects in this regression since we cannot infer firmlevel marginal costs). And although the estimates are somewhat noisy, we do find that a decline
in input tariffs leads to an increase in markups. However, the standard errors are large, perhaps
because we lose power by working at the firm-level rather than at the firm-product level.
These additional robustness checks suggest two implications. First, in practice, the input and
output price biases are likely to offset each other, at least to some extent. This is related to higher
input prices being associated with higher output prices. Second, working at the firm level means
that it is not possible to decompose changes in prices into costs and markups. Many firm-level

60

data sets do not have information on prices, but even when information on prices is available, one
would need to assume a demand system in order to create a firm-specific price index. Therefore,
the standard practice of estimating revenue-based production functions using standard firm-level
data is not sufficient for investigating how prices adjust to trade reforms and for explaining this
adjustment by examining the response of marginal costs and markups.

Online Tables and Figures (Not for Publication)
Table A1: Controlling for Delicensing
Log	  Pricesfjt
Log	  Marginal	  Costfjt
(1)
(2)

Log	  Markupfjt
(3)

Output	  Tariffit
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

0.152 ***
0.053 	  	  	  

0.042 	  	  	  
0.096 	  	  	  

0.110 	  	  	  
0.068 	  	  	  

Input	  Tariffit

0.344 	  	  	  
0.506 	  	  	  

1.158 *	  	  
0.693 	  	  	  

-­‐0.813 **	  
0.402 	  	  	  

Delicenseit

-­‐0.012 	  	  	  
0.046 	  	  	  

0.010 	  	  	  
0.093 	  	  	  

-­‐0.022 	  	  	  
0.072 	  	  	  

Within	  R-­‐squared
Observations
Firm-­‐Product	  FEs
Sector-­‐Year	  FEs

0.02 	  	  	  
20,705 	  	  	  

0.01 	  	  	  
20,705 	  	  	  

0.01 	  	  	  
20,705 	  	  	  

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

Notes: The dependent variable is noted in the columns. This table controls for whether or not the
industry is delicensed at time t. The sum of the coefficients from the markup and marginal costs
regression equals their respective coefficient in the price regression. The regressions exclude outliers in
the top and bottom 3rd percent of the markup distribution, and include firm-­‐product fixed effects and
sector-­‐year fixed effects. The regressions are run from 1989-­‐1997 and standard errors are clustered at
the	  industry	  level.	  	  Significance:	  *	  10	  percent,	  **	  5	  percent,	  ***	  1	  percent.	  

Table A2: Prices, Markups and Costs and Effective Rate of Protection

Effective	  Rate	  of	  Protectionit
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Within	  R-­‐squared
Observations
Firm-­‐Product	  FEs
Sector-­‐Year	  FEs

Log	  Pricesfjt
Log	  Marginal	  Costfjt
(1)
(2)
0.058 ***
0.024 	  	  	  
0.019 	  	  	  
0.038 	  	  	  
0.02 	  	  	  
21,246 	  	  	  
yes
yes

0.01 	  	  	  
21,246 	  	  	  
yes
yes

Log	  Markupfjt
(3)
0.034 	  	  	  
0.027 	  	  	  
0.01 	  	  	  
21,246 	  	  	  
yes
yes

Notes: The dependent variable is noted in the columns. The sum of the coefficients from the markup and
marginal costs regression equals their respective coefficient in the price regression. The regressions exclude
outliers in the top and bottom 3rd percent of the markup distribution, and include firm-­‐product fixed effects and
sector-­‐year fixed effects. The regressions use data from 1989-­‐1997. Standard errors that are clustered at the
industry	  level.	  	  Significance:	  *	  10	  percent,	  **	  5	  percent,	  ***	  1	  percent.	  

61

Table A3: Output Elasticities using Firm-Level Revenue Data and Cobb-Douglas Production Function
Control	  Function,	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  Coefficients,	  Firm-­‐Level
Sector
Labor
Material
Capital
RTS
15	  Food	  products	  and	  beverages
0.25
0.71
0.06
1.02
17	  Textiles,	  Apparel
0.08
0.86
0.06
0.99
21	  Paper	  and	  paper	  products
0.31
0.69
0.05
1.05
24	  Chemicals
0.13
0.69
0.13
0.96
25	  Rubber	  and	  Plastic
0.19
0.78
0.10
1.07
26	  Non-­‐metallic	  mineral	  products
0.38
0.18
0.31
0.87
27	  Basic	  Metal
0.15
0.70
0.12
0.97
28	  Fabricated	  metal	  products
0.17
0.76
0.03
0.96
29	  Machinery	  and	  equipment
0.18
0.71
0.17
1.05
31	  Electrical	  machinery,	  communications
0.22
0.69
0.15
1.05
34	  Motor	  vehicles,	  trailers
0.21
0.68
0.22
1.11
Notes: Table reports coefficients of a three-­‐factor Cobb-­‐Douglas production function: labor, materials, and
capital. The estimations are run at the firm level using total revenues. Estimations are performed separately
by	  sector	  using	  a	  control	  function	  approach	  (Levinsohn	  and	  Petrin,	  2003).

Table A4: Firm-level Markups on Output and Input Tariffs
Log	  Markupft
(1)

Output	  Tariffft
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

-­‐0.007 	  	  	  
0.032

Input	  Tariffft

-­‐0.212 	  	  	  
0.290
0.03
12,827
yes
yes

R-­‐squared
Observations
Firm	  FEs
Sector-­‐Year	  FEs

Notes: Table reports the regression of (log) markups on output
and input tariffs. Markups are constructed at the firm level
using	  the	  materials	  output	  elasticity	  estimated	  from	  a	  firm-­‐level	  
deflated revenue production function estimation. Input and
output tariffs are matched to the firm's initial main industry.
Standard errors clustered at the industry level. Significance: *
10	  percent,	  **	  5	  percent,	  ***	  1	  percent.	  

62

Figure A1: Output Elasticities Comparison
Material Elasticity
Standard Approach
.2
.4
.6
.8
1

Standard Approach
.1
.2
.3
.4

Labor Elasticity

.1

.15
.2
Our Approach

.25

.65

.7

.8

.85

1.05

1.1

Returns to Scale

0

Standard Approach
.1
.2
.3

Standard Approach
.85 .9 .95 1 1.05 1.1

Capital Elasticity

.75
Our Approach

0

.05

.1
Our Approach

.15

.2

.85

.9

Our Approach takes the elasticities reported in Table 4
Standard Approach uses elasticities from estimating a Cobb−Douglas function on firm−level data

63

.95
1
Our Approach

