NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO HIGH-COST HOSPITALS DELIVER BETTER CARE? EVIDENCE FROM AMBULANCE
REFERRAL PATTERNS
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
John A. Graves
Jonathan Gruber
Samuel Kleiner
Working Paper 17936
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17936

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

We are grateful to Amy Finkelstein, Michael Greenstone, Larry Katz, Doug Staiger, Heidi Williams
and especially Jon Skinner for helpful conversations; seminar participants at the NBER, University
of Chicago, MIT, Vanderbilt, New York University, the Brookings Institute, and the University of
Texas for helpful comments, and to Noam Angrist, Archit Bhise, Shelly Jin, Rex Lam, and Jie Zhao
for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Joseph J. Doyle, Jr., John A. Graves, Jonathan Gruber, and Samuel Kleiner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do High-Cost Hospitals Deliver Better Care? Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr., John A. Graves, Jonathan Gruber, and Samuel Kleiner
NBER Working Paper No. 17936
March 2012
JEL No. I12
ABSTRACT
Endogenous patient sorting across hospitals can confound performance comparisons. This paper provides
a new lens to compare hospital performance for emergency patients: plausibly exogenous variation
in ambulance-company assignment. Ambulances are effectively randomly assigned to patients in the
same area based on rotational dispatch mechanisms. Using Medicare data from 2002-2008, we show
that ambulance company assignment importantly affects hospital choice for patients in the same zip
code. Using data for New York state from 2000-2006 that matches exact patient addresses to hospital
discharge records, we show that patients who live very near each other but on either side of ambulance-dispatch
boundaries go to different types of hospitals. Both strategies show that higher-cost hospitals have significantly
lower one-year mortality rates compared to lower-cost hospitals. We find that common indicators
of hospital quality, such as indicators for "appropriate care" for heart attacks, are generally not associated
with better patient outcomes. On the other hand, we find that measures of "leading edge" hospitals,
such as teaching hospitals and hospitals that quickly adopt the latest technologies, are associated with
better outcomes, but have little impact on the estimated mortality-hospital cost relationship. We also
find that hospital procedure intensity is a key determinant of the mortality-cost relationship, suggesting
that treatment intensity, and not differences in quality reflected in prices, drives much of our findings.
The evidence also suggests that there are diminishing returns to hospital spending and treatment intensity.

Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-515
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu
John A. Graves
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
2525 West End Avenue, Suite 350
Nashville, TN 37203
john.graves@vanderbilt.edu

Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
Samuel Kleiner
Cornell University
College of Human Ecology
108 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
skleiner@cornell.edu

The U.S. has by far the highest medical spending per capita in the world; spending is over twice
as high as the median for OECD nations (Reinhardt et al. 2004, Anderson and Frogner 2008).
Despite this disparity, health outcomes, on average, do not appear superior in the U.S.: we rank
30th among the 34 industrialized OECD nations in terms of infant mortality, and 27th in terms of
life expectancy at birth (OECD 2011). There has been enormous concern expressed and numerous
studies undertaken on the source of excess spending in the U.S. health care system. A broadly shared
conclusion is that a large share of U.S. medical spending is unproductive in terms of improving
patient health.
The seminal work in the study of regional variation in healthcare spending in the U.S. has
been done by researchers at Dartmouth University as part of the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care
project. Fisher et al. (2003) studied Medicare expenditure data and found that end-of-life spending
levels – a measure of treatment intensity that controls for the health outcome – are 60% higher
in high-spending areas compared to low-spending areas in the U.S. Nevertheless, no difference is
found across regions in 5-year mortality rates following a health event such as a heart attack or hip
fracture. The lack of a relationship between regional variation in spending and health outcomes has
been cited in support of reducing Medicare spending by 20-30 percent without adversely affecting
health outcomes (Fisher et al. 2009).
The contention that higher spending is not associated with improved outcomes has also been
extensively tested at the hospital level. For example, Barnato et al. (2010) find small positive
returns to higher end of life spending in terms of lower mortality, but these effects fade quickly and
are largely gone within 180 days. These results suggest little long-term benefit to higher hospital
spending – despite enormous variation in spending across hospitals for similar services.
One concern when comparing nations, regions, or hospitals is that higher costs may be accrued
by populations in worse health. Consequently, higher spending may be associated with better
outcomes for a randomly chosen patient, even if it is not associated with better outcomes for the
(sicker) patients that reside in higher-spending areas or who use more expensive hospitals.
In this paper, we focus on hospital spending and aim to estimate the effects of being treated
at high-spending hospitals on health outcomes. We endeavor to control for patient selection into

2

different types of hospitals by focusing on emergency transports to the hospital by ambulance.
The key ingredient of our approach is the recognition that the locus of treatment for emergency
hospitalizations is, to a large extent, determined by pre-hospital factors – and, in particular, ambulance transport decisions and patient location. To the extent that ambulance companies are
pseudo-randomly assigned to patients in an emergency, we can develop more convincing measures
of the impact of hospital and area differences on patient outcomes.
We consider two complementary identification strategies to exploit variation in ambulance transports. The first uses the fact that in areas served by multiple ambulance companies, the company
dispatched to the patient is effectively random due to rotational assignment or even direct competition between simultaneously dispatched competitors. Moreover, we demonstrate that ambulance
companies serving the same small geographic area have preferences in the hospital to which they
take patients. These facts suggest that the ambulance company dispatched to emergency patients
may serve as a random assignment mechanism across local hospitals. We can then exploit ambulance identifiers provided in national Medicare inpatient data to test whether heterogeneity in
referral patterns exists, and to develop instruments for hospital choice based on patient ambulance
assignment. Finally, we can also use these ambulance data to test and control for any pre-hospital
differences in treatment which might independently impact outcomes.
Our second strategy localizes the “natural randomization” approach adopted by the Dartmouth
researchers by exploiting contiguous areas on opposite sides of ambulance service area boundaries
in the state of New York. In New York, each state-certified Emergency Medical Service (EMS)
provider is assigned to a territory via a certificate of need process where they are allowed to be
“first due” for response. Other areas may be entered when that area’s local provider is busy. We
obtained the territories for each EMS provider from the New York State Department of Emergency
Medical Services, and we couple these data with unique hospital discharge data that identifies each
patient’s exact residential address. This combination allows us to compare those living on either
side of an ambulance service area boundary. To the extent that these neighbors are similar to one
another, the boundary can generate exogenous variation in the hospitals to which these patients
are transported.

3

Both of these strategies yield a striking and consistent conclusion: higher-cost hospitals are
associated with improved patient mortality outcomes. The suggested returns to hospital care are
substantial. In particular, the results from the ambulance assignment identification strategy imply
that a 10% increase in hospital costs is associated with lower patient mortality in the first year
after admission by roughly 4% of the baseline mortality rate.
We chose average hospital cost as a summary measure of the treatment provided by the hospital
to investigate whether hospital choice matters for health outcomes. But costs are obviously correlated with a wide variety of hospital-specific characteristics. In the last section of our paper, we
endeavor to explore which hospital characteristics matter most for patient outcomes. Importantly,
our empirical strategy provides a causal framework to assess the impact of a wide range of hospital
characteristics, and to assess whether they explain the relationship we have documented between
hospital cost and mortality. We find that common indicators of hospital quality, such as indicators
for “appropriate care” for heart attacks, are generally not associated with better patient outcomes.
On the other hand, we find that measures of “leading edge” hospitals, such as teaching hospitals
and hospitals that quickly adopt the latest technologies, are associated with better outcomes – but
have little impact on the estimated mortality-hospital cost relationship. We also find that hospital
procedure intensity is a key determinant of the mortality-cost relationship, suggesting that treatment intensity, and not differences in quality reflected in prices, drives much of our findings. Last,
we investigate the extent to which there are diminishing or even negative returns to treatment in
hospitals with the very highest costs.
Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I places our project in the context of the previous literature
on the returns to hospital spending. Part II describes the nature of pre-hospital care and how it
informs our approach. Part III discusses our data sources and Part IV our empirical strategy. Part
V presents the basic results from Medicare data, and Part VI presents comparable results from New
York State. Part VII extends the analysis to consider other attributes of the hospital “bundle,”
and provides some evidence of diminishing returns. Part VIII concludes.

4

I

Previous Literature

Our work is related to a number of cross-cutting literatures which speak to the returns to higher
hospital spending.

Area Variations Literature
As noted earlier, a common source of support for the contention that the U.S. wastes much of its
medical spending is the wide variation in area health care costs that do not seem to be associated
with improved outcomes. The seminal work in this area has been done by researchers at Dartmouth
University as part of the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care project. In particular, there is a large
literature investigating the relationship between regional variation in health care spending and
health disparities. The typical study compares patients hospitalized in high-spending areas to
patients in low-spending ares. Regions with greater health care assets have been found to provide
greater amounts of care across all patients. (Fisher et al. 1994, Stukel et al. 2005). These results
suggest that where a patient lives determines the quantity of care received following a health
problem (Chandra and Skinner 2003). Chandra and Staiger (2007) employ a Roy model where
physicians in an area specialize in more intensive surgical treatments over less intensive medical
treatments if there are relatively high returns to doing so, and productivity spillovers further
enhance the returns to intensive treatment. In this model, the spillover results in potentially worse
outcomes for patients who would benefit most from the less-intensive treatment because the region
has specialized in the intensive treatment to raise average outcomes. In such a model, restricting
the intensive areas to practice in the less-intensive style would result in worse health outcomes,
despite the potential for little difference in outcomes across areas in the cross section.
These large disparities in spending are generally not found to contribute to improvements in
health outcomes (Fisher et al. 1994, Pilote et al. 1995, Kessler and McClellan 1996, Tu et al.
1997, O’Connor et al. 1999, Baicker and Chandra 2004, Fuchs 2004, Stukel et al. 2005, Sirovich
et al. 2006). As noted earlier, for example, Fisher et al. (2003) studied Medicare expenditure
data and found that end-of-life spending levels are 60% higher in high-spending areas compared to
low-spending ones in the U.S. Nevertheless, no difference in 5-year mortality rates is found across
5

regions following a health event such as a heart attack or hip fracture. This wide variation in
spending and the similarity of mortality rates were again found when the sample was restricted
to teaching hospitals (Fisher et al. 2004). Related studies have suggested that higher spending is
associated with worse health outcomes (Guadagnoli et al. 1995, Fisher and Welch 1999).

Hospital Differences Literature
There is also a sizeable literature on spending and outcomes at the hospital level. This literature
comes to mixed conclusions about the returns to higher spending. Several studies find significant
returns to measures of hospital treatment intensity. Allison et al. (2000) find that those treated
for Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI) at teaching hospitals had roughly 10% lower mortality
than those treated at non-teaching hospitals, and that this effect persisted for two years after the
incident. Most recently, Romley et al. (2011) document that those treated in California hospitals
with the highest end-of-life spending have much lower inpatient mortality: inpatient mortality in
hospitals at the highest quintile of spending is 10-37% lower than at the lowest quintile across a
range of conditions.
Other studies suggest no returns to higher spending. Glance et al. (2010) find that low inpatient
mortality is associated with lower costs. A middle ground is struck by Barnato et al. (2010), who
find small positive returns to higher end of life spending in terms of lower mortality, but find that
these effects fade quickly and are largely gone by 180 days after admission. These results suggest
little long-term benefit to higher spending.

Inference Problem: Patient Selection
A major issue that arises when comparing regions is that greater treatment levels may be chosen
for populations in worse health. For example, higher spending is strongly associated with higher
mortality rates on the individual level, even after risk adjustment. This is consistent with more
care provided to patients in (unobservably) worse health. At the regional level, long-term investments in capital and labor may reflect the underlying health of the population as well. Differences
in unobservable characteristics may therefore bias the results toward finding no effect of greater

6

spending.
Research on area- or hospital-level returns to care recognizes the issue of patient selection
and notes that observable patient characteristics are similar across areas.1 Fisher et al. (2003)
found similar predicted mortality rates in higher-spending areas for hip fracture patients, though
somewhat higher predicted mortality in those areas for heart attack patients. Further, these studies
endeavor to control for patient mix with a variety of indicators of patient severity. But even the
best controls based on diagnosis codes and patient characteristics are only imperfect proxies for
underlying severity. Advanced risk adjustment techniques explain less than 10% of the year-toyear variation in patient spending in the Medicare program, for example (Garber et al. 1998).
While some fraction of the unexplained variation is exogenous and therefore unpredictable, it is
likely that patient decisions to seek medical treatment are driven by health factors unobservable
to the researcher. A recent article by Zhang et al. (2010), for example, finds that the unadjusted
correlation between pharmaceutical spending and medical (non-drug) spending across high- and
low-spending Medicare regions is high (0.6), but that this finding is highly sensitive to patient
controls: the correlation falls to just 0.1 when patient health status is taken into account. In
addition, Doyle (2011) compared patients in Florida and again found that observable characteristics
were similar across areas that had significant variation in hospital spending levels. When the
analysis focused on tourists – a group that is arguably more comparable across areas and likely
does not affect the chosen level of treatment intensity in the area – higher-spending areas were
associated with substantially lower mortality.
The use of claims-based diagnosis codes to control for underlying health may also be problematic
because the diagnosis measures themselves could be endogenous. That is, a patient listed with many
diagnoses could be in poor health or could have been treated by a high ”observation-intensity”
provider that tends to diagnose (and record) more illnesses. In a recent paper, Song et al. (2010)
find that Medicare patients who move to higher intensity regions experience a greater increase in
the number of diagnoses over time compared to similar patients in the area from which they moved.
Conversely, patients who move to lower-intensity regions accrue fewer diagnoses. In another recent
1

See, for example, O’Connor et al. (1999); Pilote et al. (1995); Stukel et al. (2005); and Fisher et al. (2003)

7

piece, Welch et al. (2011) find an inverse relationship between regional diagnostic frequency rates
and case fatality rates, suggesting that the marginal patient diagnosed in a high diagnosis-frequency
area may be healthier compared to patients diagnosed with the same condition in low-frequency
areas.
To control for underlying health differences, another direct measure is the patient’s lagged
healthcare spending. Yet this too may be problematic when the goal is to describe areas as high
vs. low intensity, as intensity is autocorrelated. Clearly, with the limitations of standard risk
adjustment methods in mind, it is even more critical to develop a methodology that cleanly separates
provider assignment from patient health.
Finally, one of the main sources of variation used in health economics is distance to the hospital
as an exogenous instrument for determining hospital assignment. Perhaps the most famous example
of such work is McClellan et al. (1994), who modeled the use of cardiac catheterization after a heart
attack as a function of the “differential distance” to a hospital with a catheterization laboratory
(relative to the distance to the nearest hospital). By using differential distance, they aimed to
control for the fact that individuals who live near a hospital are different than those who do not.
However, patients that live in ZIP codes near higher quality hospitals that have catheterization labs
may have differ in unobserved ways from patients that live in other ZIP codes. In contrast, this
paper offers a new lens to estimate effects of different hospital types on patient outcomes: patients
who live in the same ZIP code but are treated at different hospitals in an emergency.

II

Background on Pre-Hospital Care

The key ingredient of our approach is the recognition that the locus of treatment for emergency
hospitalizations is, to a large extent, determined by pre-hospital factors, including ambulance transport decisions and patient location. Among the emergency cases we consider, 61% are brought into
the hospital via ambulance. In such cases, the level of care dispatched to the scene (e.g. Advanced
Life Support (ALS) using paramedics vs. Basic Life Support (BLS) using Emergency Medical
Technicians) may be chosen based on perceived severity (Curka et al. 1993, Athey and Stern 2002).
Critically, however, in areas served by multiple ambulance companies, the company dispatched is
8

usually chosen independent of the patient characteristics that can confound the area and hospital
comparisons reviewed above.
Rotational assignment of competing ambulances services – as well as direct competition between
simultaneously dispatched competitors – is increasingly common in the U.S. For example, two
recent articles cite examples from North and South Carolina where the opportunity for ambulance
transport is broadcast to multiple companies and whichever arrives there first gets the business.2
Similarly, large cities such as New York, Los Angeles and Chicago have adopted a hybrid approach
under which private ambulance companies work in conjunction with fire departments to provide
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) (Johnson 2001). Another recent report found that of the top
10 cities with the highest population over 65, 5 contracted with both public and private ambulance
carriers, while 2 others contracted with exclusively private carriers (Chiang et al. 2006). In a
more recent 2010 survey covering 97 areas, 40 percent reported contracting with private ambulance
companies and an additional 23 percent utilized hospital-based ambulance providers (Ragone 2012).
We are aware of no systematic evidence on the basis for rotational assignment of ambulances.
To understand the dispatch process we conducted a survey of 30 cities with more than one ambulance company serving the area in our Medicare data. The survey revealed that patients can be
transported by different companies for two main reasons. First, in communities served by multiple
ambulance services, 911 systems often use software that assigns units based on a rotational dispatch mechanism; alternatively, they may position ambulances throughout an area and dispatch
whichever ambulance is closest, then reshuffle the other available units to respond to the next call.
Second, in areas with a single ambulance company, neighboring companies provide service when
the principal ambulance units are busy under so-called “mutual aid” agreements. Critically, under
either dispatch mechanism, every one of the respondents surveyed reported that ambulance assignment was independent of patient characteristics (within BLS vs. ALS ambulances). Within a small
area, then, the variation in the ambulance dispatched is either due to rotational assignment or one
of the ambulance companies being engaged on another 911 call. Both sources appear plausibly
exogenous with respect to the underlying health of a given patient.
2

See Watson (2011) and Johnson (2001) for examples.

9

There is some existing evidence that pre-hospital care is an important determinant of hospital
choice due to the “preferences” of ambulance companies to take patients to particular hospitals.
In the South Carolina example, the article explicitly points out that if an ambulance company
associated with a particular hospital gets to the patient first, the patient is much more likely to be
transported to that hospital.
Directly relevant to our approach is research by the New York State Comptroller’s Office in
the wake of a major change in the rotational assignment of private and FDNY ambulances in New
York City. Skura (2001) found that patients living in the same ZIP code as public Health and
Hospital Corporation (HHC) hospitals were less than half as likely to be taken there when assigned
a private, non-profit ambulance (29%) compared to when the dispatch system assigned them to
an FDNY ambulance (64%). In most cases, the private ambulances were operated by non-profit
hospitals and stationed near or even within those facilities, so they tended to take their patients
there.
This point is illustrated in Figure 1, from Skura (2001). This figure shows the location of three
hospitals, two of them private hospitals that operate ambulance service (St. Clare’s and New York
Hospital) and one public (Bellevue hospital). The author examined the rate at which ambulances
took patients residing in the Bellevue ZIP code to these hospitals. He found that for those picked
up by FDNY ambulances, 61% were brought to Bellevue, and 39% brought to the more distant
private hospitals. But for those picked up by private ambulance companies, only 25% were brought
to Bellevue, and 75% to the other hospitals (Figure 1). Similar results were found for other ZIP
codes within New York City as well.
In summary, ambulance dispatch rules appear to effectively randomize patients to ambulance
companies. Previous case studies suggest that these ambulances have preferences about which
hospital to choose. Our empirical strategy exploits this plausibly exogenous variation in the hospital
choice, as described below.

10

III

Data

Our national data uses Medicare claims between 2002 and 2008. The use of these data was previously authorized under a data use agreement with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS). In particular, the Carrier file includes a 20% random sample of beneficiaries, and from this
file we observe the ambulance claim. We then link these claims to inpatient claims, which include
standard measures of treatment, such as procedures performed, and up to 10 diagnosis codes. Patient characteristics are also recorded, such as age, race, and sex. The claims data also include
the ZIP code of the beneficiary, where official correspondence is sent. In principle, this could differ
from the patient’s home ZIP code. In addition, vital statistics data that record when a patient dies
is linked to these claims, which allows us to measure mortality at different timeframes, such as 30
days or one year.
In addition to these usual controls in claims data, we discovered that the ambulance claims offer
a new set of control variables. These data include detailed information on the mode and method of
transport (Advanced Life Support vs. Basic Life Support; emergency vs. non-emergency3 ) and on
specific pre-hospital interventions administered by ambulance personnel (e.g., intravenous therapy
and administered drugs). While previous studies using Medicare data have been limited in their
inability to control for patient location (beyond using distance from the centroid of the patient’s
ZIP code), an innovation of our approach is that we also control for “loaded miles”: a billing term
referring to the exact distance the ambulance traveled to the hospital with the patient on board.
Finally, our Medicare claims also include an ambulance company identifier.4 This allows us to
construct empirical referral pattern measures that serve as the basis for our analytic strategy.
The actual costs associated with the treatment of a particular hospitalization are not recorded in
hospital inpatient data, and there are several different proxies available for costs. The previous literature has typically used Medicare hospital expenditures, but expenditures are almost completely
3

While we study conditions and admissions that appear to be emergencies, ambulances are reimbursed at a higher
rate if they transport the patient under so-called “emergency traffic” (i.e.,“lights and sirens”) on the way to the
hospital.
4
Medicare only reimburses for ambulance transports to a nearby facility; patients who wish to be taken somewhere
else must pay the incremental cost of transport to that facility. There are a small number of such episodes in our
data, and the results are not sensitive to their inclusion.

11

driven by diagnosis coding and hospital cost add-ons rather than treatment differences within a
diagnosis code. An alternative is to measure costs by the facility charges for each hospitalization.
This measure overstates costs, however, as hospitals typically mark up list prices well beyond the
prices actually paid for their services. Another alternative is to renormalize this charge measure by
a hospital-specific cost to charge ratio, and this is the basis of our cost measure in the main results:
average hospital log costs.5 We report results when alternative measures are used, as well.
Our other major data source is the universe of inpatient hospital discharges from New York
State, made available from the New York State Department of Health through the Statewide
Planning and Research Cooperative System (SPARCS). These data include detailed information
on patient demographic characteristics, diagnoses, and treatments, as well as a unique patient
identifier that allows for longitudinal linking across facilities. A unique feature of these data is an
address field that allows us to identify the exact patient residence location for 90% of the discharge
records in our 2000-2006 sample (approx. 20.6 million records for all patients). These data are
matched to vital statistics databases from the entire state of New York, enabling the construction
of mortality measures extending up to 1-year.
The SPARCS data complement our analysis in three ways. First, because the SPARCS data
include a residential address for each hospital patient, we can use narrowly defined geographic
areas such as census block groups for our analysis. These smaller areas are likely to be even more
homogeneous than the larger ZIP code areas. Second, these addresses allow us to match patients
to narrowly defined areas located near the ambulance-dispatch boundaries. Third, the New York
data allow us to compare patients throughout the age distribution and study patients not insured
under Medicare.

Sample Construction
In both data sets, our primary sample consists of patients admitted to the hospital through the
emergency room with 29 “nondeferrable” conditions where selection into the healthcare system is
5
A disadvantage of these cost-to-charge ratios is that they can be noisy measures. Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid (CMS) recommends replacing the cost-to-charge ratio for outliers with the median for that year. We
replaced the extreme 5% of the cost-to-charge ratios in this way.

12

largely unavoidable. Following Dobkin (2003) and Card et al. (2009), diagnoses whose weekend
admission rates are closest to 2/7ths reflect a lack of discretion as to the timing of the hospital
admission. Discretionary admissions see a marked decline on the weekend, but particularly serious
emergencies do not. Using our Medicare sample, we chose a cutoff of all conditions with a weekend
admission rate that was as close or closer to 2/7ths as hip fracture, a condition commonly thought
to require immediate care. These conditions represent 39% of the hospital admissions via the
emergency room, 61% of which arrived by ambulance. In New York, these nondeferrable conditions
account for 34% of all emergency patients whose primary payer is Medicare.
For our analysis of the Medicare data, we are unable to consider beneficiaries who are part
of Medicare Advantage programs, as their claims are not available. These beneficiaries constitute
17% of the Medicare population in 2000 and 22% in 2008 (Kaiser Family Foundation 2010). We
further limit the sample to patients during their first hospitalization under the Medicare program,
in order to study outcomes after an initial health shock, and in an effort to exclude patients who
may have preferences for particular hospitals due to previous hospitalizations. By necessity of
the empirical strategy, we limit the analysis to those patients who are brought to the emergency
room by ambulance. We further remove a small number of observations with missing ZIP code
information, missing ambulance company information, as well as ambulance companies, ZIP codes,
or hospitals with fewer than 10 observations. Last, we restrict the sample to hospitals that are
within 50 miles of the patient’s ZIP code centroid. This results in a sample of 667,143 patients.
The reliance on ambulance transports allows us to focus on patients who are less likely to
decide whether or not to go to the hospital. Appendix Table A1 shows that this sample has
more comorbidities, is slightly older, and has a higher 1-year mortality rate (37%) compared to
all Medicare patients who enter the hospital via the emergency room (20%). These are relatively
severe health shocks, and the estimates of the effects of hospital types on mortality apply to these
types of episodes. We caution against applying the results to more chronic conditions.
For our analysis of the New York SPARCS data, pre-hospital care is not collected so we cannot
identify ambulance transports. To facilitate comparison of results using these data to the Medicare
sample, we restrict the analysis to patients who enter inpatient care via the emergency room

13

and have a principal diagnosis considered nondeferrable. Our main results will also focus on the
first hospitalization in our data, as well as a restriction to Medicare patients. We also remove a
small number of observations with missing address information, patients whose residence is located
outside of New York State, and patients whose address could not be matched to a block group. We
again restrict the sample to patients receiving care at a hospital located within 50 miles of their
residential address. This results in a sample of 142,809 patients within 1 mile of a boundary, 213,968
patients within two miles of a boundary, and 281,036 patients within 5 miles of a boundary.

IV

Empirical Strategy

Ambulance Referral Patterns within ZIP Code Areas
Our first approach relies on differences in ambulance referral patterns within ZIP code areas.
Ambulance companies have some discretion over the hospital choice, with a typical tradeoff between
distance and the hospital with the most appropriate level of care. We compare patients picked up
by ambulances with different tendencies to favor particular types of hospitals (such as high-cost
hospitals) in these decisions. We then assess whether these different preferences lead to meaningful
differences in the type of hospital where patient is treated.
We can illustrate that such “preferences” exist by essentially generalizing the New York City
example above using variation in hospital shares across ambulance companies serving the same
ZIP codes. Specifically, using observed ambulance-hospital frequencies within each ZIP code in
our Medicare sample, we estimate a Chi-square test of homogeneity. Consider, for example, a ZIP
code served by two hospitals in which we observe emergency patients taken to hospital h1 75% of
the time when they are picked up by ambulance company a1 , but only 33% of the time when they
are picked up by company a2 . Since there are only two hospitals, it follows that we would observe
25% of a1’s patients, and 66% of a2 ’s patients, being taken to hospital h2 . Given these observed
proportions, we wish to test whether there is statistical evidence that companies a1 and a2 have
different patient transport patterns.
In our sample, we calculated test statistics for every ZIP code in our Medicare data with at

14

least 5 ambulance transports by comparing observed ambulance-hospital cell frequencies to those
expected under the null hypothesis, which is that ambulances distribute patients across nearby
hospitals at the same rates.6 Among the 9,125 ZIP codes where we can calculate these statistics,
38% have test statistics with p < 0.1. This provides evidence that there appear to be differences
in where patients are taken based on which ambulance company picks them up that well exceeds
pure chance (which would result in less than 10% of zips having test statistics with p < 0.1). This
type of variation is the basis of our first-stage estimation, which we turn to next.
To operationalize ambulance preferences, we calculate an instrumental variable that measures
the treatment intensity of hospitals where each ambulance company takes its patients. For patient
i assigned to ambulance a(i), we calculate the average inpatient costs among the patients in our
analysis sample for each ambulance company:7

Za(i) =

Na(i) −1

1

X

Na(i) − 1

Costj

j6=i

This measure is essentially the ambulance company fixed effect in a model of hospital costs. We
exclude the given patient from this measure to avoid a direct linkage between Z and the average
cost in a given hospital – a Jackknife Instrumental Variables Estimator (JIVE) that is more robust
to weak-instrument concerns when fixed effects are used to construct an instrument (Stock et
al. 2002, Kolesr et al. 2011).
We then use this measure to estimate the first-stage relationship between hospital costs, H, and
the instrument, Z: hospital costs associated with the ambulance assigned to patient i living in ZIP
code z(i) in year t(i):

Hi = α0 + α1 Za(i) + α2 Xi + α3 Ai + θz(i) + λt(i) + νi
6

(1)

The resulting test-statistic (for ZIP z) is distributed χ2 with (Hz − 1) ∗ (Az − 1) degrees of freedom, where Hz
is the total number of hospitals treating patients from ZIP z, and Az is the total number of ambulance companies
transporting patients from ZIP z.
7
In practice, some ambulance companies serve large areas including multiple states. To compare patients at risk of
receiving the same ambulance company, we compute the instrument at the company-Hospital Referral Region level.
Hospital Referral Regions are relatively large area designed to capture markets for non-emergency care. This allows
us to retain information about the ambulance company’s preferences across hospitals within and outside the patient’s
(smaller) Hospital Service Area.

15

where Xi is a vector of patient controls including indicators for each age, race, sex, miles from the
ZIP code centroid, and indicators for four common comorbidities: congestive heart failure, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), diabetes, and other comorbidity; Ai represents a vector of
ambulance characteristics including the payment to the company, which provides a useful summary
of the treatment provided in the ambulance; indicators for distance traveled in miles; whether
the transport utilized Advanced Life Support (e.g., paramedic) capabilities; whether intravenous
therapy was administered; whether the transport was coded as emergency transport; and whether
the ambulance was paid through the outpatient system rather than the carrier system.8 . We cluster
standard errors at the Hospital Service Area (HSA) level, as each local market may have its own
assignment rules. This choice is relatively conservative compared to clustering at the ambulance
company level instead.
We also include a full set of ZIP code fixed effects and year indicators. This regression therefore
compares individuals who live in the same ZIP code in the same year, but who are picked up by
ambulance companies with different “preferences” across different types of hospitals (excluding the
patient herself). A positive coefficient α1 would indicate that ambulance company “preferences”
are correlated with where the patient actually is admitted.

Relationship Between Hospital Costs and Mortality
Our main regression of interest is the relationship between hospital costs on mortality, M , for
patient i:

Mi = β0 + β1 Hi + β2 Xi + β3 Ai + θz(i) + λt(i) + i

(2)

This OLS regression parallels the previous literature in modeling mortality of patient i who
goes to hospital h, as a function of average hospital cost. Mortality can be measured at intervals
such as 30 days, 90 days, or 1 year. As noted earlier, this regression suffers from the fact that
patients may be selected into certain hospitals based on characteristics which affect their mortality.
8

Claims for ambulances owned by institutional providers (e.g., hospitals) are found in the outpatient file, and
represent about 10% of all ambulance transports within our file. These data do not include the distance measure,
and for these observations the distance indicators were filled with the sample mean.

16

To address this, we estimate the model by instrumental variables, where the instrument is the
ambulance measure discussed above. That is, we use equation (1) above as a first stage to estimate
this model by instrumental variables.
This empirical approach has four main limitations. The first is that ambulance company preferences could be correlated with underlying patient characteristics even within ZIP codes. For
example, some ambulance companies could be expert at avoiding complicated cases that are likely
to die. Our survey evidence gives us confidence that this is not the case. In addition, the results
below investigate whether our results are sensitive to controls for observed patient characteristics.
Second, some ambulance companies may serve only a certain part of a ZIP code, and these ambulance companies may disproportionately take their patients to particular hospitals. For example,
an ambulance company focused in a higher income part of a ZIP code could be more likely to take
patients to high-cost hospitals. In that case, we might find that high-cost hospitals are associated
with better outcomes through patient selection. We can address this concern to some extent in
our specification checks by restricting our sample to particularly homogenous ZIP codes using the
Summary File 3 (SF3) file issued by the U.S. Census. By restricting our analysis to ZIP codes with
little within-ZIP code variation in demographic characteristics such as household income and racial
composition, we hope to minimize the potential for ambulance selection within a ZIP code.
A third concern is that the approach interprets differences in costs and outcomes as stemming
from different hospital assignment patterns across ambulance companies, but ambulance companies
may have a more direct impact on health. If ambulance companies that tend to take patients to
high-cost hospitals provide different levels of pre-hospital care, then the outcome differences would
be due to a combination of the two types of treatment. More subtly, part of the variation comes
from ambulance companies driving farther to reach a different hospital. If these distances were
systematically longer as ambulances travel farther to reach a high-cost hospital, then “high-cost”
ambulances may take more time to reach the hospital, resulting in worse outcomes. An innovation
in this project is that we study (and control for) differences in care provided by the ambulance
company, including the distance traveled to the hospital. We also investigate the timing of any
mortality reductions, as the direct effects of treatment delivered by the ambulance company will

17

likely be observed soon after admission.
A final concern is that ambulance company assignment may only affect hospital choice for a
subset of patients, and the results would provide a local average treatment effect. For example, we
are unable to estimate effects for patients who always insist (and are taken to) high-cost hospitals.
Because of these limitations we turn to a second, complementary approach.

Borders Approach
Our alternative approach compares patients along borders that define distinct ambulance dispatch
areas. The idea is that patients could live in the same neighborhood yet go to very different hospitals
because they reside on opposite sides of a shared border. This parallels the analysis of Black (1999),
who compared those living on either side of school district borders to study the impact of school
quality on housing prices. For this analysis, we focus on New York State, where we have data on
exact patient addresses coupled with a detailed disptch grid we obtained from the New York State
Department of Emergency Medical Services.
Each state-certified Emergency Medical Service (EMS) provider in New York is assigned to a
territory where they are allowed to be ”first due” for response via a certificate of need process,
subject to the terms of New York Public Health Law (Article 30). These territories are typically
delineated using county, city, town, village and fire district boundaries. Other areas may be entered
when the provider is requested for mutual aid.
Using these data, we can identify census block groups in New York State on either side of an
ambulance dispatch area boundary. Census block groups are the smallest geographical units defined
by the U.S. Census Bureau for which demographic information is publicly available. These blocks
have an average population of 1,300 residents. Using the latitude and longitude coordinates of each
patient’s residential address as recorded in our hospital discharge data, we map each patient to
a unique census block group. We then identify individuals whose block group centroid is located
within a defined distance of an ambulance service territory border.
Specifically, we include patients residing in block groups located within 1-mile, 2-miles, and
5-miles of an ambulance border. The smaller distance criteria allows us to compare patients who

18

live very near to one another and are likely a better matched comparison. The 5-mile criterion
allows us to retain more rural areas, however, as block groups are constructed based on population
counts and the centroid in these areas may lie outside the 1- or 2-mile restrictions.
The estimating equations parallel the earlier analysis, but now the comparison is across areas
rather than ambulance companies. Rather than ZIP code fixed effects, we include matched-pair
fixed effects that allow us to compare patients who live on either side of the same boundary. For
patient i living in dispatch area a(i), the first-stage model takes the form:

Ha(i) = φ0 + φ1 Za(i) + φ2 Xi + θp(i) + λt(i) + ωi

(3)

where Ha(i) represents the average costs in the area where the patient is treated, while Za(i)
is the average costs in the dispatch area where the patient resides, and θp(i) is a set of dummies
for each matched pair of census block groups. So this regression asks: are patients who live in
a dispatch area serviced by relatively high-cost hospitals more likely to be treated at high-cost
hospitals themselves compared to those who live nearby but across a dispatch area boundary?
Standard errors in these models are clustered at the dispatch-area level.
We can then once again estimate a mortality-cost model of the form:

Mi = γ0 + γ1 Ha(i) + γ2 Xi + θp(i) + λt(i) + i

(4)

where we instrument for hospital costs at the area level using the first stage relationship in (3).
The borders approach augments the ambulance preference approach because differences in hospital patterns within these small areas are plausibly due to differences in ambulance dispatch
patterns and not patient tastes. At the same time, there may be other factors that change at borders that could bias our findings. For example, in New York a common border for dispatch areas
is the county, and counties may differ in other factors that impact the choice of residence, such as
the quality of public services.9 Our analysis will control for differences in resident characteristics
9

Of the borders delineated by the New York EMS service file, borders that separate adjacent cities and adjacent
towns are most common (29.2%, and 18.7% respectively), while 15.5% of the borders divide counties and towns,
13.2% of the borders divide counties and fire districts, and 6.5% divide counties and villages. Other types of borders
(e.g. town-village, city-county, etc.) each comprise less than 5% of the border sample.

19

at the boundary using U.S. Census SF3 data. Of course, differences in unobserved characteristics
of patients across a border from one another remain a concern.
In summary, we consider two different identification strategies using two different data sets.
Each has advantages and weaknesses, but taken together they can provide insights into whether
hospital costs are associated with health outcomes.

V

Ambulance Company Preference Results

Balance
The key underlying assumption of our approaches is that the sources of variation in the hospital
type have been purged of patient-specific factors which impact costs or outcomes. To assess whether
this is true at least along observable dimensions, Table 1 shows the balance of patient characteristics
across those patients with above and below median values of our ambulance preference instrument;
that is, those patients who are picked up by ambulance companies that go to more expensive
hospitals available to a ZIP code area versus those picked up by ambulances that go to less expensive
ones.
The first row of the table shows that costs among those picked up by ambulance companies
with preferences for higher-cost hospitals is about 20 log points higher compared to those picked
up by ambulance companies with preferences for lower-cost hospitals. The next set of rows shows
that these two groups of patients are similar in terms of their overall health and demographic
characteristics. For example, the average age for low-cost ambulance companies is 78.5 vs. 78.0
for high-cost companies. Sex, race, and comorbidity rates are similar as well. Perhaps even more
comforting is that the two groups of patients look nearly identical in terms of their pre-hospital
treatment, as summarized by the ambulance payment ($291 vs. $296). They administer an IV
in 9.7% of cases in both groups. The high-cost ambulances are more likely to be Advanced Life
Support ambulances, and we will report estimates of a robustness check that limits the sample to
ALS ambulances. In addition, the high-cost areas had a 3% shorter distance, on average. While
time to the hospital matters for survival, and we control for distance, a 0.2 mile difference is unlikely

20

to drive the results. That said, we do consider 1-day mortality to begin to investigate effects of the
ambulance company treatment. At least in terms of observable characteristics, our sample appears
well balanced.

Basic Results
Table 2 shows the first-stage results for our ambulance company preference instrument, equation
(1) above. We begin by estimating the relationship between average hospital cost at the patient’s
hospital and the average hospital cost associated with the ambulance company assigned to the
patient, controlling only for year and ZIP code fixed effects: there is a very strong correlation
between the two, suggesting that if the ambulance company that tends to take other patients to
10% more expensive hospitals, the hospital where the patient is taken has 3.1% higher average
hospital costs. The subsequent columns add controls for patient and ambulance characteristics.
The result is remarkably robust to these additional controls.
The source of the variation is evident from the coefficient being significantly less than one.
Consider the variation that stems from mutual-aid arrangements, for example. The instrument is
calculated with heavier weights on areas where the company usually operates. If it is called in
to help when another company is busy, the first-stage reflects that the company is more likely to
transport the patient back to its usual hospitals, but less so in the mutual-aid area than where it
usually operates. The mutual aid area likely has other nearby hospitals in the choice set.
Table 3 shows the results of estimating equation (2) by OLS. We find a strong and highly
significant negative correlation between hospital cost and mortality. The results suggest that raising
costs by 10% (or about $1000) would lower one year mortality by 0.24 percentage points (or about
0.7% of baseline mortality). As noted earlier, this result suffers from potential selection bias due
to patient choice of hospital. It is worth noting, however, that the robustness of the results to
controls does not suggest much bias based on observables; we find quite different results in our
OLS estimates for New York, however.
The next set of rows report the 2SLS estimates and the point estimates are much larger in
magnitude. In a model with year, diagnosis and ZIP code fixed effects, a 10% rise in costs is

21

associated with a 1.96 percentage-point lower mortality rate, or about 6% of baseline mortality. In
a model with full controls, the estimate declines to 1.44 percentage points. While the estimates do
decline with controls, the estimates are not statistically significantly different from one another.
To put the estimate in context, this result implies that a two standard deviation increase in
average hospital costs, an increase of 0.8 log points, is associated with an 11.5 percentage point
reduction in mortality, or 31% of the sample mortality rate. Thus, we find compelling evidence that
higher-cost hospitals have significantly lower patient mortality, at least for emergency admissions.

Robustness
We next subject this striking finding to a series of robustness tests. First, we report results across
alternative mortality horizons up to two years. We are particularly interested in very short run
effects at one day after admission. If we are finding strong effects of differing pre-hospital care,
then those should show up right away and perhaps fade over time. More generally, it is interesting
to know whether these findings are reduced or increased as we extend the mortality horizon.
The results of using different horizons are presented in Table 4. The OLS results in the top
rows show mortality reductions which are significant at every duration, and the magnitude grows
with duration along with the sample mean. In contrast, the 2SLS results show significant increases
in mortality at one day, which become reductions over time and are only significant by 30 days.
These findings are inconsistent with the notion that the main results simply reflect differences in
pre-hospital care. To the converse, it appears that the hospitals to which individuals are (effectively) randomly assigned appear to undertake actions which raise mortality in the short run, but
reduce it in the longer run. Indeed, when we classify procedures by their 1-day mortality rate, we
find expensive hospitals are more likely to perform procedures with high 1-day mortality rates.10
Moreover, the longer-term mortality reductions do not fade out but continue to have important
mortality impacts even at 2 years, although part of the longer-run effects could be due to ongoing
care in the subsequent period rather than the effects of the initial hospital stay.
10
To characterize procedures, the 1-day mortality rate was calculated for all 3-digit principal procedures with at
least 30 observations, a mean of 5.5/1000. Using our IV strategy, a two-standard deviation increase in the hospital
cost measure was associated with a 1.99/1000 increase in this principal-procedure mortality rate (p < 0.001).

22

Table 5 reports robustness checks of our findings along several other dimensions. The first panel
shows sizeable effects across different age groups. The next set examines the impact of ZIP code
heterogeneity on our findings. When we consider the standard deviation of income in the ZIP
code, the results are largest in the 2nd and 3rd quartile of this measure. Meanwhile, the effects are
remarkably stable across ZIP codes that vary according to racial concentration. This is inconsistent
with the notion that ZIP code heterogeneity is driving our results through patient/ambulance colocation within a ZIP code. Last, the smallest geographic unit in our data is the ZIP code, and
we find a negative cost-mortality relationship across ZIP codes of different sizes: the largest effects
are found in the 2nd and 3rd quartiles of this measure. Again, the effects are not monotonically
related to ZIP code size in a way that would suggest systematic confounding variation.
Appendix Table A2 reports further robustness checks. Results were similar when we restricted
the sample to: ambulance transports labeled “emergency,” patients who were transported from
home or a nursing home, patients transported in ALS ambulances, and patients who were not
transferred to another inpatient facility. Results were also similar when we varied the instrument
calculation to exclude the patient’s ZIP code rather than the patient, and when we used hospital charges rather than those charges deflated by a cost-to-charge ratio. Overall, the result is
remarkably consistent to all of these changes.

VI

Border Results for New York State

Balance
In this section, we turn to the second empirical strategy, relying on comparisons of individuals
living in close proximity but on either side of ambulance dispatch area borders in New York State.
Once again, we begin by showing that these samples are similar in terms of observed characteristics.
In Table 6 we divide each pair of census block groups in New York into those on the low-cost side
of an ambulance border, and those on the high-cost side. We find about an 11 log point difference
in hospital cost, on average, between these two groups. The remaining rows again show relatively
well-balanced compositions of the groups in terms of our control variables. The largest difference is

23

the distance from the patient’s home census block to the hospital, with a 0.25 mile shorter distance
for patients on the high-cost side. This difference fades away, however, and is not seen in the sample
of patients within 5 miles of a boundary.
Since we are comparing different areas, we can also now consider differences in characteristics
of the block groups in which they reside. In the final rows of Table 6, we find that block groups
on adjacent sides of these borders are similar in terms of characteristics such as income, share
owner-occupied housing, and share urban.

Basic Results
Patients are more likely to attend a hospital in their district. Specifically, for patients with a
hospital located in their district: 72% of patients living within one mile of a district border are
treated at a hospital in their district, and this rate increases to 75% and 78% for those living within
2 and 5 miles of a border, respectively. This is borne out in the first-stage relationship reported in
Table 7. The point estimates range between 0.64 and 0.74, with F-statistics that range from 12.8
to 18.1.
Table 7 also reports the OLS and 2SLS results. One salient difference between the New York
results and those for the national sample is that in our New York State sample we find that the
OLS results for mortality are much more sensitive to controls. These findings indicate substantial
selection bias in OLS when the models only control for year indicators: the coefficient on hospital
costs becomes much more negative as we add controls.
As with the national sample, however, the results grow and stabilize when we use our 2SLS
approach. Using the border strategy, we find that a 10% increase in costs is associated with lower
mortality ranging from 0.47 to 0.54 percentage points, or about 2.0-2.3% of baseline mortality
rate, depending on the sample.11 This result implies a two standard deviation increase in average
hospital costs is associated with a 4.1-4.5 percentage point reduction in mortality, or 17-19% of
the baseline mortality rate.12 These results reinforce our findings from the ambulance company
11
The mortality rate in this sample is lower than in the Medicare analysis, as this sample is composed of all
emergency room admissions rather than ambulance transports.
12
The standard deviation of mean hospital log(costs) is equal to 0.415, 0.432 and 0.447 for the one-mile, two-mile
and five-mile samples, respectively.

24

preference strategy, as we again find compelling evidence that higher-cost hospitals have lower
mortality for emergency admissions.

Extensions
We undertake two extensions with our New York sample. First, in Table A3, we show the impact
of varying mortality horizons. Consistent with the OLS results from the ambulance preference
strategy, the OLS results in the first panel show mortality reductions that grow with duration for
all three distance samples. In contrast, point estimates for the 2SLS results show no change in
mortality at one day for patients. Over time, however, we find that for all of our distance samples,
reductions in mortality are significant for the 30-day mortality measure. Although the New York
data do not include information that allows us to control for pre-hospital factors (as was done with
the Medicare data), this pattern of results is again inconsistent with the notion that our results are
driven by differences in pre-hospital care which would likely be found most strongly at the shortest
mortality horizons.
Second, one important extension that is available in New York is our ability to look at the
impacts of hospital costs on the non-elderly. To do so, we replicate our existing strategy for the
non-elderly sample, focusing the non-elderly, ages 18-64, and the “near elderly,” ages 50-64 (see
Appendix Tables A4 and A5). For both samples, we restrict analysis to the same non-deferrable
conditions analyzed in the Medicare sample. We find similar first-stage estimates in these samples,
and the OLS results are again sensitive to controls. In contrast to the results for the elderly, we find
no statistically significant impacts on mortality using 2SLS. As with the elderly, however, point
estimates for the 2SLS results are roughly twice as large in magnitude relative to the OLS estimates.
In addition, the point estimates imply a substantial mortality-cost relationship. For both groups, a
two standard-deviation increase in hospital costs is associated with a 15-30% reduction in mortality
compared to the sample mean mortality rate, magnitudes which are within the range of the New
York Medicare sample.13
13
For the nonelderly, a 2 standard deviation increase in costs (std. dev=0.42) is associated with a 0.9 to 1.6
percentage point reduction in mortality, or 15-30% of the sample mortality of 5.4%. Meanwhile, a two-standard
deviation increase in costs for the near elderly (std. dev=0.43) is associated with a 1 to 1.5 percentage point
reduction in mortality, or 18-28% of the sample mortality of 8.2%.

25

VII

Interpretation

“Unbundling” the Cost Results
Our analysis thus far has considered hospital costs as a summary measure of hospital characteristics
that might drive patient outcomes. But hospital costs may proxy for a “bundle” of hospital characteristics that are correlated with costs. As we move from carefully documenting that hospitals
matter to understanding why they matter, it is important to begin to unbundle these findings.
Of course, any other hospital characteristic that we relate to outcomes is potentially endogenous
due to patient selection, as is the case with average hospital cost. But we can use the same Medicare
ambulance preference strategy used for costs to instrument for these measures as well; for example,
we can effectively compare patients who are picked up by ambulances that prefer teaching hospitals
to ones that prefer non-teaching hospitals. In this way, we can provide selection-free estimates of the
impacts of these alternative quality measures. And, by including the instrumented quality measures
in the same regression as our instrumented cost regression, we can effectively run a “horse race”
to see if controlling for other quality measures drives out the cost result. Unfortunately, given the
more limited variation available in the New York data, we are unable to replicate this analysis on
that sample as well.
In theory, there is a very large set of hospital characteristics that we could relate to outcomes.
We choose to focus on three sets of measures for this analysis. The first set of measures aims to
capture “leading edge” hospitals which should be at the forefront of patient treatment and therefore
might be both higher cost and have higher quality physical and human capital. The second measure
is an independent measure of quality based on the rate at which hospitals provide best-practice care.
The third measure focuses on a quantity measure of intensity rather than costs, which combines
variation in price and quantity.
We use two indicators to characterize hospitals as “leading edge.” The first is teaching hospital
status. Our main measure includes hospitals that are recognized as teaching hospitals by the
American Medical Association, although results are similar when we use alternative definitions.14
14

Appendix Table A2 reports results for the more selective definition of hospitals that are members of the Council
of Teaching Hospitals, which represents 30% of our sample admissions.

26

41% of the patients in our sample are treated in a teaching hospital. Second, we define “hightech” hospitals using a technology-frontier index we constructed using hospital survey data from
the American Hospital Association (AHA). Values for this index were defined by identifying new
questions in each year’s AHA hospital survey between 1995 and 2008. For example, beginning in
2004 the AHA began asking whether hospitals had the capability to deliver shaped beam radiation
therapy, a technology that precisely targets radiation at tumors and legions. The addition of such
a question would be considered a “new” technology in our measure. For our 2002-2008 data we
allowed a “burn-in” period of 7 years from 1995 to 2001 to construct a base set of new technologies,
and then beginning in 2002 ranked hospitals based on the number new technologies they had in
each year. We identified “high-tech” hospitals as those in the top decile of this measure in a given
year, and hospital rankings are similar when we used alternative measures, such as a rolling fiveyear average of the ranking. This measure is somewhat more selective than the teaching hospital
definition, with 30% of patients treated in these high-tech hospitals. Table A6 shows that both
teaching and high-tech hospitals are positively correlated with average hospital costs, with teaching
hospitals associated with hospital log costs that are 8 points higher than non-teaching hospitals,
and high-tech hospitals associated with 12 log point higher costs.
The second hospital characteristic is an independent quality measure of the type endorsed by
CMS. This is a procedural quality score that measures the rate at which best practices are employed
for heart failure, heart attack, and pneumonia patients. In particular, the CMS quality score for
2005 is used to characterize the hospitals, and it is standardized to have mean zero and standard
deviation of one. Procedural quality measures have been shown to be negatively correlated with
treatment intensity at the area level (Baicker and Chandra 2004) and shown to be positively
correlated with survival gains for heart attack patients during the 1980s and early 1990s (Skinner
et al. 2006). In addition, Skinner and Staiger (2009) show that hospitals that were early adopters of
these best practices appear to have positive returns to spending. Table A6 shows that this quality
score is relatively unrelated to hospital costs in this sample.
The results for different hospital types are shown in Table 8. The top panel shows the OLS
results, first including each measure separately, and then including each alternative measure along

27

with hospital costs in the same model. We find that each of the alternative measures is significantly
negatively associated with mortality, although the size of the coefficient on the CMS quality score is
quite small. Meanwhile, teaching and high-tech hospitals have conditional mortality rates that are
1 percentage point lower than other hospitals. When regressed together with hospital average costs,
the coefficient estimates for teaching and high-tech hospitals decline slightly but are qualitatively
similar. This slight decline is seen for hospital costs as well: controlling for these alternative
measures of quality does not dampen the estimated relationship between hospital cost and mortality.
In contrast, the CMS quality score coefficient is largely unchanged, but the point estimate on
hospital costs is lower and not significant at conventional levels. The main reason for the change
in the point estimate is the change in sample (the restriction to hospitals that are large enough to
report these measures).
The second panel shows the same exercise using 2SLS to instrument for each of our quality measures, as well as hospital costs. The first stages for these models have larger coefficients compared
to hospital costs and are highly statistically significant (see Appendix Table A7). For teaching
hospitals and high-tech hospitals, we find that instrumenting significantly increases the point estimates, suggesting that the OLS results are indeed biased downwards (in absolute value) by patient
selection. We find that going to a teaching hospital (due to ambulance preferences) lowers mortality by 3.9 percentage points, which is over 10% of baseline mortality. The effect is even larger
for being brought to a high-tech hospital: 4.7 percentage points. For hospitals’ procedural quality
score, however, the coefficient continues to be small: a two standard deviation increase in this score
is associated with a 1 percentage-point reduction in mortality, and the result is not statistically
significant.
Most importantly for our analysis, we once again find that the effects of hospital costs on patient
outcomes are not reduced by including these other quality measures in the regression. Moreover,
in the 2SLS case, focusing on hospitals with quality scores and controlling for these scores leads
to a point estimate that is larger in magnitude (-0.218). We conclude that higher-cost hospitals
appear to improve outcomes above and beyond the effects of being a high-quality hospital along
these dimensions.

28

Finally, we consider the decomposition of our cost measure into its price and quantity components. As a proxy for quantity, we compute for each patient the number of procedures performed
during his stay. We then measure the average number of procedures at the hospital (excluding the
patient himself). This averages 1.33 with a standard deviation of 0.58.
Table 9 shows that more procedures are negatively correlated with 1-year mortality in the OLS
regressions, but the 2SLS coefficient is significantly larger: -0.161.15 This implies that a twostandard deviation increase in this treatment-intensity measure is associated with an 18 percentage
point reduction in mortality. Next, we attempt to decompose the cost result by including average costs and average number of procedures in the same model. The coefficient on the quantity
measure declines only slightly, but the coefficient on average costs decreases by more than half to
-0.065 compared to -0.144 in the main results. These results suggest that much of the difference
in mortality at high-cost hospitals stems from larger quantities of care provided. Costs remain
significant, suggesting a remaining effect of spending above and beyond our proxy for quantity, but
quantities are substantively more important.

Diminishing Returns
The main results show that higher-cost hospitals are associated with lower one-year mortality,
but the point estimate may mask heterogeneity across the distribution of hospital costs. Our
methodology with a continuous treatment measure (hospital costs) provides a setting where local
instrumental variable techniques can be employed to estimate effects at different levels of hospital
costs (Heckman and Vytlacil 2005, Florens et al. 2008).
These results can be shown in figures. Figure 2A reports average hospital costs for each percentile of the instrumental variable: hospital log costs averaged at the ambulance company level.
These variables were first regressed on ZIP code and year fixed effects to focus on the identifying
variation, and the residuals were then re-centered at the mean value. Figure 2A shows that these
hospital cost residuals are positively correlated (and fairly linear) with respect to average costs at
the ambulance-company level.
15

See Table A7 and Appendix Figure A1 for the first-stage relationship, which continues to be economically and
statistically significant for the procedure measure.

29

Figure 2B shows the relationship between 1-year mortality and hospital costs. Again, these
variables have been residualized as in 2A. In addition, hospital costs along the x-axis are the
predicted value from a model of hospital costs on the instrument. Essentially, the x-axis here is
the y-axis from Figure 2A. As implied by Figure 2B, there is a downward-sloping portion until the
top percentiles. The estimates are from a local-quadratic regression, the preferred estimator when
the derivative is sought. Figure 2C reports the local IV estimates, which are simply the derivative
estimates from Figure 2B, evaluated at each percentile of hospital costs. Return estimates are very
large at the least-costly hospitals. The bulk of the data continue to suggest smaller returns as
hospital costs increase. The point estimate is zero at the 83rd percentile, after which higher costs
are actually associated with worse outcomes, with point estimates statistically significantly less
than zero for up to the 76th percentile. While the hospitals at either end of the distribution may
be outliers for a variety of reasons, the results suggest that for all but the highest cost hospitals
there are positive but diminishing returns to spending.16

VIII

Conclusions and Implications

Given the high and rising costs of health care in the U.S., with the attendant pressures on public
and private budgets, there has been great interest among policy makers in developing strategies
for “bending the cost curve” and lowering the ultimate share of GDP which will be consumed by
health care. A wide variety of potential solutions have been posed to the cost control problem,
but none holds more promise than the notion of saving money by ending over-reimbursement for
inefficient treatments. The results of the Dartmouth analysis, and parallel findings for hospitals,
have been used to suggest that a sizeable share of hospital spending does little to improve patient
outcomes, and so could readily be cut without harming patient health. Our results do not disprove
that conclusion - but they should give policy makers some pause before assuming that spending
can be easily cut without harming patient health, at least in the context of emergency care.
16

One caveat is that the “compliers” may be different at different levels of the instrument, so the heterogeneity in
returns could represent the decline in effectiveness for any hospital and/or a change in effectiveness for patients who
are treated differently at the highest-cost hospitals compared to patients who are treated in just slightly less costly
hospitals.

30

In particular, using exogenous ambulance assignment to control for the endogeneity of patient
hospital choice, our results suggest that high-cost hospitals have better outcomes: 20-30% lower
mortality compared to low-cost hospitals. Other summary measures of hospital quality again
suggest that hospital choice matters: teaching hospitals and hospitals that are early adopters of
new technologies have lower mortality when similar patients are compared. Interestingly, even
controlling for teaching status or capital quality, high-cost hospitals have lower mortality. We rule
out many alternative explanations for this finding, and show that it is robust to two different
identification strategies.
As with previous studies of this relationship, it is not possible to conclude that the treatment
intensity-mortality relationship reflects the effects of higher-cost inputs. Other aspects of the hospital, such as physician or staff quality measures beyond those considered here, may be correlated
with overall costs and may achieve similar results with smaller budgets. To address that question,
a plausibly exogenous within-hospital source of spending variation would need to be found. The
fact that our spending results persist when we condition on other summary measures of hospital
quality suggests that treatment intensity itself may be driving the improved outcomes. It would
be particularly useful to extend this analysis to the non-emergent population, to assess whether
spending is productive for that group as well.

31

References
Allison, Jeroan J., Catarina I. Kiefe, Norman W. Weissman, Sharina D. Person,
Matthew Rousculp, John G. Canto, Sejong Bae, O. Dale Williams, Robert Farmer,
and Robert M. Centor, “Relationship of Hospital Teaching Status With Quality of Care
and Mortality for Medicare Patients With Acute MI,” JAMA: The Journal of the American
Medical Association, 2000, 284 (10), 1256 –1262.
Anderson, Gerard F. and Bianca K. Frogner, “Health Spending In OECD Countries: Obtaining Value Per Dollar,” Health Affairs, November 2008, 27 (6), 1718 –1727.
Athey, Susan and Scott Stern, “The Impact of Information Technology on Emergency Health
Care Outcomes,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2002, 33 (3), 399–432.
Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra, “Medicare spending, the physician workforce, and
beneficiaries’ quality of care,” Health Affairs (Project Hope), June 2004, Suppl Web Exclusives,
W4–184–97. PMID: 15451981.
Barnato, Amber E, Chung-Chou H Chang, Max H Farrell, Judith R Lave, Mark S
Roberts, and Derek C Angus, “Is survival better at hospitals with higher ”end-of-life”
treatment intensity?,” Medical Care, February 2010, 48 (2), 125–132. PMID: 20057328.
Black, Sandra E, “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999, 114 (2), 577–599.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas, “Does Medicare Save Lives?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2009, 124 (2), 597–636.
Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas O. Staiger, “Productivity Spillovers in Health Care: Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115, 103–140.
and Jonathan Skinner, “Geography and Racial Health Disparities,” Technical Report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc February 2003.
Chiang, Arthur, Guy David, and Michael Housman, “The Determinants of Urban Emergency Medical Services Privatization,” Critical Planning, 2006, Summer.
Curka, Peter A., Paul E. Pepe, Victoria F. Ginger, Robert C. Sherrad, Michael V.
Ivy, and Brian S. Zachariah, “Emergency medical services priority dispatch,” Annals of
Emergency Medicine, 1993, 22 (11), 1688–1695.
Dobkin, Carlos, “Hospital Staffing and Inpatient Mortality,” Unpublished Working Paper, 2003.
Doyle, Joseph J, “Returns to Local-Area Health Care Spending: Evidence from Health Shocks
to Patients Far From Home,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2011, 3
(3), 221–243.
Fisher, E S, J E Wennberg, T A Stukel, and S M Sharp, “Hospital readmission rates for
cohorts of Medicare beneficiaries in Boston and New Haven,” The New England Journal of
Medicine, October 1994, 331 (15), 989–995. PMID: 8084356.
32

Fisher, Elliott S. and H. Gilbert Welch, “Avoiding the Unintended Consequences of Growth
in Medical Care,” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association, February 1999,
281 (5), 446 –453.
Fisher, Elliott S, David E Wennberg, Thrse A Stukel, and Daniel J Gottlieb, “Variations
in the longitudinal efficiency of academic medical centers,” Health Affairs (Project Hope), 2004,
Suppl Variation, VAR19–32. PMID: 15471777.
Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thrse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas,
and toile L. Pinder, “The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part
2: Health Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care,” Annals of Internal Medicine, February 2003,
138 (4), 288 –298.
Fisher, Elliott S, Julie P Bynum, and Jonathan S Skinner, “Slowing the growth of health
care costs–lessons from regional variation,” The New England Journal of Medicine, February
2009, 360 (9), 849–852. PMID: 19246356.
Florens, Jean-Pierre, James J Heckman, Costas Meghir, and Edward J Vytlacil, “Identification of Treatment Effects Using Control Functions in Models with Continuous, Endogenous Treatment and Heterogeneous Effects,” NBER, May 2008.
Fuchs, Victor R., “Perspective: More Variation In Use Of Care, More Flat-Of-The-Curve
Medicine,” Health Affairs, October 2004.
Garber, Alan M., Thomas E. MaCurdy, and Mark B. McClallan, “Persistence of Medicare
Expenditures among Elderly Beneficiaries,” Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 1998, 1.
Glance, Laurent G, Andrew W Dick, Turner M Osler, Wayne Meredith, and Dana B
Mukamel, “The association between cost and quality in trauma: is greater spending associated with higher-quality care?,” Annals of Surgery, August 2010, 252 (2), 217–222. PMID:
20647927.
Guadagnoli, E, P J Hauptman, J Z Ayanian, C L Pashos, B J McNeil, and P D
Cleary, “Variation in the use of cardiac procedures after acute myocardial infarction,” The
New England Journal of Medicine, August 1995, 333 (9), 573–578. PMID: 7623908.
Heckman, James J. and Edward Vytlacil, “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and
Econometric Policy Evaluation,” Econometrica, Econometric Society 2005.
Johnson, Robin, “The Future of Local Emergency Medical Service: Ambulance Wars or PublicPrivate Truce?,” Reason Foundation, 2001.
Kaiser Family Foundation, “Kaiser Medicare Chartbook, Fourth Edition (Figure 4.3),”
http://facts.kff.org/chart.aspx?cb=58&sctn=165&ch=1757 2010.
Kessler, Daniel and Mark McClellan, “Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1996, 111 (2), 353 –390.
Kolesr, Michal, Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Edward L. Glaeser, and Guido W.
Imbens, “Identification and Inference with Many Invalid Instruments,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series, 2011, No. 17519.
33

McClellan, M, B J McNeil, and J P Newhouse, “Does more intensive treatment of acute
myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis using instrumental variables,”
JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association, September 1994, 272 (11), 859–866.
PMID: 8078163.
O’Connor, Gerald T., Hebe B. Quinton, Neal D. Traven, Lawrence D. Ramunno,
T. Andrew Dodds, Thomas A. Marciniak, and John E. Wennberg, “Geographic Variation in the Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction,” JAMA: The Journal of the American
Medical Association, February 1999, 281 (7), 627 –633.
OECD,
“OECD
Health
Data
2011
Frequently
Requested
Data,”
http://www.oecd.org/document/16/0,3746,en 2649 33929 2085200 1 1 1 1,00.html 2011.
Pilote, L, R M Califf, S Sapp, D P Miller, D B Mark, W D Weaver, J M Gore, P W
Armstrong, E M Ohman, and E J Topol, “Regional variation across the United States
in the management of acute myocardial infarction.,” The New England Journal of Medicine,
August 1995, 333 (9), 565–572. PMID: 7623907.
Ragone, Michael, “Evolution or Revolution: EMS Industry Faces Difficult Changes,” Journal of
Emergency Medical Services, 2012, (February).
Reinhardt, Uwe E., Peter S. Hussey, and Gerard F. Anderson, “U.S. Health Care Spending
In An International Context,” Health Affairs, May 2004, 23 (3), 10 –25.
Romley, John A., Anupam B. Jena, and Dana P. Goldman, “Hospital Spending and
Inpatient Mortality: Evidence From California,” Annals of Internal Medicine, February 2011,
154 (3), 160 –167.
Sirovich, Brenda E., Daniel J. Gottlieb, H. Gilbert Welch, and Elliott S. Fisher, “Regional Variations in Health Care Intensity and Physician Perceptions of Quality of Care,”
Annals of Internal Medicine, May 2006, 144 (9), 641 –649.
Skinner, Jonathan and Douglas Staiger, “Technology Diffusion and Productivity Growth in
Health Care,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, 2009, No. 14865.
Skinner, Jonathan S, Douglas O Staiger, and Elliott S Fisher, “Is Technological Change
In Medicine Always Worth It? The Case Of Acute Myocardial Infarction,” Health Affairs,
March 2006, 25 (2), w34–w47.
Skura, Barry, “Where Do 911 System Ambulances Take Their Patients? Differences Between
Voluntary Hospital Ambulances and Fire Department Ambulances,” 2001.
Song, Yunjie, Jonathan Skinner, Julie Bynum, Jason Sutherland, John E Wennberg,
and Elliott S Fisher, “Regional variations in diagnostic practices,” The New England Journal of Medicine, July 2010, 363 (1), 45–53. PMID: 20463332.
Stock, James H, Jonathan H Wright, and Motohiro Yogo, “A Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, October 2002, 20 (4), 518–529.

34

Stukel, Therese A., F. Lee Lucas, and David E. Wennberg, “Long-term Outcomes of
Regional Variations in Intensity of Invasive vs Medical Management of Medicare Patients
With Acute Myocardial Infarction,” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association,
March 2005, 293 (11), 1329 –1337.
Tu, J V, C L Pashos, C D Naylor, E Chen, S L Normand, J P Newhouse, and
B J McNeil, “Use of cardiac procedures and outcomes in elderly patients with myocardial
infarction in the United States and Canada,” The New England Journal of Medicine, May
1997, 336 (21), 1500–1505. PMID: 9154770.
Watson, Stuart, “Two ambulance companies compete for patients and their health dollars
| WCNC.com Charlotte,” http://www.wcnc.com/home/Two-Ambulance-companies-competefor-patients-and-their-health-dollars–99140244.html 2011.
Welch, H. Gilbert, Sandra M Sharp, Dan J Gottlieb, Jonathan S Skinner, and John E
Wennberg, “Geographic Variation in Diagnosis Frequency and Risk of Death Among Medicare Beneficiaries,” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association, March 2011,
305 (11), 1113–1118.
Zhang, Yuting, Katherine Baicker, and Joseph P Newhouse, “Geographic variation in
Medicare drug spending,” The New England Journal of Medicine, July 2010, 363 (5), 405–
409. PMID: 20538621.

35

New York Hospital ambulances are 10 times more likely than Fire Department ambulances to take patients picked up in the Bellevue Hospital
zip code area (10016) back to New York Hospital. As illustrated in the
following map, New York Hospital is three miles from Bellevue. New York
Hospital takes 29 percent of the Bellevue zip code patients to New York
Hospital, while the Fire Department takes only 3 percent of those patients
to New York Hospital.

B) Example: St. Clare’s Hospital ambulances.
Destination of Patients Picked Up In The Bellevue Hospital Zip Code Area
Destination
All Voluntary
Hospital
Department
St. Clare’s
Hospital ambulances
are 25 times
more likelyFire
than
FDNY amAmbulances
bulances to take patients pickedAmbulances
up in the Bellevue zip code
area back to
St. Clare’s. As illustrated in the preceding map, Bellevue is on the east
sideBellevue
of Manhattan
St. Clare’s
25%* is on the west side.
61%**
Hospitaland St. Clare’s Hospital
takes
55 percent of patients from the Bellevue zip code area to St. Clare’s,
(HHC)
while the Fire Department takes only two percent of them to St. Clare’s.
Any Voluntary

75%

39%

Hospital of Patients Picked Up In The Bellevue Hospital Zip Code Area
Destination
*157 taken to Bellevue/632St.
total.
**815Hospital
taken to Bellevue/1,346
total
Destination
Clare’s
Fire Department
Ambulances
Ambulances
B) Example: Elmhurst hospital zip code area.
55%*
2%** Skura (2001)
New York City Ambulance
Referral Patterns:
St.Figure
Clare’s1.Hospital
When voluntary hospital ambulances (e.g., St. John’s and North Shore at
45%
98%Differences Between Voluntary Hospital
Source: Skura, Barry.
”Where
do 911
Ambulances
Take
Their
Another
Hospital
Forest
Hills)
pickSystem
up patients
in
the zip
code
areaPatients?
of Elmhurst
Hospital,
Ambulances and Fire*102
Department
City**34
of New
Office of thetotal
Comptroller, 2001.
taken
to St.Ambulances.”
Clare's/184
total.
taken
to St. Clare's/1,366
they
bring
them
to Elmhurst
only
36 York,
percent
of time, as
compared to the
Fire Department, which does so 79 percent of the time.

Destination of Patients Picked Up In The Elmhurst Hospital Zip Code Area
Destination
All Voluntary Hospital
Fire Department
Ambulances
Ambulances
v

•

Elmhurst Hospital
(HHC)

36%*

79%**

Any Voluntary Hospital

64%

21%

*160 taken to Elmhurst/446 total. **1,264 taken to Elmhurst/1,610 total.
When a voluntary hospital ambulance picks up a patient in the zip code
area of an HHC hospital, it is far more likely than the Fire Department to
bring the patient back to the specific voluntary hospital that sponsors
that ambulance.
Who Picks Up Patient: Voluntary hospital ambulances
Where:
In HHC zip code areas
Comparison: Voluntary hospital vs. Fire Department ambulances
Analysis: Who is most likely to bring patients to the
voluntary hospital that sponsors the ambulance
Outcome: Voluntaries are far more likely to go back to
their sponsoring hospitals. In the examples we cite, “far
more” ranges from “ten times more likely” to “25 times
more likely”.

36

Table 1—Ambulance Strategy: Patient Characteristics Across Ambulance Companies

Amb. Co’s Average Cost
vs. ZIP Average Cost
≤Median
>Median
Mean Hospital log(Cost)

8.593

8.795

Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age

78.5
0.091
0.086
0.120
0.173
0.391
0.139

78.0
0.098
0.091
0.125
0.174
0.381
0.131

Male
Race: white
Race: African American

0.399
0.870
0.089

0.401
0.852
0.104

Comorbidity:
Comorbidity:
Comorbidity:
Comorbidity:

0.230
0.254
0.207
0.337

0.219
0.250
0.210
0.343

291
7.4
0.673
0.097
0.096
0.819

296
7.2
0.721
0.097
0.105
0.843

< 65
≥65 &
≥70 &
≥75 &
≥80 &
≥ 90

<70
<75
<80
<90

Congestive Heart Failure
COPD
Diabetes
Other

Ambulance Payment
Ambulance Distance
Advanced Life Support
Ambulance: IV Administered
Ambulance: Outpatient Reimbursement
Ambulance: Emergency Transport
Observations

667,143

Note: Some ambulance measures have smaller sample sizes, largely because they are not recorded in the in the outpatient
reimbursement system: Ambulance measures for Advanced Life Support and IV administration (N=600,005); Ambulance
distance travelled (N=599,825)
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

37

Table 2—Ambulance Strategy: First Stage

Ambulance: Mean Hospital log(Cost)

(1)
0.311
(0.012)**

(2)
0.309
(0.012)**

(3)
0.303
(0.012)**

(4)
0.300
(0.012)**

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Diagnosis fixed effects
Patient Controls
Ambulance Controls
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var

667,143
8.640

Note: Estimates reported for Equation (1) in the text. All models include ZIP code and year fixed effects. Patient controls
include indicators for year of age, race, sex, miles from the ZIP code centroid, and comorbidities. Ambulance controls are listed
in Table 1. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

Table 3—Ambulance Strategy: One Year Mortality & Hospital Cost

A. OLS
Mean Hospital log(Cost)

B. 2SLS
Mean Hospital log(Cost)

Diagnosis fixed effects
Patient Controls
Ambulance Controls
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.032
(0.0042)**

-0.036
(0.0038)**

-0.024
(0.0036)**

-0.024
(0.0035)**

-0.229
(0.036)**

-0.196
(0.028)**

-0.151
(0.024)**

-0.144
(0.024)**

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

667,143
0.366

Note: Estimates reported for Equation (2) in the text. All models include ZIP code and year fixed effects. Patient controls
include indicators for year of age, race, sex, miles from the ZIP code centroid, and comorbidities. Ambulance controls are listed
in Table 1. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

38

Table 4—Ambulance Strategy: Mortality Horizons

A. OLS
Mean Hospital log(Cost)

B. 2SLS
Mean Hospital log(Cost)

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

1-day

7-day

30-day

1-year

2-year

-0.002
(0.00097)*

-0.006
(0.0018)**

-0.014
(0.002)

-0.024
(0.0035)**

-0.030
(0.0039)**

0.020
(0.0053)**

0.006
(0.010)

-0.068
(0.014)**

-0.144
(0.024)**

-0.173
(0.028)**

760,998
0.026

760,998
0.082

754,039
0.168

667,143
0.366

560,929
0.470

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 3. All models include full controls. Outcomes
are uncensored, as the estimating sample is restricted to patients observed at least 7-days, 30-days, or 2-years from the end of
the sample period. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

Table 5—Ambulance Strategy: 2SLS Results for Subgroups

Subgroup
A. Age
< 65
65 − 74
75 − 84
85+

Coefficient

S.E.

Obs.

1-year Mortality

-0.117
-0.102
-0.152
-0.178

(0.043)**
(0.039)**
(0.037)**
(0.038)**

63,329
141,187
253,950
208,677

0.223
0.295
0.355
0.472

-0.118
-0.193
-0.161
-0.111

(0.033)**
(0.042)**
(0.041)**
(0.038)**

162,177
162,117
162,217
162,077

0.368
0.365
0.366
0.365

Race HHI
Bottom Quartile
2nd
3rd
Top Quartile

-0.145
-0.140
-0.142
-0.154

(0.053)**
(0.035)**
(0.037)**
(0.034)

162,203
162,162
162,096
162,127

0.369
0.371
0.365
0.360

ZIP Code Area (sq miles)
Bottom Quartile
2nd
3rd
Top Quartile

-0.095
-0.215
-0.175
-0.113

(0.052)
(0.051)**
(0.039)**
(0.0.32)**

162,175
162,141
162,159
162,113

0.362
0.366
0.366
0.372

B. ZIP Code Characteristics
Income: Standard Deviation
Bottom Quartile
2nd
3rd
Top Quartile

Note: Each cell represents a separate model. All models include full controls. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at
the HSA level. ZIP code characteristic cells are for ZIP codes with available 2000 US Census data. * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

39

40
336

32,092
66,722
0.861
0.973

0.108
0.021
0.027
0.040
0.001
0.385
3.727
0.915

78.5
0.064
0.117
0.144
0.189
0.364
0.122

482

32,061
64,421
0.864
0.941

0.069
0.011
0.030
0.029
0.001
0.385
4.126
0.915

78.5
0.062
0.118
0.145
0.187
0.370
0.120

30,949
65,074
0.871
0.940

0.116
0.018
0.028
0.041
0.001
0.384
3.915
0.921

78.4
0.066
0.120
0.145
0.188
0.359
0.122

2 miles
Low Cost Side High Cost Side
8.657
8.757

Note: Areas represented are distances from US Census Block Group centroids to an ambulance dispatch-area boundary.
Source: SPARCS Data

Number of Cross-border Pairs

33,293
65,633
0.866
0.971

< 70
< 75
< 80
< 85

Median Income
Mean Income
Share Owner Occ. Housing
Share Urban

&
&
&
&

78.6
0.060
0.116
0.144
0.186
0.372
0.122
0.063
0.008
0.028
0.028
0.001
0.383
3.977
0.911

< 65
≥ 65
≥ 70
≥ 75
≥ 80
≥ 85

1 Mile
Low Cost Side High Cost Side
8.658
8.763

Share African American
Share Asian
Share Hispanic
Share Other Race
Share Nat. Amer
Share Male
Distance travelled
Charlson Score

Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age

Mean Area log(Cost)

Sample:

583

30,680
60,878
0.856
0.930

0.081
0.021
0.030
0.025
0.001
0.383
3.958
0.915

78.6
0.062
0.117
0.142
0.185
0.369
0.125

29,672
61,273
0.879
0.926

0.119
0.018
0.025
0.037
0.001
0.382
4.001
0.926

78.4
0.067
0.120
0.144
0.187
0.359
0.124

5 miles
Low Cost Side High Cost Side
8.675
8.752

Table 6—Border Strategy: Patient Characteristics Across Ambulance Service Area Borders

41

8.70

142,809
0.236

Yes
No
No
142,809
0.236

Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.054
(0.023)*

-0.015
(0.008)*

8.70

213,968
0.236

Yes
No
No

-0.038
(0.028)

0.014
(0.010)

213,968
0.236

Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.047
(0.024)*

-0.012
(0.007)

8.70

0.678
(0.177)**

0.671
(0.181)**
8.70

(4)

2 Miles
(3)

281,036
0.236

Yes
No
No

-0.040
(0.024)

0.015
(0.008)

8.72

(6)

281,036
0.236

Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.047
(0.02)*

-0.016
(0.007)*

8.72

0.632
(0.148)**

5 Miles

0.627
(0.153)**

(5)

Note: Panel A reports estimates Equation (3) in the text, and Panel B reports estimates from Equation (4). All models include boundary and year fixed effects. Patient
controls include indicators for year of age, race, sex, comorbidities, and US Census block-group characteristics listed in Table 6. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered
at the dispatch area level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: SPARCS Data

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

Year Controls
Demographic Controls
Diagnosis Controls

C. 2SLS: 1-Year Mortality
Mean Area log(Cost)
-0.046
(0.031)

B. OLS: 1-Year Mortality
Mean Area log(Cost)
0.009
(0.010)

Mean of Dep. Var.

1 Mile
(1)
(2)
A. First Stage: Mean Area log(Cost)
Mean Area log(Cost)
0.715
0.738
(0.207)** (0.206)**

Sample:

Table 7—Border Strategy: First Stage, OLS and 2SLS

42

-0.018
(0.010)

-0.022
(0.0035)**

667,143
0.366

-0.141
(0.026)**

-0.019
(0.012)

-0.021
(0.0036)**

-0.009
(0.0019)**

(5)

454,648
0.363

-0.003
(0.007)
-0.218
(0.046)**

-0.003
(0.0015)*
-0.009
(0.005)

(6)

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 3. All models include full controls. AMA: the American Medical Association; CMS
Quality Score is normalized with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

667,143
0.366

454,648
0.363

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.0015)*

-0.010
(0.002)**

(4)

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

667,143
0.366

-0.047
(0.0099)**

-0.011
(0.0018)**

(3)

-0.141
(0.025)**
667,143
0.366

-0.039
(0.0091)**

-0.012
(0.0020)**

(2)

Mean Hospital log(Cost)

CMS Quality Score

Technology: Top Decile

B. 2SLS
Teaching: AMA

Mean Hospital log(Cost)

CMS Quality

Technology: Top Decile

A. OLS
Teaching: AMA

(1)

Table 8—Ambulance Strategy: Alternative Hospital Summary Measures

Table 9—Ambulance Strategy: Treatment Intensity Measured by Number of Procedures

One-Year Mortality
Mean Hospital Number of Procedures

OLS
(1)

OLS
(2)

2SLS
(3)

2SLS
(4)

-0.013
(0.0019)**

-0.010
(0.0019)**

-0.161
(0.015)**

-0.149
(0.014)**

Mean Hospital log(Cost)

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

-0.018
(0.0035)**
667,143
0.366

667,143
0.366

-0.065
(0.021)**
667,143
0.366

667,143
0.366

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 3. All models include full controls. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

43

44

Note: Panel A reports the first-stage relationship between ambulance-company hospital log cost and hospital log cost. Panel B reports local quadratic regression estimates
of 1-year mortality on predicted hospital log cost, where the prediction was from a model of hospital costs on ambulance-company hospital log cost as described in the text.
All variables were first residualized using models with ZIP code and year fixed effects. Each point represents the mean at each percentile of the x-axis variable, and the
lines represent local-linear regression estimates in Panel A and local quadratic estimates in Panel B. Panel C reports the first derivative of the relationship found in Panel
B. Dotted lines represent bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Pilot bandwidth: h=0.02.
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims

Figure 2. Mortality: Local Instrumental Variables Estimates by Percentile

A1
.
.
.
.
.
.
2,729,156

75.051
0.424
0.840
0.108
0.151
0.198
0.219
0.294
8.553

Mean
7,649
8.555
0.411
0.302
0.000
0.201

.
.
.
.
.
.

12.179
0.494
0.366
0.311
0.358
0.398
0.414
0.455
16.821

Std. Dev.
4,257
0.406
0.492
0.459
0.000
0.401

.
.
.
.
.
.
1,204,291

76.493
0.423
0.856
0.096
0.175
0.232
0.207
0.312
8.452

Mean
8,515
8.555
0.404
0.297
0.000
0.246

.
.
.
.
.
.

11.665
0.494
0.351
0.294
0.380
0.422
0.405
0.463
16.523

Std. Dev.
4,818
0.404
0.491
0.457
0.000
0.431

ER Admissions:
Nondeferrable Sample

299
7.540
0.646
0.097
0.828
0.101
738,167

78.200
0.401
0.862
0.095
0.223
0.249
0.208
0.339
8.060

205
10.310
0.478
0.295
0.377
0.301

11.500
0.490
0.345
0.293
0.416
0.432
0.406
0.473
14.000

ER Admissions:
Nondeferrable Sample
Ambulance Arrivals
Mean
Std. Dev.
9,257
13,706
8.694
0.404
0.409
0.492
0.300
0.458
0.000
0.000
0.365
0.481

293
7.300
0.648
0.097
0.831
0.101
667,143

78.200
0.400
0.861
0.097
0.224
0.252
0.209
0.341
7.050

Mean
9,235
8.694
0.410
0.302
0.000
0.367

163
9.390
0.478
0.295
0.374
0.301

11.500
0.490
0.346
0.296
0.417
0.434
0.406
0.474
7.980

Std. Dev.
13,677
0.401
0.492
0.459
0.000
0.482

Analysis Sample

Note: The full sample includes the top 100 3-digit ICD-9-CM diagnoses among emergency room (ER) admissions, which compres 89% of all such admissions. Distance from
ZIP to the hospital was calculated for the 50 closest hospitals, and the number of observations for distance in the full sample is 2,563,145. The nondeferrable sample includes
diagnoses most likely to require immediate medical care, as described in the text. The number of observations for distance in this sample is 1,128,411. The ambulance
sample includes measures of ambulance inputs, some of which are only available for data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid’s Carrier file, as opposed to outpatient
reimbursement. These include ambulance distance, which is available for 693,376 observations. The analysis sample excludes observations that are not linked to a hospital
service area (HSA), patients who were treated more than 50 miles from the ZIP code of their mailing address, patients with missing cost information, and a minumum of
10 observations in the analysis sample for each ZIP code, hospital, and ambulance company.
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

Ambulance Payment
Ambulance Distance
Advanced Life Support
Ambulance: IV Administered
Ambulance: Emergency Transport
Ambulance: Outpatient Claim
Observations

Age
Male
Race: white
Race: African American
Comorbidity: Congestive Heart Failure
Comorbidity: COPD
Comorbidity: Diabetes
Comorbidity: Other
Distance from ZIP centroid to hospital

1-year Mortality

Hospital Cost from ER admissions
Mean Hospital log(Cost) from ER admissions
Teaching Hospital: AMA Recognized
Technology Index (top decile)

ER Admissions:
Full Sample

Table A1—Summary Statistics: Ambualance Sample

A2

Exclude
Transfers
-0.161
(0.026)**

Sub-samples
Patient Origin: Home
or Nursing Home
-0.201
(0.039)**
Advanced Life Support
Ambulances
-0.181
(0.028)**
-0.128
(0.020)**

Instrument Calculation
Exclude Own Hospital Charges
ZIP
-0.123
(0.025)**

-0.061
(0.013)**

Teaching Hospital
Definition

Observations
554,704
652,174
463,892
432,349
666,110
667,143
667,143
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.363
0.369
0.381
0.373
0.366
0.366
0.366
Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 3. All models include full controls. COTH: Councile on Teaching Hospitals. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

Teaching: Member COTH

Mean Hospital log(charges)

Mean Hospital log(Cost)

“Emergency”
Transports
-0.155
(0.029)**

Table A2—Ambulance Strategy: One Year Mortality Robustness

Table A3—Ambulance Strategy: One Year Mortality Robustness

OLS
1-Day
7-Day
30-Day
1-Day
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sample: Census Block Groups Within 1 Mile of Border
Mean Hospital log(Cost)
0.000
-0.005
-0.023
0.002
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.006)**
(0.007)

2SLS
7-Day
(5)

30-Day
(6)

-0.004
(0.011)

-0.043
(0.013)**

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

142,809
0.015

142,809
0.049

142,809
0.103

Sample: Census Block Groups Within 2 Miles of Border
Mean Hospital log(Cost) -0.001
-0.008
-0.022
0.000
(0.001) (0.003)* (0.005)**
(0.007)

-0.007
(0.013)

-0.040
(0.017)

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

213,968
0.015

213,968
0.049

213,968
0.104

Sample: Census Block Groups Within 5 Miles of Border
Mean Hospital log(Cost) -0.001
-0.011
-0.026
-0.003
(0.001) (0.004)** (0.006)**
(0.006)

-0.019
(0.011)

-0.048
(0.013)**

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

281,036
0.049

281,036
0.104

142,809
0.015

213,968
0.015

281,036
0.015

142,809
0.049

213,968
0.049

281,036
0.049

142,809
0.103

213,968
0.104

281,036
0.104

281,036
0.015

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 7. All models include full controls. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered at the ambulance district level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: SPARCS Data

A3

Table A4—Border Strategy: First Stage, OLS and 2SLS for Nonelderly (Age 18-64)

Sample:

1 Mile
(1)
(2)
A. First Stage: Mean Area log(Cost)
Mean Hospital log(Cost)
0.727
0.713
(0.150)** (0.151)**
Mean of Dep. Var.

2 Miles

5 Miles

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.730
(0.154)**

0.712
(0.150)**

0.662
(0.139)**

0.644
(0.137)**

8.46

8.46

8.46

8.46

8.46

8.46

0.006
(0.004)

-0.008
(0.005)

0.010
(0.003)**

-0.005
(0.004)

0.013
(0.004)**

-0.003
(0.003)

C. 2SLS: 1-Year Mortality
Average Hospital log(Cost)
0.004
(0.008)

-0.019
(0.013)

0.007
(0.011)

-0.011
(0.013)

0.012
(0.013)

-0.010
(0.012)

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

114,648
0.053

114,648
0.053

175,161
0.054

175,161
0.054

233,616
0.055

233,616
0.055

B. OLS: 1-Year Mortality
Average Hospital log(Cost)

Year Controls
Demographic Controls
Diagnosis Controls
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 7. All models include full controls. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered at the ambulance district level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the dispatch area
level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: SPARCS Data

A4

Table A5—Border Strategy: First Stage, OLS and 2SLS for Nonelderly (Age 50-64)

Sample:

1 Mile
(1)
(2)
A. First Stage: Mean Area log(Cost)
Mean Hospital log(Cost)
0.645
0.645
(0.179)** (0.174)**
Mean of Dep. Var.

2 Miles

5 Miles

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.603
(0.179)**

0.602
(0.170)**

0.550
(0.160)**

0.549
(0.153)**

8.59

8.59

8.59

8.59

8.60

8.60

0.005
(0.005)

-0.009
(0.005)

0.001
(0.004)*

-0.006
(0.005)

0.012
(0.005)*

-0.004
(0.004)

C. 2SLS: 1-Year Mortality
Average Hospital log(Cost)
-0.015
(0.023)

-0.012
(0.022)

-0.008
(0.025)

-0.013
(0.020)

-0.003
(0.029)

-0.018
(0.021)

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

56,788
0.081

56,788
0.081

86,884
0.082

86,884
0.082

115,955
0.083

115,955
0.083

B. OLS: 1-Year Mortality
Average Hospital log(Cost)

Year Controls
Demographic Controls
Diagnosis Controls
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 7. All models include full controls. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered at the dispatch area level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: SPARCS Data

Table A6—Ambulance Strategy: Correlates with Hospital Cost

Teaching: AMA Recognized

(1)
0.077
(0.012)**

Technology Adoption: Top Decile

(2)

(3)

0.115
(0.011)**

CMS Quality Score

-0.008
-0.008

Average number of procedures

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

(4)

0.166
(0.018)**
667,143
8.694

667,143
8.694

454,648
8.683

667,143
8.694

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 2, but with alternative measures of hospital
characteristics. All models include full controls. AMA: the American Medical Association; CMS Quality Score is normalized
with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant
at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

A5

Table A7—Ambulance Strategy: Alternative Hospital Types 1st Stages

Dependent Variable: Hospital Level
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Ambulance Level:
Teaching: AMA Recognized

0.563
(0.014)**

Technology Adoption: Top Decile

0.577
(0.013)**

CMS Quality

0.567
(0.019)**

Average number of procedures

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

0.277
(0.012)**
667,143
0.410

667,143
0.459

454,648
-0.005

667,143
1.340

Note: Each cell represents a separate model analogous to those estimated in Table 2, but with alternative measures of hospital
characteristics. All models include full controls. AMA: the American Medical Association; CMS Quality Score is normalized
with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the HSA level. * significant
at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims Data

A6

A7

Note: Panel A reports the first-stage relationship between ambulance-company hospital (average number of) procedures and hospital (average number of) procedures. Panel
B reports local quadratic regression estimates of 1-year mortality on predicted hospital (average number of) procedures, where the prediction was from a model of hospital
procedures on ambulance-hospital procedures as described in the text. All variables were first residualized using models with ZIP code and year fixed effects. Each point
represents the mean at each percentile of the x-axis variable, and the lines represent local-linear regression estimates in Panel A and local quadratic estimates in Panel B.
Panel C reports the first derivative of the relationship found in Panel B. Dotted lines represent bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Pilot bandwidth: h=0.02.
Source: 2002-2008 Medicare Part A Claims

Figure 1. Procedures: Local Instrumental Variables Estimates by Percentile

