                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                REMEDIES FOR SICK INSURANCE

                                           Daniel L. McFadden
                                            Carlos E. Noton
                                              Pau Olivella

                                          Working Paper 17938
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17938


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2012




McFadden acknowledges support from the E. Morris Cox fund at the University of California, Berkeley,
the Presidential fund at USC, the Schaeffer Center for Health Economics and Policy at USC, and National
Institute on Aging (NIA) grants No. P01 AG005842 to the NBER and No. RC4 AG039036 to USC;
Olivella acknowledges support from the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, project ECO2009-07616.
We thank Peter Diamond, Mike Rothschild, Victor Fuchs, and Jonathan Gruber for useful comments.
 All conclusions of this research are solely those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the supporting
institutions or of the individuals cited. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Daniel L. McFadden, Carlos E. Noton, and Pau Olivella. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Remedies for Sick Insurance
Daniel L. McFadden, Carlos E. Noton, and Pau Olivella
NBER Working Paper No. 17938
March 2012
JEL No. D4,D62,I13,I18

                                            ABSTRACT

This expository paper describes the factors that contribute to failure of health insurance markets, and
the regulatory mechanisms that have been and can be used to combat these failures. Standardized
contracts and creditable coverage mandates are discussed, along with premium support, enrollment
mandates, guaranteed issue, and risk adjustment, as remedies for selection-related market damage.
 An overall conclusion of the paper is that the design and management of creditable coverage mandates
are likely to be key determinants of the performance of the health insurance exchanges that are a core
provision of the PPACA of 2010. Enrollment mandates, premium subsidies, and risk adjustment can
improve the stability and relative efficiency of the exchanges, but with carefully designed creditable
coverage mandates are not necessarily critical for their operation.


Daniel L. McFadden                                 Pau Olivella
University of California, Berkeley                 Departament Economia i Historia Economica
Department of Economics                            Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona
549 Evans Hall #3880                               08193 Cerdanyola del Valles
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                            Barcelona
and NBER                                           Spain
mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu                         and Barcelona GSE
                                                   pau.olivella@uab.es
Carlos E. Noton
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry
Post Code: CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
C.Noton@warwick.ac.uk
                             REMEDIES FOR SICK INSURANCE
                                Daniel McFadden, Carlos Noton, Pau Olivella
                                                 March 2012


1. BACKGROUND


      Heterogeneity in consumer tastes and needs, and in cost and quality of goods and services, are
ubiquitous features of resource allocation.      When these variations are observed, competitive markets
price, sort, and match them efficiently. For example, in a market in which private information cannot
improve upon information available to all participants in predicting the expected costs and benefits from
contracts for goods and services, such as maintenance contracts on furnaces, competition will price these
contracts at their expected marginal costs to the sellers, buyers will chose among contracts and sellers to
maximize their expected values, and market efficiency will be achieved. An important feature of these
efficient contracts are clauses, offered and priced, that spell out and limit actions of the contracting parties
in response to downstream events and experience.
      When market participants have informative private information on states or actions that affect costs or
values, this can interfere with market incentives, and cause markets to operate inefficiently, or even unravel.
For example, if firms providing furnace maintenance vary in reliability, and this is difficult for buyers to
assess, price may be used as a signal of quality, distorting its role as a signal of scarcity. Further, when
government intervenes to promote fairness in markets that are not delivering socially acceptable outcomes,
this can have the unintended side effect of introducing problems similar to those caused by private
information.
      In well-functioning insurance markets where competitive underwriting can price contracts at their
actuarial cost based on public information, without adverse effects from private information of buyers,
risk-adverse consumers will be able to buy insurance contracts at close to their individualized actuarial
values. In the United States, health insurance markets fail to achieve this efficient competitive market
ideal. A significant portion of the population is uninsured or under-insured, either because they are denied
coverage, or because they believe that the contracts available to them in the market are actuarially
unattractive or contain clauses that make their promised benefits risky.1 The health cost of incomplete
coverage is substantial. Tardy diagnoses and inconsistent follow-ups are more common among the

1
    See Card-Dobles-Maestas (2008), Gruber (2008), Heiss-McFadden-Winter (2009).
                                                       3
uninsured, and these exacerbate chronic conditions and lead to complications. In comparison with other
countries, the United States ranks 25th in the survival rate from age 15 to age 60, which impacts the
population of workers and young parents whose loss is a substantial cost to families and to the economy.2
If the U.S. could raise its survival rate for this group to that of Switzerland, a country that has mandatory
standardized coverage offered by private insurers, this would prevent more than 190,000 deaths per year.
The elderly in the United States aged 65 and older do have universal coverage under the Medicare program,
with prescription drug coverage (Medicare Part D) added in 2006. This may explain the somewhat better
comparative performance of the United States for seniors, a rank of 14th in life expectancy at age 65.
Since the U.S. has a population that at retirement has the poorest health in the developed world, this is a
medical accomplishment, but it is very costly – U.S. health expenditures per capita are 50 percent higher
than those in any other country. Causes other than health insurance market failure contribute to the
shortcomings of the health care delivery system in the United States, but the way health insurance is
organized is one of the most striking differences in provision of health care in the United States and other
developed countries.
    Major contributors to health insurance market failure are (1) private information on states leading to
adverse selection and passive moral hazard, (2) private information on actions leading to active moral
hazard, (3) performance risk, (4) inefficient screening and signaling, (5) conflicts between social sentiment
and competitive underwriting, (6) consumer misperception of risk, (7) market concentration, and (8) weak
and inconsistent incentives induced by government intervention and regulation. Contracts offered in
health insurance markets can vary on four primary dimensions: scope of conditions covered; benefit
design that determines the share of losses uncovered, or copayments; levels of risk classification,
reclassification, and screening based on available information and experience; and price (premium).
Private information and other contributing factors can lead to wasteful competition on the first three of
these dimensions, and to failure of price competition to guide efficient resource allocation.
    This expository paper discusses regulatory mechanisms that can limit market damage from the factors
listed above. We first define the factors, and list the most common regulatory mechanisms. After that,
we concentrate particularly on the use of standardized contracts and creditable coverage standards,
guaranteed issue, premium subsidies, and enrollment mandates to control adverse selection and channel
competition to prevent health insurance market failure. These topics are also addressed in a more technical
companion paper, McFadden-Noton-Olivella (2012). The term “creditable coverage” has a specific legal
definition under the 2003 Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act as an


2
 These statistics are based on World Health Organization data for 2006, and U.S. Census data on population by age in
2006.
                                                         4
insurance contract that is actuarially at least as favorable as a Standard contract specified by Medicare, but
here we will use the term generically to denote regulatory restrictions on (minimum) conditions covered,
(minimum) benefit designs, and (maximum) copayment rates. “Guaranteed issue”, also termed “open
enrollment”, requires sellers to accept all purchase offers from consumers meeting announced contract
conditions.   “Premium subsidies” are government-provided consumer vouchers or seller subsidies.
“Enrollment mandates” are legal requirements that consumers buy coverage. This paper concludes with a
broader commentary on regulatory mechanisms for health care finance and its interaction with the overall
problem of managing health care. We often refer to the United States health system, but the issues of
health care finance are global, and many of the problems of resource allocation discussed here also arise in
centrally administered single-payer systems; see Olivella and Vera-Hernandez (2012).


    1.Private Information, Adverse Selection, Passive Moral Hazard: It has long been recognized that in
markets where the quality is not easily distinguished so that various qualities trade at a common price,
sellers have an incentive to offer lower-quality products whose cost is below the market price, and withhold
higher-quality products whose cost is above the market price. Then the average quality of goods in the
marketplace is lower than that potentially available, and the market may unravel from the top, fracturing
into a spectrum of contracts whose attributes are distorted to avoid pooling with lower-quality products, or
collapsing in a “death spiral” in which only the lowest quality products trade. Perhaps the oldest surviving
comment on this phenomenon is in Aristophanes’ comedy “The Frogs” in 405BC, where bad politicians
driving good ones out of the political marketplace is compared to adulterated coins driving pure ones out of
circulation. The impact of adverse selection on the debasement of money is enshrined in Gresham’s law,
“bad money drives out good”, stated variously by Copernicus (1519), Gresham (1558), and Walford
(1881). The modern recognition that adverse selection can lead to unraveling of a variety of contemporary
markets, including products such as used cars, workers in the labor force, and health insurance, dates from
the contribution of Akerlof (1970). Belli (2001) gives a succinct description of the impact of adverse
selection in health insurance markets:    “... each individual chooses among the set of contracts offered by
insurance companies according to his/her expected probability of using health services. In brief, those
who foresee an intense use of health services will tend to choose more generous plans than those who
expect a more limited use of them. In the extreme, for each premium and degree of coverage, those who
will decide to purchase that particular health insurance contract are those who expect to have health
expenditure greater or equal to the premium paid. Then, whatever the premium, the insurance company
may end up with a loss on each customer.”



                                                      5
    While adverse selection characterized by Belli focuses on heterogeneity in the probability of illness,
another dimension of selection is passive moral hazard where heterogeneity in the severity of illness is
private information; this is also termed “ex post” moral hazard (Zwifel-Breyer-Kiffman, 2009, Sect. 6.4.2).
Then an insurer cannot observe or verify severity, and cannot limit coverage to the most cost-effective
treatment. Consequently more costly treatments may be selected than would be necessary if illness
severity were public information.
    There is a large literature on selection effects, much of it related to insurance markets.3 In practice, the
extent to which an insurance market is damaged by selection will decrease when buyers are more risk
averse, when their expectations are inaccurate so that their choices are poorly related to actual risk, and
when they overstate the dispersion of possible future outcomes. If the degree of risk aversion is negatively
correlated with health risk, adverse selection is blunted because the healthy are willing to buy policies for
risk protection even though they perceive a heavy load. There is evidence for advantageous selection in
some health insurance markets such as long-term care insurance where the risks involved are ambiguous
and remote in time.4 However, Heiss, McFadden, and Winter (2010) find the opposite pattern in the
market for Medicare Part D insurance – risk aversion does not seem to play a major role in consumer
choice, and the uninsured are mostly low-risk healthy consumers with low education and incomes. This
pattern may be a reflection of overconfidence by consumers of the predictability of future drug needs. In
the general private health insurance market for individuals, screening and rejections based on observables
that are correlated with private information on health risk may disguise the consequences of adverse
selection, so that relatively high insurance enrollment rates among the healthy are due to supply-side
rejections of the unhealthy rather than a negative correlation of risk aversion and health risk. Then market
management of risk can be quite inefficient even if there is no direct evidence of insurance enrollment rates
varying with health risk.



3
  Radner (1968, 1970), Akerlof (1970), and Diamond (1978) discuss the role of information in formation of markets.
Feldstein (1973), Pauly (1974), Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), Spence (1976), Riley (1975, 1979), Wilson (1979,
1980), Cutler and Reber (1998), Pauly and Nicholson (1999), Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) Abbring et al (2003),
Bajari et al (2006), Chiappori et al (2006), Olivella and Vera-Hernández (2007, 2010), Heiss-McFadden-Winter
(2007, 2008, 2009, 2010), Gruber (2008), and Chade and Schlee (2011) discussions information in the context of
health insurance.
4
  See Cardon and Hendel (2001), de Meza and Webb (2001), Finkelstein and McGarry (2003), Finklestein-Poterba
(2004), Mahdavi (2005), Chiappori (2000), Chiappori et al (2006), Fang, Keane, and Silverman (2006), De Donder
and Hindriks (2006), Cutler, Finkelstein, and McGarry (2008), and Buchmueller (2008). When risk-taking behavior
is considered in a life-cycle setting, it is difficult to distinguish the effects of static tastes for risk and the life-cycle
consequences of current risks. For example, people in poor health face high mortality risk, which reduces the
probability of extended life with restricted consumption, and reduces the incentive to protect current assets.
Consequently, people in poor health may be more tolerant of risk not because they are less risk-averse, but rather
because the risks they face have different life-cycle implications.
                                                              6
    2.Unobservable Action, Active Moral Hazard: Consumers, providers, and insurers entering a health
insurance contract can be viewed as principals and agents. The insurer can imperfectly discriminate
avoidable and unavoidable risk-taking by the consumer, and consequently cannot easily categorize risk
classes and penalize unnecessary risk-taking, an active or “ex ante” moral hazard. Then, the consumer’s
incentive for actions that avoid risks is diluted. Further, the insurer and the consumer can imperfectly
discriminate the accuracy, efficacy, and prospective costs of diagnoses and treatments, so that the
provider’s and consumer’s incentives to avoid unproductive or costly procedures are diluted, another active
moral hazard. The impact of active moral hazard on principal-agent contracts, and co-payment, capitation,
outcome-based compensation, and other mechanisms to mitigate its effect, are discussed in an extensive
literature.5


    3.Performance Risk: Insurance contracts have the property that enrollment and payment of premiums
come first, and health events and contingent benefit payments come later. With limited information and
consumer inattention, insurers have incentives to shirk the payment of benefits through ambiguous contact
language and legal stratagems that make contract enforcement costly. In addition, there is a risk of default
by the insurer due to insufficient provision for benefit outlays, and due to systemic risk. The result is that
receipt of contingent benefits is not risk-free to the buyer, reducing the attractiveness of an insurance
contract even if it is nominally actuarially appealing. Performance risk is also called counter-party, credit,
or default risk, and is currently a major issue in regulation of markets for financial insurance.6 Note that
imperfect discrimination of performance risk may induce adverse selection, with low-cost,
poorly-capitalized insurers driving higher-cost, better-capitalized ones out of the market. Control of
performance risk has been a traditional goal of State insurance regulation in the United States.


    4.Inefficient Screening: When consumers have private information on their health, and this induces
adverse selection, the response of underwriters will be to categorize consumers into risk classes on the basis
of observable information, and offer and price contracts by risk class. In some cases, insurers may refuse
to offer coverage, a practice termed “lemon dropping” or “red-lining”.7 Risk classification is typically
based on insurance, medical, employment, and demographic histories of consumers and their kin.

5
  Clark (1895), Walford (1881), Crosby (1905), Pauly (1974), Arrow (1968), Spence and Zeckhauser (1971), Grubel
(1971), Feinstein (1973), McGuire (2000), Fagart and Kambla-Chopin (2006), Zweifel, Breyer, and Kifmann (2009).
6
  Kilburn (1904), Hodgeman (1960), Clark (1976), Holmstrom (1979), Agarwal and Ligon (1998), Duffy and
Singleton (2003), and Mahul and Wright (2004).
7
  Market failure in which consumers with some health histories are refused coverage at any price may come from
restrictions on competitive underwriting, or may be a symptom of market unraveling due to adverse selection.
                                                      7
Consumers then have incentives to misrepresent or burnish their histories to understate their risks. While
risk classification is a natural part of underwriting, when screening and signaling responses are costly, they
effectively increase the price of insurance contracts and render them actuarially less attractive. Screening
can particularly distort resource allocation when insurers refuse coverage because individuals have earlier
refusals or prior claims, as this can chill the market, discouraging individuals from applying for insurance or
filing claims for losses, a form of active moral hazard. Competition and restrictions on collusion may
increase the burden of screening, as insurers try to meet or beat the screening effectiveness of their rivals in
order to survive.8


    5.Conflicts of Social Sentiment and Competitive Underwriting: Consumers and society have
difficulty refusing or withholding treatments after bad health outcomes are realized.              For example,
actuarially fair health insurance is extremely expensive for a consumer who has kidney failure or AIDS, but
social sentiment is that this consumer is nevertheless entitled to access to treatment at affordable cost.
Social sentiment for such ex post equity often conflicts with competitive underwriting. As a consequence,
public sentiment often supports regulation of insurance and provider markets to address inequities. For
example, insurers may be forbidden to base underwriting on race or gender, forbidden to set premiums or
restrict coverage based on pre-existing conditions, forbidden to include rescission clauses in their contracts,
and mandated to cover specified conditions. These regulations have the direct effect of mitigating market
outcomes deemed unfair to higher-risk consumers, although they may be undercut if insurers can offer
menus of contracts that fracture demand; see Finklestein et al (2009).
    If regulation requires that the insurer offer unsubsidized coverage to high-risk consumers at less than
actuarial value, an unintended consequence is that in order to survive in the market, insurers must offer
premiums that are actuarially unfair to low-risk consumers. This induces adverse selection if low-risk
consumers then choose to be uninsured, and can cause unraveling; see Buckmueller (2008). Legal limits
on competitive risk classification, or price ceilings established legally or chosen to forestall legal challenge,
give insurers incentives to screen and accept or reject buyers on the basis of observables that are correlated
with risk, exclude coverage for pre-existing conditions when this is not prohibited to discourage enrollment
by high-risk consumers, and reject potentially high-risk consumers outright when open enrollment is not
enforced. The result may be large numbers of rejections and exclusions, leaving many consumers
uninsured or under-insured. The apparent pattern in the United States where the most healthy have the

8
  The influence of screening and signaling on market outcomes has been studied by Spence (1974, 1976, 1978), Riley
(2002), and Buchmueller (2008). Community-rating systems to reduce the costs and selection effects of individual
screening have been studied by Pauly (1970), Neuhaus (1995), and Encinosa (2001).

                                                        8
highest share insured may arise because the healthy are more risk averse, but may also be due to higher rates
of rejections and exclusions for the less healthy.
    When social sentiment leads to mandates that hospitals and providers treat the critically ill even if they
are unable to pay, poor consumers may choose this “insurance of last resort” unless premium subsidies or
enrollment mandates nudge them into the private insurance market. The cost of their care is then borne by
society through increased hospital fees. These fees are either subsidized by government, or eventually
appear in increased insurance premiums that make contracts less actuarially attractive and exacerbate
adverse selection.    In general, effective imposition of fairness constraints without inducing adverse
selection will require social intervention through public subsidies or direct market management, and
interpersonal transfers that are contingent on circumstance and behavior.


    6.Consumer Misperceptions of Risk: The standard treatment of selection assumes that the private
information of consumers is accurate.        However, beliefs and health choices of consumers are not
necessarily fully rational or self-protective; see Card et al (2008), Heiss-McFadden-Winter (2010), Abaluck
and Gruber (2011). An additional dimension of selection arises when unobserved individual risk is filtered
through consumer perceptions that are not completely realistic.           Two well-documented features of
consumer behavior are over-optimism, manifest in discounting of the probability of adverse future events
and underestimation of risks, and over-confidence (certitude) regarding ability to predict outcomes.
Contrary to the assumptions of rational expectations theory, there is little market discipline for these beliefs
in the case of future health events – while poor choices based on misperceptions may be punished in the
market, the punishment is often not certain, prompt, or repetitive enough to train expectations to be rational.
Consumers with the behavioral tendencies of optimism and certitude are likely to perceive insurance
contracts as less fair than actuarial reality, and are likely to undervalue the reduction in risk the contracts
offer. The result may be “knife-edge” insurance choices in which in the extreme consumers will buy only
actuarially favorable contracts that are unprofitable for insurers. In summary, behavioral consumers may
view insurance contracts as entitlements rather than as protection against risk, and feel cheated if benefits
received do not come close to balancing premiums. If perceived risks are strongly positively correlated
with true risks, then both over-optimism and over-confidence will exacerbate adverse selection, with only
the truly most risky buying insurance. Private information does not distort the market if consumers fail to
act upon it, or if perceived and actual risk are uncorrelated.


    7.Market Concentration: The organization of health insurance suppliers can have a significant
influence on the degree of loading of insurance contracts, the viability of contracts offered, and the burden

                                                       9
of screening. Competition will tend to drive premiums down to the costs of offered contracts, but can
exacerbate adverse selection through a “race to the bottom” in contract coverage, or costly screening, as
competitors battle in these dimensions to attract lower-risk consumers and lemon-drop high-risk ones.
Rents accruing to oligopolistic insurers will discourage the lowest-risk consumers from buying their
contracts. However, insurers in a concentrated market do have more tools to combat adverse selection,
through limiting the types of contracts offered, cross-subsidizing contracts to achieve a viable menu, and
avoiding competitive risk classification; e.g., a monopolistic insurer designing a menu of contract offerings
has to worry about one contract cannibalizing another, but not about a rival offering contracts that through
screening can cherry pick or cream-skim the lowest-risk purchasers of an existing contract that are the least
costly to serve; see Johnson (1977), Olivella and Vera-Hernandez (2007).
    One feature of the American health insurance market, which is quite concentrated, is that the major
insurers use their market power to bargain for discounts from providers, medical device makers, and
pharmaceutical companies. Insured consumers benefit from this consequence of concentration to the
extent that these cost savings are passed through. These price differences also make self-insurance
relatively less attractive for the healthy, inducing increased enrollment and lower average payout rates in
the insured population. Small insurers have less bargaining power, leading to increasing returns to scale
and increased barriers to entry in the health insurance market. In equilibrium, bargaining is likely to result
in increased prices for uncovered consumers. There is some evidence in the Medicare Part D market and
in the medical device market (Grennan, 2012) that measured discounts are not strongly size-related, but
some of this may be due to bargaining over indirect rebates rather than direct discounts that have to be
extended to consumers outside the bargaining process.


    8.Weak and Inconsistent Incentives Due to Government Regulation:                   A variety of regulatory
mechanisms have been applied to health insurance markets.9 In the United States, most regulation of
insurers has been in the hands of State agencies, but Federal regulation is important in areas such as
Medicare and Medicaid, particularly in the Part D prescription drug insurance program, and in the Patient
Protection and Accountable Care Act of 2010 (PPACA) that is currently in the process of implementation.
Regulation has had multiple objectives, including control of performance risk of insurers, promotion of
social objectives of fairness, elimination of “health inequities” and better health for the public, promotion of
affordable health care as a “right” of citizens, limiting the exercise of market power by providers and
insurers, monitoring use of public funds spent on health care, limiting the growth of medical expenditures,

9
  Selected references are Neudeck and Polezeck (1996), Cutler-Reber (1998), Feldman et al (1998), Glazer (2000),
Finklestein (2002), Boccuti and Moon (2003), Pauly and Zeng (2004), Buchmueller (2008), Dhalby (2008),
McFadden-Winter-Heiss (2008), Blumberg (2009), Olivella and Vera-Hernandez (2010), and Englehardt (2011).
                                                       10
and blunting the causes of market instability and inefficiency. These objectives can conflict, and can
create incentives for insurers, providers, and consumers that are inconsistent with efficient resource
allocation.   While a number of specific regulatory mechanisms have proven effective for specific
purposes, there is no political consensus in the U.S. on what the overall objectives of regulation should be,
and only a limited public policy consensus on what combinations of regulatory agencies and tools are the
most effective. Most critically, there is very little overall assessment and coordination of regulations and
subsidies to identify and repair misaligned incentives, and keep pace with innovations in technology and
management of health services. Our earlier paragraph on active moral hazard emphasized the difficulties of
achieving compatible incentives when information is asymmetric.            A patchwork of inconsistently
motivated and poorly coordinated government regulation can have similar consequences, in the same way
that poorly designed coverage mandates and limits on underwriting can exacerbate adverse selection.
    There are problems of coordination of regulations between States, where insurers operating across State
lines or consumers migrating between States can undercut a State’s regulations, and problems of
coordination of Federal and State regulation. At least some national regulation is required to facilitate
interstate operations of insurers and providers without introducing destabilizing “races to the bottom” in
which lax regulation in one State allows the market to circumvent stricter regulation desired by the citizens
of another State. Clearly in light of the fundamental problems with health insurance markets caused by the
factors discussed above, substantial regulation of health insurance markets is essential to achieve efficient
and socially acceptable resource allocation. The broad question is how to manage the regulatory system so
that it meets its central objectives while minimizing unintended consequences.


    Regulatory Remedies for Health Insurance: Table 1 gives a summary of common regulatory
mechanisms for health insurance, classified in terms of their primary target: consumers, providers, or
insurers. Obviously, some of these regulations must be used in tandem. For example, enrollment
mandates on consumers are sensible only with creditable coverage requirements plus guaranteed issue
requirements that insurers enroll all persons trying to buy contracts satisfying the creditable coverage
minimums.


        INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE


    Consumer-based regulation is intended primarily to blunt adverse selection and to prevent the “free
riding” that occurs when the uninsured sick appear in the emergency rooms of hospitals for treatment.
Enrollment mandates require consumers to buy creditable coverage insurance contracts even if they would

                                                     11
not do so voluntarily. Thus, consumers are prevented from bailing out of pooled risk contracts that they
consider actuarially unattractive. The effect of enrollment mandates is a cross-subsidy of the less healthy
by the more healthy. Enrollment mandates may also nudge consumers to act in their own interest, and
overcome faulty perceptions of risk. Enrollment mandates can prevent market unraveling in which the
only contracts that can be offered by insurers without a loss are actuarially unfair to all but the highest-risk
consumers.
    Premium subsidies make insurance contracts more actuarially attractive, and are central to social
insurance objectives of providing safety nets for the less fortunate. These subsidies primarily benefit the
less healthy, who would otherwise be in risk classifications with high premiums. Means-tested premium
subsidies explicitly cross-subsidize the poor, but because the poor are generally less healthy,
non-means-tested general premium subsidies are also progressive. The overall progressivity of premium
subsidies of course depends on the taxes used to finance them; even a relatively regressive tax earmarked
for health insurance premium subsidies will be progressive overall.
    Co-payments require that consumer have some skin in the game when they make treatment choices.
Reference pricing requires consumers to pay out-of-pocket for treatment costs in excess of the least cost
procedure deemed effective for their condition. These regulations reduce active moral hazard by giving
consumers an incentive to economize on health purchases, and are often incorporated into
“consumer-directed health care” or “Consumer, heal thyself!” initiatives that place more responsibility for
treatment choices and costs on the patient.            Obviously, the “stick” of high copayments for
“over-treatment” can be combined with a “carrot” of refunds for “cost-effective” treatment. However,
there is a significant conflict between having consumers see all or most of the true marginal cost of health
services, and providing substantial insurance against health risks. There are also substantive problems in
determining efficient levels of care that maintain “health capital”, and reduce or delay costly breakdowns
later, when patients or providers have private information on treatment efficacy, or when consumers
discount or underestimate the probability of future health problems and undervalue preventative care. As
many scholars have noted, “moral hazard” is an unfortunately loaded term for a price-service margin where
care is needed to handle external and information effects and get the incentives right.
    Provider regulation is intended primarily to blunt incentives for inappropriate or unnecessary
treatments that increase provider income, and to give consumer and insurer payers more control over and
interest in controlling medical costs. Capitation, a fixed fee for treatment of a diagnosed condition, is a
common method, but one that may induce inappropriate “up-coding” of diagnoses and risk adjustments,
rejection of patients requiring costly treatment, or under-treatment. Outcome-based “accountable care”



                                                      12
payment may be an effective tool, but risk-adjustments and lags in observing outcomes are challenges to
implementation.
    Insurer regulation includes tools that are often deployed in markets where the suppliers are
concentrated, those where product quality is not easily determined by the buyer, and those where
performance risk is an issue. For example, rate-of-return or price (premium) regulation is common in
concentrated industries and natural monopolies, and entry controls and capitalization requirements are
typical for financial and insurance industries where there is default risk. Franchising is a form of entry
regulation that can prevent market unraveling due to cherry-picking by rivals; single-payer health insurance
systems are an extreme case of franchising.
    Controls on risk classification and screening, guaranteed issue, exclusions for pre-existing conditions,
and rescission are necessary if consumers face mandates for coverage, and can also be used to block
channels through which insurers trying to position contracts to combat adverse selection may cause markets
to unravel. However, these regulations, and limits on underwriting, can also be counter-productive in the
absence of consumer mandates, forcing pooling across risk classes that feeds adverse selection. Finally,
there are regulations on insurers that limit adverse selection, including regulatory control of contract terms
to require creditable coverage and limit cherry picking, premium subsidies, ex ante risk adjustment, ex post
experience adjustment, and reinsurance. Effective risk adjustments and reinsurance are very important,
and usually require public subsidies, although in some cases they can be achieved through mandated
pooling of industry risks.
    In this paper, we will focus on the problems of undercoverage and market instability that can occur
when insurers can introduce contracts in the market that undercut contracts with more generous benefits by
cherry-picking their lowest-risk enrollees who are the least expensive to serve. In the terminology of
Akerlof (1970) and Miyazaki (1977), the result may be a “rat race” in which contracts that attract
heterogeneous risk pools cannot be sustained and the market fragments into many different contracts, with
the more healthy consumers fleeing to contracts with insufficient coverage to attract the less healthy
consumers. In the extreme, the market may “unravel from the top”, with insurers unable to offer a
sustainable contract that only the most healthy will buy, and absent such a contract unable to offer a
sustainable contract that the next most healthy will buy, and so on in a race to be bottom in which there is
only one stable surviving contract that attracts only the least healthy. In this extreme, “bad” consumers
with high health risks drive “good” consumers with low health risks out of the market, a health insurance
version of Gresham’s Law.        For shorthand, we lump all these outcomes under the term “market
unraveling”.



                                                     13
    Asymmetric information, with consumers knowing more about their health risks than insurers can
observe or use, and the resulting adverse selection, can cause market unraveling, but so can regulations that
limit competitive underwriting, and consumer misperceptions that underestimate the probability or range of
the possible health problems they face. We will argue in the following section that creditable coverage
regulation that restricts the health insurance contracts that insurers can offer can be an effective tool to
prevent market unraveling, essentially by ensuring that contracts purchased by a pool of consumers with
heterogeneous health risks cannot be cannibalized by contracts with less generous coverage that
cherry-pick the most profitable customers. In a pool supported by creditable coverage regulation, the least
risky cross-subsidize the most risky, a feature that may or may not be judged socially desirable, but all risk
classes in the pool may nevertheless be better off than in an unregulated market that is fragmented into
contracts with incomplete coverage, induces costly and onerous risk classification, or fails to achieve an
equilibrium in which insurance contracts are available.
    It is obvious that an enrollment mandate without coverage regulation cannot prevent market
fragmentation and undercoverage: competitive insurers could continue to cherry-pick by offering cheap
contracts with low expected benefits that only low-risk consumers find attractive. On the other hand,
while creditable coverage regulation has more scope and can be more effective in the presence of
enrollment mandates, by ruling out non-enrollment or self-insurance as a contract option, it can be effective
even in the absence of enrollment mandates. If the lowest risk consumers are substantially risk adverse,
then creditable coverage regulation can attract most low-risk consumers, as they will prefer partial
insurance to none even if the contract is loaded against them due to pooling with riskier consumers.
However, if the lowest-risk consumers are not very risk-adverse, or if they underestimate their own risk or
are certain about the losses they will incur, they will be unwilling to tolerate much loading, so that
creditable coverage regulation without enrollment mandates or premium subsidies may fail to achieve an
equilibrium, or attain an equilibrium with socially unacceptable numbers of uninsured. Of course,
premium subsidies can be used to draw low-risk consumers into a pooled contract even if they are not very
risk adverse, and are an important regulatory alternative or supplement to enrollment mandates.




2. SELECTION


    We have noted that selection, the phenomenon in which the enrollees in an insurance contract have risk
characteristics different than the population as a whole, can arise from asymmetric information about the
costs or benefits to be derived from the contract, from legal restrictions on underwriting, issue, and

                                                     14
rescission driven by social sentiment, and from consumer misperceptions of risk or of uncertainty.
Selection becomes an issue in market operation when it is destabilizing, or when it interferes with efficient
resource allocation. Screening, a device used by insurers to refuse contracts to people that on the basis of
observable information will have an expected service cost that exceeds the premiums they can be charged,
or to set premiums people judge to be actuarially adverse, can be costly to conduct and can lead to large
numbers of consumers who are uninsured or underinsured.                Selection can be either adverse or
advantageous from the perspective of insurers, and in principle can distort resource allocation in either
direction, but adverse selection is of more concern. It is useful to begin a discussion of selection by
reviewing the classical graphical analysis of Rothschild-Stiglitz (1976). This analysis concentrates on the
availability of coverage and generosity of benefits for a single health condition; later, we consider scope of
coverage over a distribution of health conditions, which involves many of the same issues.


FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE


    One consumer risk class: Figure 1 shows the preferences of a single consumer for consumption
contingent on two future states of the world, healthy and sick. The consumer’s indifference curves reflect
her beliefs regarding the probability of these states, and her attitudes toward risk. Specifically, if the
consumer is an expected utility maximizer, then an indifference curve is a locus of points (H,S) where EU =
pu(S) + (1-p)u(H) is constant, with p the probability of becoming sick, S and H the levels of consumption in
the sick and healthy states, respectively, and u(⋅) a utility function of consumption outcomes. The
consumer is risk-adverse if u(⋅) is a concave function and the indifference curves are strictly convex;
risk-neutral if u(⋅) is a linear function and the indifference curves are linear. Hereafter, we assume that all
consumers are strictly risk adverse. The slope of an indifference curve is dS/dH ≡ -(∂EU/∂H)/(∂EU/∂S =
-(1-p)u′(H)/pu′(S); on the 45o diagonal where S = H, this slope is -(1-p)/p. The diagram shows the
indifference curves through E and through two other points, A and B, defined below. For this discussion,
we ignore the issue of moral hazard, where p becomes a function of (unobserved) effort by the consumer to
avoid becoming sick or to mitigate loss. The point E = (H0,S0) gives consumption in the case of no
insurance, with L = H0 - S0 equal to the lost consumption due to medical expenses if sick.
    Consider an insurance contract with premium π that pays a share θ of the loss if the consumer becomes
sick, the benefit θL. The consumer’s copayment if sick is (1-θ)L. Partial or full insurance has 0 < θ ≤ 1,
but the notation can also encompass over-insurance, a bet that the consumer will become sick (θ > 1); and
counter-insurance, a bet that the consumer will stay healthy (θ < 0). We will assume in this paper that
legal health insurance contracts must satisfy 0 < θ ≤ 1; i.e., consumers are not allowed to bet on health via

                                                      15
over-insurance or counter-insurance. Contracts for a fixed θ and various premiums π lie along a 45o line aa
that is parallel to the diagonal and goes through the point A* = (H0,H0 - (1-θ)L). The point A on this line
where the premium equals the expected benefit, π = pθL, is the actuarially fair contract. Contracts on the
line aa southwest of this point are actuarially adverse for the consumer and profitable for the insurer, while
those northeast of this point are actuarially advantageous for the consumer and unprofitable for the insurer.
If insurers are competitive and the administrative overhead of providing insurance is negligible, then
competition between insurers offering contracts in the aa line drives their premiums to the single price at the
point A.
    Consider the line bb through the points E and A. The slope of this line is -(1-p)/p, given by the ratio of
the net increase in income from E to A if consumer becomes sick, the benefit less the premium, or (1-p)θL,
to the net increase in income if the consumer stays healthy, the negative of the premium, or -pθL. This
slope depends only on the probability of becoming sick, and holds for any θ, so that any insurance contract
on the line bb is actuarially fair. A risk adverse consumer given the option of any actuarially fair insurance
contract, that is to say any point on the budget line bb, will choose the full insurance contract on the 45o
diagonal, B = (Hʹ,Sʹ) where Hʹ = Sʹ = H0 – pL and the slope of the budget line equals the slope of the
indifference curve. A strongly risk-adverse consumer will have an indifference curve that is nearly
L-shaped, while a nearly risk-neutral one will have an indifference curve that is almost flat, but if both have
the same p, then they both have the same slope at the 45o diagonal. Any insurance contract northeast of the
consumer’s indifference curve through E, actuarially fair or not, will be preferred to no insurance. In the
case of a nearly risk-neutral consumer, this will include only contracts close to actuarially fair, while for a
strongly risk-adverse one, there will be many contracts better than the no insurance point E. In the latter
case, the consumer is willing to tolerate a substantial adverse load to gain the benefit of reduced risk.
    If (1) all consumers have the same probability p of being sick, or these probabilities vary but consumers
are unable to use private information to estimate them more accurately than insurers can do based on public
information, (2) underwriting can freely use estimates of p to establish actuarially fair premiums for each
consumer, (3) moral hazard does not introduce a dependence between level of insurance and probability of
becoming sick, and (4) insurers are competitive and administrative overhead is negligible, then an efficient
                                                                                                         4
market equilibrium is achievable at which each consumer buys actuarially fair full insurance.


4
 If all these conditions hold except that there is administrative cost of providing insurance that is proportional to the
coverage rate θ, then the locus of breakeven contracts will be less steep than the line bb, and given a choice among all
break-even contracts, the consumer will choose less than full insurance, with the degree of risk aversion determining
how much less. Alternately the health insurance business may be imperfectly competitive, with fixed costs of entry,
the case that is a focus of McFadden-Noton-Olivella (2012). One possible market equilibrium in this full information
case is a monopolist selling full insurance at a profitable premium that just low enough to forestall entry.
                                                           16
FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE


    Two consumer risk classes: Now suppose there are two classes of consumers, robust and frail. A
robust consumer has a probability pʺ of becoming sick that is lower than the probability pʹ of a frail
consumer becoming sick. Each consumer knows her own probability. Suppose that insurers cannot
distinguish robust and frail consumers, or are required to sell contracts at the same premium to consumers
from either class even if they could be distinguished. Figure 2 depicts these consumers, where we assume
that they have exactly the same consumption outcome E if they have no insurance. The case depicted in
the figure has a common utility function u(·) for both risk classes, so that aside from the risk of becoming
sick, tastes are the same. In this case, at any point on or below the 45o diagonal, the indifference curve of a
robust consumer is steeper than the indifference curve of a frail consumer. We concentrate on this case,
but also include analysis of the case in which robust consumers are much more risk adverse than frail
consumers, so that at points sufficiently below the 45o diagonal, the indifference curves of robust
consumers are less steep. The actuarially fair contracts for the two classes separately are given by the line
bb through E with slope -(1-pʹ)/pʹ for frail consumers and the line cc with the steeper slope -(1-pʺ)/pʺ for
robust consumers. Let γ denote the share of the consumers who are frail. Then, the probability that a
consumer from the pool of all robust and frail consumers will become sick is p* = γpʹ + (1-γ)pʺ. The line
dd through point E with slope -(1-p*)/p* contains the contracts that break even when both frail and risky
consumers buy them. When the share of frail consumers is large, the line dd will be close to the line cc,
and when the share of frail consumers is small, it will be close to the line bb.
    Consider again contracts in the line aa that for various premiums pay the benefit θL if a consumer
becomes sick. If only robust consumers buy this contract, it will break even at a premium that gives the
point F. If only frail consumers buy it, then it will break even at the point A. Finally, if the pool of both
frail and robust consumers buy it, the breakeven contract is D.


    Cherry-picking blocks and pooled contract failure: A consumer will choose from available options the
contract that maximizes utility, with no insurance (self-insurance) always an available alternative. The
menu of contracts available in the market, each characterized by a coverage level θ and a premium π, will be
determined by competition between insurers. A competitive equilibrium is defined by a menu of contracts
such that no insurer could by introducing, withdrawing, or changing the premium on a contract increase its
profit. This profit calculation is made under the assumption that consumers will respond to the actions of
an insurer by re-maximizing their utilities, and in particular will buy from the firm offering the lowest
premium for a specified contract, and the Nash assumption that rivals will not respond to the insurer’s

                                                      17
actions by changing their own offers. When there are no regulations restricting the contracts that can be
offered, then in competition between many small insurers, each with eventually non-decreasing average
costs of serving consumers with given profiles of risk characteristics, every contract in the market menu
must break even, as money-losing contracts will be withdrawn, and profitable contracts will have their
premiums bid down by competition until excess profits are exhausted. Further, no non-offered contract
could yield a positive profit, given the market menu in place, since it would otherwise be introduced by
some firm.


FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE


    With this background, we can now give the Rothschild-Stiglitz argument that no contract that attracts a
pool of both frail and robust consumers is viable in a competitive market menu. The reason will be that
any pooled contract is either itself inferior to a second pooled contract for both risk classes, or else can be
undercut by rivals introducing a new contract that cherry-picks away its robust consumers and leaves the
frail ones behind. In the second alternative, the resulting adverse selection would increase the expected
benefit payout for those remaining in the pooled contract so that it would no longer break even. Consider
the contract D on the line dd in Figure 3, and suppose that it is in a pool with both frail and robust
purchasers, so that it is breaking even. (This is depicted in the case that the share of frail consumers buying
this contract is the same as their population share γ, but the following argument works for any share 0 < γ <
1 that involves pooling consumers from both risk classes.) The slope of the indifference curve of frail
consumers through D must be less steep than the slope of the pooled break even line dd, as their
indifference curve below the diagonal can be no steeper than the line bb which is less steep than the line dd.
In general, the indifference curve of robust consumers through D could either be at least as steep as the line
dd, or less steep than dd (not shown). In the latter case, rivals could introduce a contract with larger θ just
below the line dd and above the indifference curves of both frail and robust consumers through D. This
would be superior for both frail and robust consumers and earn positive profits if they move to it, blocking
D. Therefore, the only possibility for D to be viable is that the indifference curve of robust consumers
through D is at least as steep as dd, as depicted. But if this is true, then the contract G, shown in the figure,
that lies above the indifference curve of robust consumers through D, and below the indifference curve of
frail consumers through D, could be introduced. This contract would cherry-pick the robust consumers
away from the contract D. The contract G would be profitable in the presence of D, as it attracts only
robust consumers and is southwest of the breakeven line cc for robust consumers alone. On the other hand,
D would now lose money, as it retains only frail consumers and is northeast of the breakeven line bb for

                                                       18
frail consumers alone. Consequently, a competitive market equilibrium cannot include a pooled contract
          6
like D.


FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE


    Rothschild and Stiglitz go on to show that there may be a stable competitive market equilibrium that is
separating, with frail consumers buying an actuarially fair full insurance contract B and robust consumers
buying actuarially fair partial insurance at a contract H with coverage so low that is not more attractive to
frail consumers than B. This situation is depicted in Figure 4, with H located at the intersection of the
breakeven line cc for robust consumers alone and the indifference of frail consumers through B. In this
figure, the breakeven line dd for pooled contracts does not intersect the robust consumers’ indifference
curve through H. Then, there is no contract G just below dd and above the robust consumer indifference
curve that could attract both frail and robust consumers and be profitable. Conversely, if the robust
consumers’ upper contour set of points better than H does intersect dd, the potential separating equilibrium
would be blocked by a pooled contract G (not shown) on dd and above the robust indifference curve
through H. Now, we already know that a pooled contract can itself always be blocked, so that in the last
case, no stable competitive market equilibrium exists. Observe that when the share of frail consumers
becomes small, the breakeven line dd for pooled contracts approaches the breakeven line cc for robust
consumers alone. Then for sufficiently small γ one will be in the case where no stable competitive market
equilibrium exists. The market in this case can be said to unravel from the top, with no sustainable contract
targeted to the robust consumers.
     There has been considerable discussion of non-existence of competitive equilibrium and its
consequences in the Rothchild-Stiglitz setting. One possibility is that the market will settle at some refined
equilibrium in which insurers offer menus of contracts that may contain cross-subsidized “loss leaders” that
shelter other offerings and make their menus profitable overall, and have sufficient foresight to forego
introducing contracts whose profitability requires the presence of incompatible contracts that cannot
co-exist, thus allowing some pooling and separating contracts to survive.10 Another is that the market will


6
 In the case of a contract D on dd that provides full or over-insurance, θ ≥ 1, the slope of the robust consumer
indifference curve at D must be steeper than the slope of dd. If the indifference curve of frail consumers through D is
steeper than dd, then D will be blocked by a pooled contract just below dd with lower θ, and if the indifference curve of
frail consumers is at no steeper than dd, then there is a cherry picking contract G with lower θ that will profitably
attract only robust consumers and will block D because it will be left with only frail consumers and will become
unprofitable.
10
   Wilson (1977,1979,1980) shows that some menus that are not viable under Nash competition may be so in such
expectational equilibria, with firms making conjectures on the responses of rivals. Other game-theoretic alternatives
                                                           19
“churn” continuously, with entry and exit of contracts, and unsatisfied demand. It appears that in the
market for individual health insurance in the U.S., consumers often feel that they cannot obtain actuarially
fair insurance with close to full coverage. Some of this may be misperception, but market unraveling also
seems to be going on, either a “rat race” in which the only contracts available to robust consumers that are
actuarially fair have very limited coverage, or an unstable market in which the “bad” frail consumers drive
out the “good” robust consumers. If what we are observing in the U.S. is a “rat race”, achieved either with
basic competition or with refinements, then these equilibria apparently do not substantially reduce the
incentives for insurers to screen on the basis of observables and use rejections to improve the risk
characteristics of its enrollees in any contract, and do not appear to be efficient or equitable enough to
satisfy social sentiment for health outcomes that are comparable to national health systems in other
developed countries.


    Many Risk Classes:        The Rothchild-Stiglitz analysis with two consumer risk classes has a
straightforward extension to many risk classes. The argument for non-viability of pooled contracts
requires only comparisons of two risk classes, and remains the same even if there are many risk classes.
More risk classes make it more difficult for a stable competitive separating market equilibrium to exist.
Riley (1979, Theorem 3 and discussion) shows that when there is a continuum of consumers just above a
given risk class, a stable separating market equilibrium cannot exist. The analysis of Hendren (2011)
shows however that there may be decentralized incentive-compatible designs that will lead to stable
equilibria for some consumer segments.




3. CREDITABLE COVERAGE REGULATION


    We will examine closely creditable or minimum coverage requirements for offered contracts in markets
with competitive insurers, and the effect of this form of regulation on adverse selection. The usual form of
minimum coverage requirements is that they mandate standardized contracts or require that contracts
offered in the market encompass specified lists of conditions and procedures, providers, and covered
persons. For example, Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage in the United States is offered by

to competitive Nash behavior of suppliers have been considered by Miyazaki (1977), Crocker-Snow (1985ab),
Cho-Kreps (1987), Hellwig (1987), Rose (1993), Gale (1992, 1996), Allard et al (1997), Lopez-Cunat (2000),
Villeneuve (2000), Dionne et al (2001), Blouin (2003), Hendel (2005), and Chade-Schlee (2011). Hendren (2011)
uses the tools of mechanism design to establish a critical condition for the existence of any incentive-compatible
design for a decentralized health insurance market, and gives evidence that this condition may not be satisfied.

                                                       20
competitive insurers with a standard contract, market-determined publically-subsidized premiums, and
creditable coverage requirements that offered contracts be at least as generous as the standard contract, and
meet specific conditions on formularies and copayment limits. It is important to note that effective
creditable coverage regulations require lower limits on the generosity of benefits as well as lower limits on
the conditions or procedures that must be covered. Table 2 describes State condition and procedure
coverage mandates for employer-provided or publically subsidized general health insurance in the United
States. In addition, States have mandates on the types of providers that must be covered, and on household
or family members who must be covered. It is apparent from this table that while coverage mandates are
common, there is no uniform standard for what mandates are justified in terms of health outcomes, or what
mandate designs are helpful in stabilizing health insurance markets. These mandates increase the cost of
health insurance, and result in cross-subsidies from the relatively healthy to people with specific health
conditions. They also increase the cost of employer-provided insurance, leading business groups to
strongly oppose mandates; see Bunce and Weiske (2010), Keating (2012). Coverage mandates can induce
adverse selection, by making contracts more actuarially adverse for the healthy, but can also restrict the
ability of insurers to tailor contracts to cherry-pick lower-risk consumer.


TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE


    In tandem with “guaranteed issue” and “no rescission” requirements on insurers, particularly with
premium subsidies and risk adjustments, creditable coverage regulation can be an effective tool to control
adverse selection and prevent unraveling. On the other hand, mandates enacted at the behest of specific
provider and interest groups without considering their overall consequences may exacerbate adverse
selection. Thus, for creditable coverage regulation to be effective for health outcomes and market
stabilization, it needs to be implemented with careful attention to the health value of specific mandates and
the consequences for market operation. We argue in this paper that coverage mandates are a powerful tool
for stabilizing health insurance markets and reducing inefficiencies, but note that to help rather than hurt,
coverage mandates have to be carefully designed.
    Enrollment mandates can be used to improve the effectiveness of creditable coverage regulation and
reduce the need for premium subsidies. In particular, if there are not enrollment mandates, then in general
there will be a delicate trade-off between the scope of mandated coverage and voluntary enrollment of
healthy people that lower the average benefit payout. On the other hand, enrollment mandates are
ineffective without some level of minimum coverage regulation combined with sufficient penalties to
prevent consumers from ignoring the enrollment mandates.             Overall, enrollment mandates are an

                                                     21
important tool in promoting health insurance market efficiency, but it would also be possible to achieve
stability and acceptable efficiency in health insurance exchanges through use of standardized contracts and
creditable coverage restrictions, premium subsidies, and risk adjustment if enrollment mandates were
removed as a policy tool.


    Creditable coverage, premium support, and enrollment mandates: Consider regulatory measures to
combat the failures of health insurance markets in the presence of adverse selection, the non-viability of
pooled contracts as in Figure 3, and the instability or lack of coverage for low-risk consumers as in Figure 4.
The challenge is to obtain high enrollment and high rates of coverage by preventing pooled contracts from
being blocked. Creditable coverage regulation approaches this by restricting the coverage of contracts that
are allowed in the market. In its simplest form, this regulation could specify a single fixed level of
coverage θ. Insurers would compete on premiums, but would not be able to introduce contracts with
coverage variations that could cherry pick away robust consumers. For example, consider the contract D
in Figure 3, and creditable coverage regulation requiring that any offered contract lie in the line aa offering
the same coverage as D at various premiums that will be market determined. If D is above the indifference
curve of robust consumers through the no insurance point E, as shown, then this “all or nothing” contract
will attract both risk classes, in which case its location on the dd line will correspond to the competitively
determined break even premium. Except for the corner case where the indifference curve of robust
consumers at E is steeper than dd, so they will buy no contract on dd with 0 < θ, there will always be some
pooled contract D, protected by creditable coverage regulation from cherry picking, that is better for robust
consumers than E, and better for frail consumers than A. If the robust consumer indifference curve
through E intersects the 45o diagonal to the southwest of the contract L at the intersection of dd with the 45o
diagonal, then L is a Pareto optimal full insurance contract for both risk classes. While robust consumers
would prefer less insurance than L along the pooling line dd, and frail consumers would prefer more
insurance, the creditable coverage restriction of legal contracts to lie on the 45o diagonal prevents entry of a
blocking cherry-picking contract.      The second possibility is that the indifference curve of robust
consumers through E lies above L, and the range of viable pooled contracts protected by creditable
coverage regulation lie in an interval on dd that is strictly between E and L. Over this interval, larger θ is
always better for frail consumers, while there will be an optimal θ for robust consumers. If the creditable
contract D is established to the southeast of this optimum, then both consumer classes would benefit from
increased coverage. If D is located on dd northwest of this optimum, the interests of frail and robust
consumers are opposed, and there will be an interval of contracts that are all second-best Pareto optimal,
with increasing θ better for frail and worse for robust consumers. In this range, enrollment does not

                                                      22
depend on θ, a feature that reappears below when we discuss creditable scope regulation. In the final
alternative, not shown, where robust consumers prefer E to D, the market collapses to an extreme version of
a separating equilibrium in which frail consumers obtain creditable insurance at the point A at the
intersection of the lines aa and bb, and robust consumers choose the no insurance point E. The obvious
critical condition for creditable coverage regulation to sustain a pooled market equilibrium is then that the
robust consumers’ indifference curve at E be less steep than the slope of the line dd. This condition will be
met if robust consumers are sufficiently risk adverse, but the existence of a sustainable creditable pooled
equilibrium contract does not guarantee that this contract would provide a socially acceptable level of
coverage, or that a pooled contract that is socially acceptable would attract robust consumers. Obviously,
an enrollment mandate excludes the last possibility and makes any D on the dd line stable. We show
below that the same outcome can be obtained using premium subsidies.
    More elaborate creditable coverage schemes could (1) set minimum rather than fixed coverage
requirements corresponding to D, and allow insurers to offer alternatives with greater coverage than D, (2)
establish a basic coverage requirement like D, and allow insurers to offer supplementary policies to
consumers who have purchased D, or (3) require insurers to guarantee issue for a specified menu of
contracts, with or without restrictions on cross-subsidization. Consider the first of these schemes in the
case that D is preferred to no insurance by robust consumers. If robust consumers do not prefer more
coverage than D along the dd budget, then no pooled contract that exceeds the creditable minimum can
attract them. Then, D is a stable competitive market equilibrium subject to minimum creditable coverage
regulation. On the other hand, if robust consumer preferences are maximized subject to dd at a contract
with a larger θ than D, this will block the contract D and can in turn be blocked by a cherry picking contract
with less coverage that still meets the creditable minimum but attracts only the robust. Consequently,
creditable minimum coverage regulation can sustain a stable competitive equilibrium only if robust
consumers do not prefer more insurance than the minimum among contracts on the dd line, and if their
upper contour set through E includes the creditable minimum.
    Suppose that the basic contract D is a sustainable as a creditable market equilibrium, and now suppose
insurers are allowed to offer supplementary (secondary) contracts to consumers who purchase D. Suppose
further than these supplements are not controlled by creditable contract restrictions. This situation is like
that in Figure 3, writ small, with D replacing E as the starting point. There can be no supplemental
insurance contract that attracts the pool of both frail and robust customers. Such a contract would lie in dd,
and could be blocked by a cherry picking supplemental contract located between the indifference curves of
the two risk classes through the pooled basic contract and pooled supplement. However there is a
separating equilibrium for supplemental insurance when robust consumers prefer no contract on the line dd

                                                     23
to the northwest of the basic contract D, as depicted in the detail given in Figure 5. In this case the frail
consumers end up with a supplement that gives them full insurance at K, and robust consumers end up at J
with a partial supplement that does not attract frail consumers away from K. The assumption that the
indifference curve of robust consumers is tangent to dd at D implies that the indifference curve of these
consumers through J does not intersect dd. Then, the points K and J define a stable separating equilibrium
in the supplementary insurance market at which frail consumers are worse off than at L but better off than at
D, and robust consumers are better off than at D.           In this case it is unnecessary to stabilize the
supplementary insurance market with creditable restrictions that prevent blocking. However, with more
risk classes, creditable coverage regulation that specifies fixed basic coverage, fixed secondary coverage,
fixed tertiary coverage, and so forth, with voluntary enrollment and guaranteed issue at each level, may be
necessary for supplementary market stability.


FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE


    A third creditable coverage scheme requires that insurers offer a specified menu of contracts, with
guaranteed issue for each, with restrictions on cross-subsidization. This could accomplish the same thing
as the supplemental insurance market just described, with insurers required to offer a full coverage contract
in the 45o diagonal and a second contract in the 45o line through L, with a ceiling on premiums for full
insurance that forces insurers to offer K. Note that a regulated monopoly insurer (e.g., a single payer)
could achieve any resource allocation attainable through creditable coverage regulation, with the possibility
that the “all or nothing” choices available to consumers in the offered menu will capture all consumer
surplus and achieve second-best Pareto optimality subject to the asymmetric information in the market.
    Thus far, we have discussed creditable coverage regulation with minimal consideration of two other
regulatory tools to combat adverse selection, enrollment mandates and premium support. Consider
enrollment mandates.      These require that all consumers buy insurance (or, perhaps, post a bond,
demonstrate that they have the financial resources to self-insure, or pay a penalty earmarked for treatment
of the uninsured). Clearly, meaningful mandates require that the insurance purchases be creditable, and
require guaranteed issue. Mandates make the problem of finding stable creditable market equilibrium with
pooled contracts easier, and expand the set of contracts that are sustainable, as they effectively eliminate the
no insurance alternative E for robust consumers and the requirement that the creditable contract be better
for robust consumers than E. However, as the preceding paragraphs showed, mandated enrollment is not a
prerequisite for market stability, particularly when premium subsidies are available as a policy tool.



                                                      24
FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE


    Premium subsidies from government funds can be accomplished by providing vouchers to consumers
that can be applied to the purchase of health insurance, or by subsidizing insurers. The second channel can
be made incentive-compatible by having insurers bid the premium they seek to offer a specified creditable
contract, establish a subsidy that is a specified share of a national average premium bid, and finally require
each insurer’s premium to equal its bid less the subsidy; this is the scheme used in the Medicare Part D
prescription drug market. In Figure 6, a premium subsidy will move the break even point D for a pooled
contract to the northeast along aa. If the subsidy is sufficient to move the pooled contract to point F on the
robust consumer break even line cc, there is no longer any possibility of this contract being blocked by a
contract with less coverage that cherry picks the robust consumers. The contract F shows a case where
there are pooled contracts that offer more coverage, and with a premium subsided to the cc line are
preferred by both frail and robust consumers. In particular, the contract C, with full insurance for both frail
and robust, is attainable with sufficiently large premium subsidies. No enrollment mandates are required,
and creditable coverage regulation is needed only to assure that consumers are at C. Subsidies can be
combined with active creditable coverage regulation to assure that a break even subsidized pooled contract
in the line aa will attract robust consumers, and provide the basis for a stable pooled market equilibrium.
This reduces the public subsidy required relative to the one required to support C. If enrollment mandates
are added, it may be possible to reduce further the premium subsidy. A complete analysis of premium
subsidies must consider the source of tax revenue to finance them, its deadweight cost, and the overall
progressivity of a tax program earmarked for premium subsidies.


    Creditable Coverage Regulation with Many Risk Classes: The sustainability of basic creditable
coverage regulation that fixes the contract coverage is essentially unchanged if there are many consumer
risk classes. Consider again Figure 3, and now assume that the lines aa and cc are breakeven for the upper
and lower extremes of risk, but there are now consumers in intermediate risk classes. Assume that p* is the
average risk for the grand pool of all consumers, and dd is the break even line for this grand pool. Then, all
consumers at least as risky as p* will choose L if it is available in preference to any other contract on or
below dd and the 45o diagonal, and will choose D over E. Consumers only slightly less risky than p* will
prefer more insurance than D at the price p*, while consumers that are near p″ in risk will, in the case shown
in Figure 3, prefer less insurance than D. So long as the consumers in the p″ risk class prefer D to E, and
intermediate risk classes do as well, D will remain a stable competitive pooled contract when only this
coverage level is allowed. However, it will very difficult to achieve a stable market for secondary

                                                      25
insurance among the purchasers of D, for the same reasons that separating equilibria are difficult to achieve
in the original Rothschild-Stiglitz setup when there are many risk classes, as demonstrated by Riley.


     Creditable Coverage Scope Regulation: Thus far, we have analyzed creditable coverage regulation
when there is a single health problem, and the only issue is the share of the cost of treatment paid as benefits
by the insurer. In practice, health insurance contracts can restrict coverage to a specified list of conditions
and treatments, as in Table 2, with different benefit formulas for each. For example, in the Medicare Part
D prescription drug insurance market, insurers are allowed to specify the formularies they provide, subject
to limitations on the number of drugs available for each therapeutic condition, and are allowed to place
drugs on different copayment tiers, subject to a requirement that on average they meet a standard criterion
for benefit generosity. In the general private health insurance market, plans may differ on coverage and
restrictions for a variety of conditions and needs, from contraceptives to preventative and maintenance
therapies to surgical and hospital charges.
     A tractable model of coverage scope starts with the assumption that each consumer faces a continuum
of health conditions indexed by the points in the unit interval. Suppose that for selected θ, insurance
contracts with premiums π(θ) are available that covers all losses from conditions in [0,θ], and no losses
from the conditions in (θ,1]. Obviously, θ = 0 with p(0) = 0 corresponds to no insurance, and increasing θ
corresponds to increasing scope of coverage. Figure 7 illustrates a locus, labeled ABC, of insurance
contracts that might be offered in the market, each characterized by its scope and premium. Assume that
each consumer chooses a contract θ to maximize a certainty-equivalent net expected payoff θ(μ + η) – π
over the available (θ,π) scope-premium pairs, where θ(μ + η) is the certainty equivalent value of benefits
from insurance against losses from the conditions [0,θ], μ equals the consumer’s expected benefit from all
conditions if fully insured, and η > 0 equals the certainty equivalent value of eliminating all risk.11 This
payoff function increases to the southeast in Figure 7, with the line cc with slope μ + η denoting the linear
indifference curve through the best point B for this consumer, with coverage scope θ*. Then for all θ″ >
θ*, θ*(μ+η) – p(θ*) ≥ θ″(μ+η) – π(θ″) and hence μ+η ≤ ∂+π(θ) ≡ infθ″>θ [π(θ″) - π(θ)]/[θ″ – θ] where “inf” is
over all the contracts available in the stated range. Similarly, μ+η ≥ ∂-π(θ) ≡ supθ′<θ [π(θ) - π(θ′)]/[θ – θ′].

11
   This specification comes from consumers who are expected utility maximizers with a constant absolute risk
aversion (CARA) utility function u = [1 - exp(-α(c-π(θ)-L))]/α, where c – π(θ) - L is consumption after paying
premium π(θ) and a out-of-pocket loss L from uninsured health care costs from conditions (θ,1], α > 0 is a coefficient
of risk aversion, and health care losses are described by a Weiner process with drift; i.e., the loss L from conditions
(θ,1] has a normal distribution L ~ N((1-θ)μ,(1-θ)σ2), with μ > 0 and σ2 > 0. The expectation of this utility function,
obtained from the moment generating function for the normal, is Eu = [1 - exp(-α(c-π(θ)-(1-θ)μ)-(1-θ)ασ2/2))]/α, so
that expected utility is maximized when θ(μ + ασ2/2) – π(θ) is maximized; see Sharpe (1964), Mailath, and Noldeke
(2008). The expected net benefit from insurance θ is θμ – π(θ), and the certainty equivalent value of risk reduction is
θη = θασ2/2.
                                                          26
Then for every contract θ offered and chosen by some consumers, a price schedule π(θ) consistent with
consumer optimization satisfies 0 < [π(θ) - π(θ′)]/[θ – θ′] ≤ [π(θ″) - π(θ)]/[θ″ – θ] for θ′ < θ < θ″ Then π(θ)
must be increasing and convex on the domain of available contracts. Further, if ∂-π(θ) < ∂+π(θ), then θ is
the unique optimal choice for any consumer that has μ ∈ ∂-π(θ) – η,∂+ π(θ) - η). Thus, in Figure 7, where
B is a kink in the locus of available contracts, all the consumers with μ in the interval ∂-π(θ*) – η,∂+ π(θ*)
- η) will choose θ*.


FIGURE 7 ABOUT HERE


      Assume that μ is private information to the consumer, and is heterogeneous and continuously
distributed in the population with a support [μ0,μ1] satisfying 0 < μ0 < μ1 < ∞ and a positive continuous
density on the interior of this support; this private information will then be a potential source of adverse
selection.      This model is a highly stylized characterization of conditions and losses, and the
one-dimensional characterization of scope and risk heterogeneity is quite special, but it captures the
essential feature of scope – more limited coverage increases exposure to risk. The expected risk of a pool
of consumers with μ ∈ a,b ⊆ μ0,μ1] will be denoted M(a,b) = E{μ | a ≤ μ ≤ b}; then M(a,a) = a, and for a
constant C > 0 that is independent of a and b, a + ½C-1(b – a) ≤ M(a,b) ≤ b – ½C(b – a).12
       A contract θ breaks even if the premium equals the expected benefit payout to the consumers who
choose this contract, p(θ) = θ·M(a,b), where a = ∂-π(θ) - η and b = ∂+π(θ) - η.13 Then the premium on a
breakeven contract must satisfy ∂-π(θ) – η ≤ π(θ)/θ ≤ ∂+π(θ) – η, with the inequalities strict when ∂-π(θ) <
∂+π(θ). Competitive market equilibrium is defined by a compact set of offered contracts θ, with premiums
π(θ) and consumer choices across contracts at these premiums such that all offered and chosen contracts
break even, and no other contract if introduced would be profitable while the previously offered contracts
all remain in the market.


FIGURE 8 ABOUT HERE


       In the absence of creditable scope regulation, this paragraph shows that market equilibrium cannot
exist: First suppose, as in Figure 8, that a candidate equilibrium exists in which a contract B is chosen by a

12
    If f(μ) is the density of μ, then M(a,b) =              /         . Since f is positive and continuous on μ0 ≤ μ ≤ μ1,
it satisfies c0 ≤ f ≤ c1 for some positive constants c0, c1. Define C = c0/c1. Then by the mean value theorem, a +
½C-1·(b-a) = a + c1(a-b)2/2·c0·(b-a) ≤ a +                     /            = M(a,b) = b +                    /
≤ b – c0(a-b) /2·c1·(b-a) = b - ½C·(b-a).
                2

13
     The insurer’s revenue is p(θ)·           and expected benefit cost is θ·                  .
                                                        27
non-degenerate pool of risk classes, μ′ < μ < μ″, where μ′ + η and μ″ + η are the slopes at which consumers
with these risks are indifferent between B and other offered contracts A and C. The height of B is
determined by the breakeven condition π(θ) = θM(μ′,μ″) ≡ θμ*. Introduce a contract D to the southwest of
B on the line with slope μ* + η and above the ray with slope M(μ′,μ*). This contract is better than B for the
consumers with μ′ < μ < μ*, and worse than B for consumers with μ* < μ < μ″. Then it cherry picks away
from B the consumers in the interval μ′ < μ < μ*, and it is profitable since it is above the ray with slope
M(μ′,μ*) that determines breakeven for this cherry picked group. Hence, D blocks B. The figure is
drawn for discretely separated offered contracts, but the argument also holds when there are continua of
offered contracts to the left or right of B. With pooling contracts ruled out, any candidate equilibrium must
be separating, with premiums satisfying ∂π(θ) - η = π(θ)/θ. This is a differential equation with the
boundary condition that the most risky consumers are fully insured, and has the unique solution π(θ) = θ(μ1
+ η·ln(θ)) for θ0 ≤ θ ≤ 1, with θ0 = exp(-(μ1-μ0)/η). This is the curve between the points A and B in Figure
9. The consumers distribute themselves across contracts so that μ = μ1 + η·ln(θ), or θ = exp(-(μ1-μ)/η).
Now consider introduction of a new contract D at θ = 1 with a premium π* < π(1).         This will attract the
pool of consumers who were previously located at θ between the coverage θ′ at point B and 1, or with risks
between μ′ = μ1 + η·ln(θ′) and μ1, where θ′ and π* are related by the formula π* = μ1 + η·ln(θ′) + (1 - θ′)η.
This pool has average risk M(μ′,μ1). When D is above the ray with slope M(μ′,μ1), as shown in the figure,
it is profitable and blocks C. But this configuration must hold when θ′ is close enough to 1, since π* = μ1 -
O((1-θ′)2) by expansion of the log, while M(μ′,μ1) ≤ μ1 – ½C(1-θ′) for some C > 0 from the properties of the
conditional expectation (see fn. 11), so that π* - M(μ′,μ1) = c(1-θ′) - O((1-θ′)2) > 0 for 1 - θ′ sufficiently
small. This demonstration is for particular preferences, but the result holds more generally; see Riley
(1976).


     FIGURE 9 ABOUT HERE


     Now consider the effect of creditable scope regulation. Suppose regulation allows a single contract θ,
and there are no enrollment mandates or premium subsidies. If M(μ0,μ1) ≤ μ0 + η, then risk aversion is
sufficiently strong so that all consumers enroll, there is no adverse selection, and full insurance with θ = 1
and π(1) = M(μ0,μ1) is Pareto optimal. Alternatively, if M(μ0,μ1) > μ0 + η, there exists a minimum μ′ > μ0
independent of θ satisfying η = M(μ′,μ1) - μ′; existence of this minimum is guaranteed since the
right-hand-side of this condition is continuous in μ′, exceeds η at μ′ = μ0, and is zero at μ′ = μ1. Any
consumer with μ > μ′ then has μ + η > M(μ′,μ1), and will choose to buy any contract θ with premium
θ·M(μ′,μ1), and vice versa. Then the break even condition π(θ)/θ = M(μ′,μ1) can be met for any θ > 0, and

                                                     28
in particular met for full insurance θ = 1 and the premium π(1) = M(μ′,μ1). Then a creditable scope
restriction to full insurance is second-best Pareto optimal. This model is obviously special, but it illustrates
a broader principle: Standardized contracts are not necessarily subject to as stark a trade-off between level
of insurance and non-enrollment of the healthy as is found in markets where contract terms are unregulated.
     An alternative to a single allowed contract under creditable coverage regulation is to permit several
contracts with different levels of scope. For example, the configuration in Figure 8 with discrete contracts
A, B, C will separate the population into pools. This can be stable if regulation forbids introduction of
contracts like D that are just below B in coverage and cherry pick its lowest risk enrollees. At least in the
simple model we have used to investigate scope regulation, one can calculate for any distribution of risks μ
the viability and stability of market equilibrium, and contract market shares, for any candidate menu of
allowed contracts. In general, clear separation of the contracts allowed under creditable coverage is
required to avoid unraveling. Contracts with moderate coverage are needed to achieve high enrollment if
there is no enrollment mandate, but contracts with very low coverage have to be excluded to avoid socially
unacceptable levels of “underinsurance”. Of course, premium support and/or enrollment mandates will
attract or force people into the contracts allowed under creditable coverage regulation, and relax the
constraints on achieving a socially acceptable stable market.


    Consumer Misperceptions and Scope Regulation: If consumers misperceive their own preferences,
then their choices may not be in their self-interest, but more seriously may contribute to adverse selection
and health insurance market failure.       Two behavioral tendencies, observed in laboratory and field
experiments, are overconfidence in beliefs, and errors in estimating probabilities of future events,
particularly rare events in the remote future. Thus, people are unrealistically sure of themselves when
making guesses about facts such as the length of the Amazon River or the expected length of their
remaining healthy life, and when judging future low-probability risks, often either overstate them or treat
them as if they have probability zero. In the context of health insurance, these tendencies may lead
consumers to undervalue protection against risk, evaluate insurance contracts primarily in terms of
expected net payoff, and underestimate the expected net payoff relative to actuarial reality.
     In the context of coverage scope, individuals may differ in the risks they perceive of developing
different conditions, and the certitude with which they hold these perceptions, and these behavioral
heterogeneities can have a substantial impact on adverse selection and the stability of the market. In our
model of choice of coverage scope and creditable regulation of scope in the health insurance market, it is
easy to examine the impact of consumer misperceptions of risk, and the relation between true risk and the
degree of risk aversion. Previously, μ was assumed to be both the actual and perceived risk of an

                                                      29
individual, and η was treated as constant and unrelated to μ. More generally, the gap μ* - μ between
perceived risk μ* and true risk μ can be noisy, and may be correlated with μ. In addition, the certainty
equivalent value of eliminating risk, which can be written η = ασ2/2, where α is a coefficient of absolute risk
aversion and σ2 is the variance of health losses from all causes, may be distorted if consumers belief’s about
σ2 are unrealistically low, and may be correlated with μ if the degree of risk aversion is correlated with risk.
     In the presence of these behavioral effects, the consumer will choose coverage scope among offered
contracts to maximize θ(μ* + η) – π(θ) = θ(μ + [η - μ + μ*]) – π(θ). Then, if consumers underestimate their
true risk, μ* < μ, this effectively lowers the certainty equivalent value of eliminating risk, and moves them
toward a knife edge judgment on whether a contract is actuarially fair. Underestimating σ2 also moves
consumers toward this knife edge. The worst case for adverse selection is μ* < μ and the gap largest when
μ is small, as in this case healthy consumers are less inclined to insure, particularly with contracts whose
premiums are determined by a pool of more risky enrollees. On the other hand, if there is a negative
correlation of α and μ, so that healthy consumers are more risk adverse, this will increase their willingness
to enroll and introduce an advantageous selection offset to the adverse selection induced by private
information. If μ* is random and uncorrelated with μ, then private beliefs do not induce behavior that is
related to μ, and there are no selection effects, adverse or advantageous. Adverse selection rises with an
increasing positive correlation of μ and μ*, and an increasing mean for the gap μ – μ*. There is
controversy about the appropriateness of government intervention to nudge consumers toward choices that
reflect their true rather than perceived risk situations. However, there is a case for intervention if
consumers as a result of these misperceptions impose external costs on society, say by failing to insure and
falling back on the government as an “insurer of last resort”, even under the ideology that government
should respect consumer sovereignty and not try to “second-guess” and manipulate consumers.




3. CONCLUSIONS


    It is clear that in the United States, the current “dog’s breakfast” of incentives and regulations, and the
behavior of participants in response to these regulations, have not resulted in an efficient, equitable health
care system. In comparison with other developed countries, the U.S. population pays far too much, in
private and public funds combined, for the final health outcomes achieved, and there are large gaps and
inequities in outcomes. We conclude from our overview that the general health insurance market in the
United States has been substantially damaged by unraveling and inefficient screening. If private insurance
markets, such as those envisioned in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), are the

                                                      30
politically determined preference for organization of health insurance in the U.S., then it is critical to
regulate these markets to achieve workable competition and equitable and efficient outcomes.
    We conclude that the State-level health insurance exchanges planned under the PPACA can be
protected from market failure by carefully designed standardized contracts and creditable coverage
regulation used in tandem with some combination of premium subsidies, risk adjustment, and enrollment
mandates. We have previously mentioned Switzerland as a model of successful implementation in a
strongly market-oriented economy of mandatory health insurance with legislated creditable coverage
requirements, offered through private insurers; see Newhouse (1996) and Heiss-McFadden-Winter (2008).
If enrollment mandates were removed as a policy tool in the United States, State exchanges would remain a
viable mechanism for offering insurance contracts that would attract most consumers and reduce free-riding
by the uninsured, provided creditable coverage regulations and premium subsidies were used to protect the
market from destabilizing cherry-picking and reduce the relative attractiveness of self-insurance to the
lowest-risk consumers. There is a largely successful U.S. precedent for this form of regulation, with about
92 percent enrollment without enrollment mandates in the Medicare Part D market for prescription drug
insurance introduced by the Bush administration in 2006. That said, enrollment mandates are a useful
policy tool that substitute for premium subsidies, reduce the public cost of meeting the objectives of the
PPACA, and control the externality imposed by consumers who fail to insure and end up with the cost of
their health care borne by the public. Further, enrollment mandates seem to fall well within the range of
mandates that the United States and member States have imposed on markets and consumers in the past to
advance the public good; e.g., safety standards on toys, CAFE standards on automobiles, communicable
disease quarantines, compulsory automobile insurance, and the military draft.
    This paper has not undertaken a comprehensive analysis of the health care sector that examines the
health care delivery system as well as health finance. Finding good mechanisms for provision of health
care may place additional requirements on the health insurance market. This breadth of analysis should be
a target of future research.




                                                    31
References
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2011) Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: evidence from plan choice in the
Medicare Part D program, American Economic Review, 101(4), 1180-1210.
Abbring, J., P. Chiappori, J. Heckman, J. Pinquet (2003) Adverse selection and moral hazard in insurance: can
dynamic data help to distinguish? Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(2/3), 512-21.
Agarwal, V., J. Ligon (1998) Insurer contract nonperformance in a market with adverse selection, Journal of Risk and
Insurance, 65(1), 135-150.
Akerlof, G. (1970) The Market for "Lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism, The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 84(3): 488-500.
Allard, M., J. Cresta, and J. Rochet (1997) Pooling and separating equilibria in insurance markets with adverse
selection and distribution costs, Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Theory, 22(2), 103.120.
Arrow, K. (1963) Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. American Economic Review, 53:941-973.
Bajari, P., H. Hong, A. Khwaja (2006), Moral hazard, adverse selection, and health expenditures: a semiparametric
analysis, NBER Working Paper 12445.
Belli, P. (2001) How adverse selection affects the health insurance market, World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper 2574.
Blouin, M. (2003) Equilibrium in a decentralized market with adverse selection, Economic Theory, 22(2), 245-262.
Blumberg, L., J. Holahan (2009) The Individual Mandate — An Affordable and Fair Approach to Achieving
Universal Coverage, New England Journal of Medicine, 361 (1): 6–7.
Boccuti, C. and M. Moon (2003) Adverse selection in private stand-alone drug plans and techniques to reduce it,
Commonwealth Club white paper.
Buchmueller, T. (2008) Community rating, entry-age rating, and adverse selection in private health insurance in
Australia, Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance- Issues and Practice, 33(4), 588-609.
Bunce, V., J. Wieske (2010) Health Insurance Mandates in the States 2010, white paper, Council for Affordable
Health Insurance.
Card, D, C. Dobkin, N. Maestas (2008) The impact of nearly universal insurance coverage on health care utilization:
evidence from Medicare, NBER working paper 10365.
Cardon, J., Hendel, I. (2001) Asymmetric information in health insurance: evidence from the National Medical
Expenditure Survey, Rand Journal of Economics 32 (3): 408–427.
Chade, H., E. Schlee (2011) Optimal insurance with adverse selection, Theoretical Economics.
Chade, H., V. de Serio (2002) Risk Aversion, Moral Hazard, and the Principal's Loss, Economic Theory, Vol. 20(2) ,
637-644
Chiappori, P. (2000). Econometric Models of Insurance under Asymmetric Information, Handbook of Insurance,
Georges Dionne (ed), 365-394.
Chiappori, P., B. Jullien, B. Salanie, F. Salanie (2006) Asymmetric information in insurance: general testable
implications, working paper.
Chiappori, P.; Salanie, B. (2000) Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance Markets, Journal of Political
Economy 108 (1): 56–78.
Cho, I., and D. Kreps (1987) Signaling games and stable equilibria,. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2),
179-221.
Clark, J. (1895) The gold standard of currency in the light of recent theory, Political Science Quarterly, 10(3),
389-403.
                                                        32
Clark, R. (1976) The soundness of financial intermediaries, Yale Law Journal, 86(1), 1-102.
Copernicus, N. (1519) Modus cudendi monetam, NCT Archives.
Crocker, K., and A. Snow (1985a) A simple tax structure for competitive equilibrium and redistribution in insurance
markets with asymmetric information, Southern Economic Journal, 51(4), 1142-1150.
Crocker, K., and A. Snow (1985b) The efficiency of competitive equilibria in insurance markets with asymmetric
information, Journal of Public Economics, 26(2), 207.219.
Crosby, Everett (1905). Fire prevention, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (American
Academy of Political and Social Science) 26 (2): 224–238.
Cutler, D. and R. Zeckhauser (2000) The anatomy of health insurance, in A. Culyer and J. Newhouse (eds) Handbook
of Health Economics, Elsevier Science, Chap. 11.
Cutler, D. and S. Reber (1998), Paying for health insurance: the trade-off between competition and adverse selection,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2), 433-466.
Cutler, D., A. Finkelstein, and K. McGarry (2008) Preference heterogeneity and insurance markets: explaining a
puzzle of insurance, American Economic Review, 98(2), 157-162..
Dahlby, B. (1981) Adverse selection and Pareto improvements through compulsory insurance, Public Choice, 37(3),
547.558.
Dasgupta, P., and E. Maskin (1986) The existence of equilibrium in discontinuous economic games, II: Applications,
The Review of Economic Studies, 53(1), 27.41.
De Donder, P., J. Hindriks (2006) Equilibrium social insurance with policy-motivated parties, Core Discussion Paper
2006/33.
De Meza, D. and D. Webb (2001), Advantageous selection in insurance markets, RAND Journal of Economics, 32(2),
249-262.
Diamond, P. (1978), Welfare analysis of imperfect information equilibrium, Bell Journal of Economics, 9(1), 82-105.
Dionne, G., N. Doherty, and N. Fombaron (2001) Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets, Handbook of Insurance,
Chapter 7, p. 185.
Duffie, D. and K. Singleton (2003). Credit Risk: Pricing, Measurement, and Management. Princeton University Press
Encinosa,W. (2001) A comment on Neudeck and Podczeck, Journal of Health Economics, 20(4), 667.673.
Englehardt, G. and J. Gruber (2011) Medicare Part D and the Financial Protection of the Elderly, American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4), 77-102.
Fagart, M., and B. Kambia-Chopin (2006): .Prevention in insurance markets, Annales d.Economie et de Statistique,
82, 55.70.
Fang, H., M. Keane, and D. Silverman (2008), Sources of advantageous selection: evidence from the medigap
insurance market, Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 303-350.
Feldman, R., C. Escribano, and L. Pellisé (1998): .The role of government in health insurance markets with adverse
selection, Health Economics, 7(8), 659.670.
Feldstein, M. (1973), Welfare loss of excess health insurance, Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), 251-280.
Finkelstein, A. (2002) When can partial public insurance produce Pareto improvements?,.NBER Working Paper.
Finkelstein, A. (2004) Minimum standards, insurance regulation and adverse selection: evidence from the Medigap
market, Journal of Public Economics, 88(12), 2515.2547.
Finkelstein, A.; McGarry, K. (2006). Multiple dimensions of private information: evidence from the long-term care
insurance market, American Economic Review 96 (4): 938–958.


                                                         33
Finkelstein, A.; Poterba, J. (2004). "Adverse selection in insurance markets: policyholder evidence from the UK
annuity market". Journal of Political Economy 112 (1): 183–208.
Finkelstein, A., Poterba, J., and Rothschild, C, (2009), “Redistribution by insurance market regulation: Analyzing a
ban on gender-based retirement annuities”, Journal of Financial Economics 91, 38–58
Gale, D. (1992) A Walrasian theory of markets with adverse selection, Review of Economic Studies, 59(2), 229-255.
Gale, D. (1996) Equilibria and Pareto optima of markets with adverse selection, Economic Theory, 7(2), 207-235.
Glazer, J., and T. McGuire (2000): .Optimal risk adjustment in markets with adverse selection: an application to
managed care, American Economic Review, 90(4), 1055.1071.
Grennan, M. (2012) Price discrimination and bargaining: empirical evidence from medical devices, American
Economic review, forthcoming.
Gresham, T. (1558) letter to Queen Elisabeth I.
Grossman, H. (1979): .Adverse selection, dissembling, and competitive equilibrium, The Bell Journal of Economics,
10(1), 336.343.
Grubel, H. (1971) Risk, uncertainty, and moral hazard, Journal of Risk and Insurance, 38(1), 99-106.
Gruber, J. (2008) Covering the uninsured in the United states, Journal of Economic Literature, 46(3), 571-606.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2006): Who failed to enroll in Medicare Part D, and why? Early results. Health
Affairs, 25, w344–w354.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2009): Regulation of health insurance markets: Lessons from enrollment,
plan choice, and adverse selection in Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper No. 15392.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2010): Mind the gap! Consumer perceptions and choices of Medicare Part D
prescription drug plans. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Research Findings in the Economics of Aging, 413–481. Chicago and
London: Chicago University Press.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2011): The demand for Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage: Evidence
from four waves of the Retirement Perspectives Survey. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Explorations in the Economics of Aging,
159–182. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press.
Hellwig, M. (1987): .Some recent developments in the theory of competition in markets with adverse selection,
European Economic Review, 31(1-2), 319.325.
Hendel, I. (2005) Efficient sorting in a dynamic adverse-selection market, Review of Economic Studies, 72(2),
467-497.
Hendren, N. (2011) Private information and insurance rejections, MIT working paper.
Herring, B., M. Pauly (2006) The effect of State community rating reulation on premiums and coverage in the
individual health insurance market, NBER working paper 12504.
Hodgeman, D. (1960) Credit risk and credit rationing, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 74 (2), 258-278.
Holmstrom, B. (1979), "Moral hazard and observability". Bell Journal of Economics, pp. 74-91.
Johnson, W. (1977) Choice of compulsory insurance schemes under adverse selection, Public Choice, 31, 23-35.
Keating, R. (2012) Health Care Policy Cost Index 2012, white paper, Small Business & entrepreneurship Council.
Kilburn, F. (1904) Control and supervision of trust companies, Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science, 24, 29-42.
Lopez-Cunat, J. (2000) Adverse selection under ignorance, Economic Theory, 16(2), 379-399.
Mahdavi, G. (2005) Advantageous selection versus adverse selection in life insurance market, Japanese Society for
the Promotion of Science.


                                                         34
Mahul, O., B. Wright (2004) Implications of incomplete performance for optimal insurance, Economics, New Series,
71(284), 661-670.
Mailath,, G., G. Noldeke (2008) Does competitive pricing cause market breakdown under extreme adverse selection?
Journal of Economic Theory 140, 97 – 125.
McFadden, D., C. Noton, and P. Olivella (2012) Minimum coverage in insurance markets, working paper.
McFadden, D., J. Winter, F. Heiss (2008) Consumer directed health care: Can consumers take care of themselves?,
Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics, 144(3), 285-307.
McGuire, T. (2000) Physician agency, in A. Culyer and J. Newhouse (eds) Handbook of Health Economics, Elsivier
Science, Chap. 9.
Mimra, W., and A. Wambach (2011) A Game-Theoretic Foundation for the Wilson Equilibrium in Competitive
Insurance Markets with Adverse Selection,.CESifo Working Paper Series.
Miyazaki, H. (1977) The rat race and internal labor markets, The Bell Journal of Economics, 8(2), 394.418.
Mott, D. et al (1998) Agency theory, drug formularies, and drug product selection: implications for public policy,
Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 17(2), 287-293.
Neudeck, W., and K. Podczeck (1996) Adverse selection and regulation in health insurance markets, Journal of
Health Economics, 15(4), 387-408.
Neuhaus, W. (1995) "Community rating and equalisation", ASTIN Bulletin 25 (2), 95–118.
Olivella, P., and M. Vera-Hernandez (2010) How complex are the contracts offered by health plans? Journal of the
Spanish Economic Association, 1(3), 305-323.
Olivella, P., and M. Vera-Hernández, (2012) “Testing for asymmetric information in private health insurance”, The
Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Olivella, P., and M. Vera-Hernández (2007) "Competition among Differentiated Health Plans under Adverse
Selection”, Journal of Health Economics, 26, 233-250.
Pauly, M. (1970) The welfare economics of community rating, Journal of Risk and Insurance, 37(3), 407-18.
Pauly, M. (1974) Overinsurance and the public provision of insurance: the roles of moral hazard and adverse
selection, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88(1), 44-62.
Pauly, M. and S. Nicholson (1999) Adverse consequences of adverse selection, Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and
Law, 24(5), 921-930.
Radner, R. (1968) Competitive equilibrium under uncertainty, Econometrica, 36, 31-58.
Radner, R. (1970) Problems in the theory of markets under uncertainty, American Economic Review, 59(2), 454-460.
Riley, J. (1975) Competitive signaling, Journal of Economic Theory, 10, 174-186.
Riley, J. (1979) Informational Equilibrium, Econometrica, 47(2), 331-359.
Riley, J. (2002) Weak and strong signals, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 104(2), 213-236.
Rose, C. (1993) Equilibrium and adverse selection, RAND Journal of Economics, 24(4), 559-569.
Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz (1976) Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on the economics of
imperfect information, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4), 629.649.
Sharpe, William F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk, Journal of
Finance, 19 (3), 425-442
Smart, M. (2000) Competitive insurance markets with two unobservables, International Economic Review, 41(1),
153.170.

                                                        35
Spence, M. (1974) Competitive and optimal response to signals, Journal of Economic Theory, 7(3), 296-332.
Spence, M. (1976) Informational aspects of market structure, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4), 591-597.
Spence, M. (1978) Product differentiation and performance in insurance markets, Journal of Public Economics, 10(3),
427-447.
Spence, M., R. Zeckhauser (1971) Insurance, information, and individual action, American Economic Review, 61(2),
380-387.
Villeneuve, B. (2000) The consequences for a monopolistic insurance firm of evaluating risk better than customers:
the adverse selection hypothesis reversed, Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Theory, 25(1), 65.79.
Walford, C. et al (1881) On the Number of Deaths from Accident, Negligence, Violence, and Misadventure in the
United Kingdom and some other Countries, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Wilson, C. (1977) A model of insurance markets with incomplete information, Journal of Economic Theory, 16(2),
167-207.
Wilson, C. (1979) Equilibrium and adverse selection, American Economic Review, 69(2), 313-317.
Wilson, C. (1980) The nature of equilibrium in markets with adverse selection, Bell Journal of Economics, 11(1),
108-130.
Zweifel, P., F. Breyer, M. Kifmann (2009) Health Economics, Springer-Verlag: Berlin.




                                                        36
                        Remedies for Sick Insurance - Tables and Figures


                Table 1. Regulatory Mechanisms for Health Insurance Markets
Consumer regulation
      mandates that consumers buy creditable coverage
      direct or tax-linked premium subsidies
      low-income premium subsidies
      co-payment and reference price requirements
Provider regulation
      payment capitation
      risk-adjusted outcome-based payment
      approval or review of diagnostic classifications and treatment assignments
Insurer regulation
      Franchising and entry controls
      capitalization and reserve requirements
      rate-of-return or premium load regulation
      controls on screening, enrollment, and recission
      limits on underwriting
      minimum coverage requirements for offered contracts
      oversight of benefit payments
      ex ante risk adjustment or ex post experience adjustment with public or mutual subsidies
      public premium subsidies
      subsidized reinsurance




                                                  37
Table 2. State-Level Coverage Mandates for Employer-Provided and Subsidized Health Insurance

Condition with Coverage Mandate          Number           Condition with Coverage Mandate   Number
                                         of States                                          of States
AIDS/HIV Testing/Vaccine                    10        HPV Vaccine                              11
Alcoholism/Substance Abuse                  46        Hormone Replacement Therapy               4
Alzheimer’s                                 4         In Vitro Fertilization                   15
Ambulatory Surgery Centers                  13        Kidney Disease                            2
Ambulance Transportation                    13        Long-Term Care                            5
Ambulatory Cancer Treatment                  3        Lyme Disease                              3
Anti-Psychotic Drugs                        10        Lymph Edema                               3
Asthma Education & Self-Management          3         Mammography Screening                    50
Attention Deficit Disorder                   2        Mastectomy & Minimum Stay                25
Autism                                      25        Maternity                                22
Bilateral Cochlear Implant                   2        Maternity Minimum Stay                   50
Blood Lead Poisonng Screening                8        Mental Health General                    42
Blood Products                               3        Mental Health Parity                     48
Bone Marrow Transplant                       9        Minimum Hysterectomy Stay                 2
Bone Mass Measurement                       16        Morbid Obesity Treatment                  7
Brain Injury                                 3        Neurodevelopment Therapy                  1
Breast Reduction                            1         Newborn Hearing Screening                18
Breast Reconstruction                       50        Newborn Sickle Cell Anemia Testing        4
Cancer Pain Medication Therapies             7        Off-Label Drug Use                       36
Cervical Cancer / HPV Screening             31        Oriental Medicine                         3
Chemotherapy                                 8        Orthotic and/or Prosthetics              19
Circumcision                                 1        Ostomy Procedure and Supplies             1
Chlamydia Screening                         4         Ovarian Cancer Screening                  7
Cleft Lip and Palate                        17        PKU/Metabolic Disorder                   33
Clinical Trial (cancer)                     28        Port-Wine Stain Elimination               2
Colorectal Cancer Screening                 34        Prescription Drugs                        4
Congential Bleeding Disorder                 3        Prescription Inhalent                     2
Congenital Defect/Habilatative Service       6        Prostate Cancer Screening                36
Contraceptive                               29        Psychotropic Drugs                        5
Dental Anesthesia                           31        Reconstructive Surgery                    7
Developmental Disability                     1        Rehabilitative Service                    6
Diabetic Self-Management                    38        Residential Crisis Service                3
Diabetic Supplies                           47        Second Surgical Opinion                  10
Drug Abuse Treatment                        34        Shingles (Herpes Zoster) Vaccine         1
Early Intervention Service                   7        Smoking Cessation                         6
Emergency Room Service                      45        Special Footwear                          2
Hair Prosthesis                             10        Telemedicine                              9
Hearing Aids for Minor                      17        TMJ Disorder                             19
Heart Transplant                             1        Varicose Vein Removal                    1
Home Health Care                            20        Vision Care Service                       1
Hospice Care                                12        Well Child Care                          33

Source: Bunce and Weske (2010)




                                                     38
                Figure 1. Expected Utility Maximization under Health Uncertainty


Consumption
   if sick




                                                                                              (1-θ)L
                                                                                   a

                                                                              A*
                         Slope = - (1-p)/p




        b

                                   B
                                                                                               θL




                                                   A
                                                                  b


                                                                          E
              45o           a
                                                                                       Consumption
                                                                                        if healthy




                                              39
                                   Figure 2. Two Consumer Risk Classes


Consumption                                                     Slope = - (1-p″)/p″
   if sick


                                                        c



                    Slope = - (1-p*)/p*
                                                                                                 (1-θ)L
                                                                                      a
                         d


                                                                  C




        b
                                                                              F
                                       B
                                                            D                                     θL
        Slope = - (1-p′)/p′                                                       c
                                                                      d

                                                        A


                                                                          b

                                                                                  E
              45o              a
                                                                                          Consumption
                                                                                           if healthy




                                                   40
                 Figure 3. Pooled Contract Blocked by Cherry-Picking Alternative

Consumption                                                  Slope = - (1-p″)/p″
   if sick


                                                     c



                    Slope = - (1-p*)/p*
                                                                                              (1-θ)L
                                                                                   a
                         d


                                                                C



                                            L
        b
                                                                          F
                                     B
                                                         D                                     θL
        Slope = - (1-p′)/p′                                           G       c


                                                     A
                                                                              d
                                                                      b

                                                                              E
              45o              a
                                                                                       Consumption
                                                                                        if healthy




                                                41
                              Figure 4. Separating Equilibrium

Consumption                                               Slope = - (1-p″)/p″
   if sick


                                                  c



                                                                                          (1-θ)L



                    d
                                                             C


                                         L
        b

                                B
                                                                                           θL
                                                      d                    c
        Slope = - (1-p′)/p′
                                                                               H




                                                                   b

                                                                           E
              45o
                                                                                   Consumption
                                                                                    if healthy




                                             42
            Figure 5. Creditable Coverage Regulation with Supplements


                                                  Slope = - (1-p″)/p″
                                   c




           Slope = - (1-p*)/p*


                 d




                                   L
b

                            K
                                                                c
                                                                            a
Slope = - (1-p′)/p′
                                                                    J




                                                           b

                                                                    D
                                                                        d



                                                   a




                                       43
                                    Figure 6. Premium Subsidies

Consumption                                                   Slope = - (1-p″)/p″
   if sick


                                                      c



                    Slope = - (1-p*)/p*
                                                                                               (1-θ)L
                                                                                    a
                         d


                                                                 C



                                             L
        b
                                                                           F
                                     B
                                                          D                                     θL
        Slope = - (1-p′)/p′                                            G       c


                                                      A
                                                                               d
                                                                       b

                                                                               E
              45o              a
                                                                                        Consumption
                                                                                         if healthy




                                                 44
         Figure 7. The Market for Contract Scope



π


                                Locus of offered contracts (θ,π(θ))

                                                C



                                                        c



                                                            Consumer payoff
                                                              θ(μ+η) – π



                           B
π*                                                 Slope = ∂-π(θ*) + η


                                     Slope = ∂+π(θ*) + η
     A
               c


                                θ*                             θ




                           45
            Figure 8. Pooling Contracts are Blocked



π
                                                       C
                                                                Slope = μ″ + η



                                                           Slope = μ* + η




                                               B
    Slope = μ* = M(μ′,μ″)
                                           D

                                                      Slope = M(μ′,μ*)




                 A
                  Slope = μ′ + η



                                                            θ




                              46
                      Figure 9. Separating Contracts are Blocked



π
                                                                   C
    π* = μ1 + η·ln(θ′) + (1 - θ′)η                                     D




              Slope = M(μ′,μ1)


                                                            B

    Slope = μ′ + η




         A


         θ0                                            θ′          1   θ




                                         47
