NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL LITERACY AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS
Leora F. Klapper
Annamaria Lusardi
Georgios A. Panos
Working Paper 17930
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17930

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

We thank Ed Al-Hussainy, Andrei Markov, David McKenzie, Martin Melecky, Sue Rutledge, Bilal
Zia, and seminar participants at the ISNIE 2011 at Stanford University, the CEPR/Study Center Gerzensee
2011 European Summer Symposium, the McDonough School of Business, Essex Business School
and the University of Venice for very valuable comments and the World Bank Development Research
Group Research Support Budget for financial assistance. Teresa Molina and Douglas Randall provided
outstanding research assistance. This paper’s findings, interpretations and conclusions are entirely
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views or policies of the World Bank, their
Executive Directors, the countries they represent or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Leora F. Klapper, Annamaria Lusardi, and Georgios A. Panos. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Literacy and the Financial Crisis
Leora F. Klapper, Annamaria Lusardi, and Georgios A. Panos
NBER Working Paper No. 17930
March 2012
JEL No. D14
ABSTRACT
The ability of consumers to make informed financial decisions improves their ability to develop sound
personal finance. This paper uses a panel dataset from Russia, an economy in which consumer loans
grew at an astounding rate - from about US$10 billion in 2003 to over US$170 billion in 2008 - to
examine the importance of financial literacy and its effects on behavior. The survey contains questions
on financial literacy, consumer borrowing (formal and informal), saving and spending behavior. The
paper studies both the financial consequences and the real consequences of financial illiteracy. Even
though consumer borrowing increased very rapidly in Russia, the authors find that only 41% of respondents
demonstrate understanding of the workings of interest compounding and only 46% can answer a simple
question about inflation. Financial literacy is positively related to participation in financial markets
and negatively related to the use of informal sources of borrowing. Moreover, individuals with higher
financial literacy are significantly more likely to report having greater availability of unspent income
and higher spending capacity. The relationship between financial literacy and availability of unspent
income is higher during the financial crisis, suggesting that financial literacy may better equip individuals
to deal with macroeconomic shocks.

Leora F. Klapper
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
lklapper@worldbank.org
Annamaria Lusardi
The George Washington University
School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Duques Hall, Suite 450E
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu

Georgios A. Panos
University of Stirling
Stirling Management School
Room 3B79, Cottrell Building
Economics Division
Stirling, Scotland, FK9 4LA
United Kingdom
georgios.panos@stir.ac.uk

1.

Introduction
The 2008 financial crisis, characterized in part by mounting losses for individuals,

has generated interest in better understanding how to promote savvier saving and
borrowing behavior. The ability of individuals to make informed financial decisions is
critical to developing sound personal finance, which can contribute to more efficient
allocation of financial resources and to greater financial stability at both the micro and
macro level (see, e.g., Lusardi, 2008; Lusardi and Tufano, 2009a,b). Efforts to improve
financial literacy can also be an important component of efforts to increase saving rates
and lending to the poorest and most vulnerable consumers (Cole, Sampson and Zia,
2011).
Our paper extends the existing literature in a new direction, using a panel survey
of financial literacy administered to a nationally representative sample of over 1,000
Russian individuals prior to and during the 2008 financial crisis. Russia is a particularly
important country to study given the large increase in consumer credit it has recently
experienced: Consumer loans (excluding mortgages) in Russia grew at an astonishing
rate: from about US$ 10 billion in 2003 to over US$ 170 billion in 2008—accounting for
over 10% of GDP in 2008 versus less than 1% in 2003 (World Development Indicators,
2010). This is one of the few panel data sets on financial literacy, and with it we are able
to address some novel questions, such as What is the level of financial literacy in a
country without a legacy of consumer credit and financial education? Are there not only
financial but also real consequences of low financial literacy? Are lower levels of
financial literacy related to greater financial vulnerability during a crisis, i.e., are less
financially literate individuals less able to deal with financial crises?
2

Assessing the direction of causality between financial literacy and financial
decision making or consumption and saving behavior has been a challenge in previous
work, as financial literacy is potentially an endogenous variable. However, this
assessment in a country like Russia may suffer less from the endogeneity problem, as
financial markets are not well developed and there are few financial education programs
in place. In our empirical work we are able to address this problem by relying on
instrumental variables (IV) estimation and using a new set of instruments, i.e., the
number of newspapers and the number of universities across regions, to measure
exposure to financial information or to peers with higher financial knowledge.
Importantly, because we have a panel data set, we are also able to account for
unobservable variables, such as intelligence, ability, and interest in financial matters,
which can also affect the relationship between financial literacy and financial or real
outcomes.
We find that even though consumer borrowing increased very rapidly in Russia
between 2003 and 2008, only 41% of respondents in our sample have an understanding of
the workings of interest compounding and only 46% can answer a simple question about
inflation. Financial literacy is not only low in the general population, but is particularly
severe among specific groups, such as women, those with low income and low
educational attainment, and those living in rural areas. Most importantly, we find that
financial literacy in Russia is significantly related to the use of formal banking and
borrowing and negatively related to the use of informal borrowing. Financial literacy has
real as well as financial consequences: Even after accounting for many characteristics and
income, individuals with greater financial literacy are significantly more likely to report

3

having higher availability of unspent income and less likely to report having experienced
lower spending capacity. In addition, the relationship between financial literacy and
availability of unspent income is stronger in 2009 versus 2008, showing that financial
literacy may better equip individuals to deal with macroeconomic shocks.
Our findings suggest that rapid growth of consumer credit combined with low
levels of financial literacy—and the shock of the global financial crisis—might end up
being a dangerous mix. As Russia transitions quickly to a market-based banking system,
financial education and basic financial literacy are still lagging. Many young Russians
have parents who did not have experience with bank loans (i.e., they did not have an
opportunity to receive financial education at home)1 and did not receive formal financial
literacy courses in school (i.e., there is no curriculum requirement for financial education
in Russia). Furthermore, consumer debt was almost non-existent before 2001, so few
individuals are likely to have long personal banking relationships or experience with
formal debt contracts and other financial products. In the context of current events, this is
likely to be the first financial crisis that most Russians are experiencing as borrowers.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the existing literature on
financial literacy and its effects on financial decision-making; Section 3 reviews the
environment for consumer finance in Russia; Section 4 describes our data, variables, and
summary statistics; and Section 5 presents our empirical strategy and reports our results.
Section 6 concludes.

1

Although state banks existed in Soviet times, their main role was to serve state-owned enterprises. There
were no credit-reporting bureaus and the availability of credit to private firms and individuals was limited
(McMillan and Woodruff, 2002). For the correlation between financial literacy of the young and parental
background, see Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto (2010).
4

2.

Review of existing literature
Many papers have documented a strong correlation between financial literacy and

a set of behaviors. Bernheim (1995, 1998) showed that most households lack basic
financial knowledge and cannot perform very simple calculations, and that the saving
behavior of many households is dominated by crude rules of thumb. Hilgert, Hogarth,
and Beverly (2003) find a strong link between financial literacy and day-to-day financial
management. Financial literacy has also been linked to a set of behaviors related to
saving, wealth, and portfolio choice. For example, several papers have shown that
individuals with greater numeracy and financial literacy are more likely to participate in
financial markets and to invest in stocks (Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2010; Yoong,
2011; Almenberg and Dreber, 2001; Almenberg and Widmark, 2011; Van Rooij, Lusardi,
and Alessie, 2011). Moreover, more literate individuals are more likely to choose mutual
funds with lower fees (Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton, 2008; Hastings and Mitchell, 2011).
Similarly, Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a, 2011d) show that those who display high
levels of literacy are more likely to plan for retirement and, as a result, accumulate much
more wealth, a finding reproduced in many of the countries that are part of an
international comparison of financial literacy, which includes Russia (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2011c). Financial literacy is found to affect not only the assets side but also the
liability side of households’ balance sheet. Moore (2003) was one of the first to report
that respondents with lower levels of financial literacy are more likely to have costly
mortgages. More recently, Gerardi, Goette, and Meier (2010) report that those with low
literacy are more likely to default on sub-prime mortgage or have problems with them.
Stango and Zinman (2009) find that those who are not able to correctly calculate interest

5

rates out of a stream of payments end up borrowing more and accumulating lower
amounts of wealth. Campbell (2006) shows that individuals with lower incomes and
lower education levels—characteristics that are strongly related to financial literacy—are
less likely to refinance their mortgages during a period of falling interest rates. Lusardi
and Tufano (2009a,b) report that individuals with lower levels of financial literacy tend to
transact in high-cost manners, incurring higher fees and using high-cost methods of
borrowing. The less knowledgeable also report that their debt loads are excessive or that
they are unable to judge their debt position. Similar findings are reported in the UK
(Disney and Gathergood, 2011).
In addition to greater susceptibility to fraud and abuse, lack of financial literacy
might lead to borrower behavior that increases financial fragility (i.e., greater loan
losses). Informed consumers may also exercise innovation-enhancing demand on the
financial sector and play an important monitoring role in the market that can help
improve transparency and honesty in financial institutions. Furthermore, financial
illiteracy appears to be particularly severe for key demographic groups: women; the less
educated; those with low income; ethnic minorities; and older respondents (e.g.,
Bernheim, 1995; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a, 2007b, 2008, 2011b; Lusardi and Tufano,
2009a,b; inter alia).
Correlation between financial literacy and behavior does not mean causation, and
it is important to establish a causal link. Nevertheless, obtaining an exogenous source of
variation in financial literacy has been challenging. For example, it may be the desire to
invest in stocks or plan for retirement that causes individuals to invest in financial literacy
rather than the other way around. There also may be some omitted variables, such as

6

ability or patience, that affect both financial literacy and financial behavior. One way
around this problem is to look at financial mistakes and assess whether they are
correlated with financial literacy, as it is harder to argue that the causality goes from
mistakes to financial literacy. Interestingly, Agarwal et al. (2009) show that financial
mistakes are prevalent among the young and the elderly, which are the groups that
display the lowest levels of financial knowledge. Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007,
2009) examine data from Sweden and look at actions of investors that can be classified as
mistakes. They find that poorer, less educated, and immigrant households—demographic
characteristics that are strongly associated with low financial literacy—are more likely to
make financial mistakes.
Another strategy has been to rely on instrumental variable (IV) estimation.
Several instruments have been used. For example, Lusardi and Mitchell (2009, 2011d)
follow Bernheim and Garrett (2001) in using high school financial literacy mandates in
different states and time periods in the United States. Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie
(2011) have used the financial literacy of others, such as siblings and parents. Behrman et
al. (2010) use data from the Chilean Social Protection Survey and a set of plausibly
exogenous instrumental variables that satisfy critical diagnostic tests to isolate the causal
effects of financial literacy on wealth. All these studies show that financial literacy is
positively associated with a set of financial outcomes. Moreover, the IV estimates
indicate even more potent effects of financial literacy than suggested by OLS models.
Financial literacy also appears to be correlated with economic development; for
instance, the percentage of individuals in the United States that correctly answered
questions on interest compounding and inflation was 72% versus 79% in the Netherlands,

7

52% in Indonesia, 46% in Russia, and 34% in rural India (Figure 1).2 These findings have
been supported in recent studies using randomized control trials to explore the causal
impact of financial literacy on financial outcomes. For instance, in Indonesia, a randomly
selected set of unbanked individuals were offered financial literacy training sessions,
which were found to increase the demand for banking services among those with low
initial levels of financial literacy and low levels of education (Cole et al., 2011).
[Insert Figure 1 about here]

3.

The Russian Banking System
This paper focuses on Russia, an economy that grew at a brisk rate in the past

decade and experienced a very sharp increase in consumer borrowing, as will be
described below. This setting provides a unique opportunity to examine the importance
and effects of financial literacy.
The Russian economy grew, on average, by almost 7% annually from 2001 to
2009, while annual per capita income grew from US$ 2,101 in 2001 to US$ 8,676 in
2009, an increase of over 400% (Figure 2). This rapid increase in purchasing power was
associated with an increase in demand for consumer credit, particularly for the purchase
of household appliances and other durable goods (Presniakova, 2006).3 Within this same
time period, as mentioned earlier, consumer loans grew at a very fast rate, reaching US$
170 billion in 2008 (preceding a decline to about US$ 120 billion in 2009). This
accounted for about 10% of GDP in 2009 versus about 2% in 2003.

2

Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a) for the U.S. and Cole et al. (2011) for Indonesia and India. The figure for
Russia is calculated by the authors.
3
It is possible that Russians are more comfortable borrowing for durable goods, as buying goods on
installment was quite popular in Soviet times.
8

[Insert Figure 2 about here]
In aggregate, the Russian banking system grew at a rate of over 40% between
2003 and 2008, with almost a trillion US$ in assets in 2008. Yet, despite this recent
growth, the Russian banking system remains small by international standards; domestic
credit to the private sector was 41% of GDP in 2008, relative to other markets such as
Brazil (54%), India (49%), and China (104%). In addition, the proportion of household
loans as a percentage of GDP in 2007 is below 10%, lower than the rate in many
developing Eastern European states (15%) and developed Western European states
(above 50%) (Oxford Analytica, 2007b). Furthermore, in 2006, close to 60 million
Russians (42% of the population) were estimated to not be part of the formal banking
system (Rohland, 2008).
Banks in Russia generally face an unfavorable investment climate, as indicated by
Russia’s ranking of 123rd out of 181 countries in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing
Business ranking (where 1 indicates the most favorable business environment) (Doing
Business, 2011). In this measure, Russia is ranked 89th in “getting credit,” which takes
into account creditor protection and the credit information sharing infrastructure.
Within this weak business environment, there is concern that the tremendous
growth of credit will be associated with high rates of default, in particular if rapid growth
in consumer credit is combined with low levels of financial literacy among borrowers.
The share of bad consumer loans was a sizeable 12.25% in 2010 (Central Bank of Russia,
2011). It is within this rather unique context that our survey instrument was designed.

4.

Data and Summary Statistics

9

We use a panel dataset of Russian individuals in May/June 2008 and in June
2009. The 2008 sample was designed to be nationally representative at the individual
level, and weighted by gender, age, education, 46 oblasts (i.e., administrative regions),
and 7 federal region4 for a total of 1,600 individuals interviewed face-to-face.5 This is one
of the very few panel surveys measuring financial literacy and other key variables over
time. In 2009, 22% of individuals from the original sample either no longer resided at the
same location or refused to answer the follow-up survey. However, analysis of the data
between the two years does not show evidence of significant selection bias across the
covariates used in the empirical work (available upon request).
These surveys collected information on individual levels of financial literacy (i.e.,
numeracy, knowledge of interest compounding, understanding of inflation), as well as
use of financial services (e.g., the use of bank accounts and formal credit). The dataset
also provides rich demographic and socioeconomic information, and measures of
financial vulnerability. The primary respondent was the household head, without an age
limit.
[Insert Table 1 about here]

4.1

Demographic Information
Table 1 provides summary statistics of the pooled sample (2008 and 2009). The

percentage of male respondents is 43.9%, consistent with national census averages
4

Since March 1, 2008, the Russian Federation consists of 83 federal subjects. Six types of federal subjects
are distinguished: 21 republics, 9 krais, 46 oblasts, 2 federal cities, 1 autonomous oblast, and 4 autonomous
okrugs. We exclude the North-Caucasian (Chechnya) district because civil unrest prohibited surveying.
5
Summary statistics by gender, age, and education (% with secondary degrees) are very similar to those
found in the 2002 Russia Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (LSMS), as well as the 2002 Russian National
Census. Relative to the census data, however, our survey appears to under-represent individuals in the
highest income bracket. This is likely the result of difficulty gaining access to the highest income
individuals, many of whom live in gated housing communities, in order to conduct face-to-face interviews.
10

(Russian National Census, 2002). The average age in the pooled sample is around 45.
Most individuals (66%) live in households with three or more individuals, and 28.2% of
individuals live in urban regions, defined as settlements with a population greater than
500,000.
With respect to employment, 52.5% are employees (both skilled and unskilled),
while 25.5% are retirees. The education level of individuals in our sample is relatively
high: only 8.4% of the sample has less than a secondary education, 29.9% completed
secondary school, and 61.8% completed a special vocational/ technical school or initiated
or completed their higher education, a characteristic that sets Russia apart from other
emerging markets and makes it a particularly useful country to study.
The survey asks individuals to report their personal and household monthly
income, but these values are missing for almost 30% of the sample, i.e., individuals who
refused to answer.6 For our main regressions in the next section we impute missing
income observations and include dummies for brackets of family income rather than
using income values.7
The survey also includes a self-reported measure of income shocks.8 Individuals
are asked, “Did you (your family) experience an unexpected significant reduction of your

6

In our sample, mean personal monthly income for 2008 is US$ 762 (US$ 2,345 median income), while
average family monthly income is US$ 1,494 (US$ 12,500 median). This compares closely with official
statistics for 2008 of average per capita monthly income of US$ 1,404. Source: Russian Federation Federal
State Statistics Service: http://www.gks.ru/bgd/regl/b10_06/IssWWW.exe/Stg/1/17-01.htm
7
The imputation methodology is based on regressions of family income on federal regions, gender, age,
education categories, and self-assessed economic classification groups. The corresponding figures for each
of the quartiles of the imputed income distribution are the following: Bottom quartile (1st): monthly income
< US$833; 2nd quartile: $833 ≤ monthly income < $1,433; 3rd quartile: $1,433 ≤ monthly income < $2,084;
4th quartile: monthly income ≥ $ 2,084.
8
This is a categorical variable: the first category is individuals who report that they do not have enough
money, even for food (7%); the next category is individuals who report they can buy food, but cannot buy
clothes (23%); the third category is individuals who report they can buy food and clothes, but not durable
goods (e.g., a television or refrigerator) (52%); finally, individuals who report they can buy durable goods
(16%).
11

income over the past 12 months,” and we define a dummy “Income shocks” for those
who answer yes to this question. The summary statistics in Table 1 show that 35.9% of
the sample reported the experience of a negative income shock during 2009, showing that
the crisis and associated decline in income affected a large share of the Russian
population.
[Insert Table 2 about here]

4.2

Use of Formal and Informal Credit
Our next set of variables measures financial inclusion, which includes variables

related to respondent affiliation with financial institutions and borrowing behavior.9 Our
first variable is “Bank Account,” which indicates whether an individual uses a bank
account (which includes the use of debit cards). In Russia it is common practice for an
employer to provide employees with an account and associated debit card, so-called
salary or “plastic” cards, at a bank chosen by the employer, and salaries are paid to these
accounts only. However, the employee can use this account only to withdraw salary, and
cannot make deposits to the account; thus, this may overestimate the actual voluntary
“use” of bank accounts (Danske Bank, 2011). Similarly, accounts might be used only to
withdraw government transfers. In our sample, 33.8% of respondents report using a
checking account in 2008 and 35% in 2009, with only 13 individuals (1.2%) adding an
account in 2009 and no individuals closing an account (changes in financial usage
between the two years are shown in Table 2).

9

An important feature to note about Russia is the absolute lack of and relatively low levels of trust in the
banking sector, which is potentially an important factor in explaining the low level of use of banking
products. Remarkably, only 28% of surveyed individuals in Russia report confidence in banks, the second
to lowest score in the region (EBRD, 2006).
12

We also have information on consumer credit received from a bank or other
formal financial institution, including consumer debt, credit card debt, and mortgages.10
In 2008, 18.1% of our sample received bank credit and in 2009, 17.7% did so. Table 2
shows that 12.2% of the sample (131 individuals) used bank credit in 2008 but not in
2009, while 11.8% of the sample (127 individuals) who did not have bank credit in 2008
did have it in 2009.
We measure the use of informal debt by defining a dummy that equals one when
individuals respond “yes” to the question “Do you currently have debt?” but do not
report having any bank credit. In 2008, 17% of individuals in the sample report using
informal sources of borrowing, while 12.9% of individuals used informal borrowing in
2009; 13% of the sample used informal borrowing only in 2008, and 9% used informal
borrowing only in 2009. Note that informal borrowing typically involves shorter
repayment periods than formal borrowing, along with higher interest rates, penalties, and
other fees.

4.3

Capacity to Spend and Save
The next set of variables assesses respondent spending and saving capacity. The

survey includes a self-reported measure of spending capacity. This is a categorical
variable: the first category is individuals who report that they do not have enough money,
even for food (7%); the next category is individuals who report that they can buy food,
but cannot buy clothes (23%); the third category is individuals who report they can buy
food and clothes but not durable goods (e.g., a TV set or refrigerator) (52%); the final
category is individuals who report they can buy food, clothes, and durable goods (16%).
10

Less than 5% of individuals have a mortgage or credit card.
13

We use an ordinal variable ranking between 1 (highest spending capacity) and 5 (lowest
spending capacity) (see footnote 5) and, for robustness, define a dummy variable for
individuals who report not having enough money for more than food. As shown in Table
1, 31.6% of individuals in the sample report low spending capacity, with the figure being
higher during 2009 (33.1%, compared to 30.1% in 2008), consistent with the financial
crisis experienced in that time period.
A second set of variables measures the availability of unspent income, based on
the question “How often during the last 12 months did you (or your family) have any
money unspent from previous earnings before new revenues arrived.” The menu of
responses is “always,” “very often,” “sometimes,” “very rarely,” and “never.” Our main
results use an ordinal variable ranging from 1 to 5, and, for robustness, we also define a
dummy variable equal to one if the respondent reports “always” or “very often.” The
statistics shown in Tables 1 and 2 indicate that 39.4% of the sample report having
unspent income “always” or “very often” on a typical basis, and that the availability of
unspent income increased significantly from 34% in 2008 to 44.8% in 2009. We
speculate that at the onset of the crisis, some individuals increased their saving (and/or
reduced their spending), expecting to have lower income in the future. The ordinal
variable for the availability of unspent income has an average value of 2.36, with the
average being significantly higher in 2009 (2.57, compared to 2.14 in 2008).

4.4

Financial Literacy

14

Our survey includes four financial literacy questions, covering the concepts of
interest (two questions), inflation (one question), and sales discounts (one question). The
exact wording of the questions is reported below:
1) Let’s assume that you deposited 100,000 rubles in a bank account for 5 years at 10%
interest rate. The interest will be earned at the end of each year and will be added to the
principal. How much money will you have in your account in 5 years if you do not
withdraw either the principal or the interest?





More than 150,000 rubles
Exactly 150,000 rubles
Less than 150,000 rubles
I cannot estimate the amount even roughly

2) Let’s assume that you took a bank credit of 10,000 rubles to be paid back during a
year in equal monthly payments. The credit charge is 600 rubles. Give a rough estimate
of the annual interest rate on your credit. The interest rate is about:






3%
6%
9%
12 %
I cannot estimate it even roughly

3) Let’s assume that in 2010 your income is twice what it is now and that consumer
prices also grow twofold. Do you think that in 2010 you will be able to buy more, less, or
the same amount of goods and services as today?





More than today
Exactly the same
Less than today
I cannot estimate it even roughly

4) Let’s assume that you saw a TV set of the same model on sale in two different shops.
The initial retail price of it was 10,000 rubles. One shop offered a discount of 1,500
rubles, while the other one offered a 10% discount. Which one is a better bargain—a
discount of 1,500 rubles or 10%?




A discount of 1,500 rubles
A 10 % discount
I cannot estimate it even roughly

Similar questions have been asked in other surveys, such as the U.S. Health and
Retirement Study, the American Life Panel, and the English Longitudinal Study on
Aging, and have been shown to measure both numeracy and financial knowledge

15

(Lusardi and Mitchell, 2009, 2011c; Banks and Oldfield, 2007; Stango and Zinman,
2009).
On average, in 2008, 41.4% of respondents correctly answered the question on
interest compounding; 23.3% correctly answered the monthly interest payment
calculation question; 45.6% correctly answered the question on inflation; and 69.5%
correctly answered the question on sales discounts. A large number of respondents
reported they “did not know” the answer to these questions. On average, in the pooled
sample, 30% of individuals replied “don’t know” to the question on interest
compounding; 49% to the question on monthly interest payments; 24% to the question on
inflation; and 22% to the question on sales discounts. These findings are similar to those
reported in other surveys (Van Rooij et al., 2011; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b; and
Lusardi and Tufano, 2009a,b), and in data in other seven countries (Lusardi and Mitchell,
2011c). Notably, we find that correct responses to all but one question increased during
the financial crisis, which might be explained by increased attention to financial issues in
the media or a rise in individuals’ interest in understanding their own finances.
[Insert Table 3 about here]

4.4.1

Constructing a Financial Literacy Index
We construct an index of financial literacy using principal component analysis

(PCA) to summarize the information from the four questions detailed in the previous
subsection. For each question, we create a binary variable to identify the correct response
and perform PCA analysis based on polychoric correlations, following the method
developed to adapt PCA to ordinal data by Kolenikov and Angeles (2004). We estimate

16

the financial literacy index as the first principal component of the four financial literacy
questions. The procedure is described in greater detail in Appendix A for the year 2008
(the analysis for 2009 is available upon request). The corresponding distribution of
eigenvalues is presented in Appendix A, Panel B (the first component accounts for 53%
of the variation) and the factor loadings/scoring coefficients for the index are detailed in
Panel C.11 The financial literacy index distribution is shown in Panel E.

4.4.2

Who is Financially Literate in Russia?
Table 1, columns 2 and 3, show summary statistics for individuals with high and

low levels of financial literacy; asterisks indicate significant mean differences. We
identify “high” financial literacy as individuals with a financial literacy index greater than
the sample median. Univariate tests find that financially literate individuals are more
likely to be male, married or cohabiting, younger, and residents of urban Russian regions.
They are more likely to have vocational/technical, or some level of higher education, and
be employed in skilled or non-manual occupations. Importantly, individuals in the lowest
income quartile are more likely to score low in terms of their financial literacy, while
those in the highest income quartile are more likely to be highly financially literate. This
is consistent with many other surveys on financial literacy in other countries (see Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2011b, for an overview of financial literacy data in eight countries and
Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2010, for an overview in eleven countries).

11

Although we retain the first factor for the purpose of parsimony, the optimal number of factors, identified
by Humphrey-Ilgen parallel analysis (Lance, Butts, and Michels, 2006), is in fact two. We compare the
number of factors derived from our survey data against factors for random numbers representing the same
number of cases and variables and obtain the optimal number of factors at the intersection of plots of
factors against cumulative eigenvalues for the two sets of data (Panel D).
17

Of primary interest to this study is the association between financial literacy and
financial outcomes. Table 1 indicates that there is a moderately positive association
between financial literacy and having a bank account (also shown in the correlation
matrix between financial literacy and bank account in Appendix Table B3). Individuals in
the high literacy group are also significantly more likely to use formal bank credit. In
addition, high literacy groups are significantly less likely to experience low spending
capacity, both in terms of the binary and the ordinal spending capacity variable. In
contrast, individuals with higher financial literacy are significantly more likely to
experience having unspent income and with higher frequency.

5.

Financial and Real Consequences of Financial Literacy
The important question we aim to address in this paper is whether financial

literacy matters. To do so, we consider the following set of outcomes that expand upon
the previous literature. We first estimate a set of regressions in which the dependent
variable is (a) having a bank account, (b) using formal bank credit, and (c) using informal
credit. In addition to financial consequences we also look at real consequences. Our set of
dependent variables is (a) level of spending capacity and (b) availability of unspent
income. The sets of explanatory variables in our regressions include financial literacy,
gender, single-person household, the logarithm of age, a dummy for a negative income
shock during the last year, and dummy variables for education (4 dummies), occupation
(8 dummies), family income quartiles, and federal region of residence (7 dummies).

5.1

Empirical Strategy

18

Because we have a panel data set, we are better equipped to assess the effect of
financial literacy on a set of outcomes than previous studies. First, we use 2009 measures
of financial inclusion and outcomes and 2008 values of financial literacy and other
explanatory variables. We use past values of the independent variables to account for
both the potential simultaneity between financial literacy and financial outcomes, along
with the potential endogeneity of the financial literacy measure.
Second, we use IV estimation to assess the impact of financial literacy on
financial behavior. Two instruments are used: (a) the number of newspapers in circulation
per two-digit region (both regional and national) and (b) the total number of universities
per two-digit region (both public and private). The two variables can be expected to be
correlated with financial literacy in terms of “exposure” to newspaper readership (either
directly or through family members and neighbors who read the paper) and higher
education of peers in the region. The experience of others is not under the control of the
respondent and is thus exogenous with respect to his or her actions, but respondents can
learn from those around them, thus increasing their own literacy. Several other studies
have documented that individuals learn about financial matters from peers (Duflo and
Saez, 2003; Hong, Kubik, and Stein, 2004; and Brown, Ivkovic, Smith, and Weisbenner,
2008). Studies have also documented the importance of proximity to a university as an
exogenous measure of financial knowledge (Christiansen, Joensen, and Rangvid, 2008).
The bottom of Table 1 shows that the average number (by two-digit region) of
newspapers is 56 and the average number of universities is 18 (11 public and 7 private).

19

Appendix C presents maps illustrating the regional variation in the number of newspapers
in circulation and the number of universities in the 46 Russian oblasts of our sample.12
Third, to account for unobserved heterogeneity that can account for the
relationship between financial literacy and our set of outcomes, we use both years of data
and estimate individual random effects and fixed effects models.

5.2

Empirical estimates: Financial outcomes
Our first set of estimates examines the correlates of the use of bank accounts by

respondents in our sample. Due to the low number of new bank accounts for the year
2009 in the sample, panel models cannot be estimated. Table 4 presents probit estimates.
The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the individual reports having a bank
account in 2009 and equal to zero otherwise. Explanatory variables are dated as of 2008
in order to mitigate as much as possible simultaneity problems. Marginal effects and
robust standard errors are presented throughout the table.
Column 1 of Panel A shows the baseline probit estimates, which exclude
measures of financial literacy. We find that individuals who are older, more educated,
and have higher income are more likely to have a bank account, consistent with findings
in other countries (Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2010; Cole, Sampson and Zia, 2011).
Columns 2, 3, and 4 include our two measures of financial literacy (an index and the
number of correct responses to the financial literacy questions). Both measures show a
significantly positive effect (at the 10% level) of financial literacy on the likelihood of
12

In terms of federal regions (figures available upon request), the Central federal region, Volga, and the
Southern region have the highest newspaper circulation, while the Urals, the Far-Eastern, and the Siberian
region have the lowest numbers of newspapers in circulation. Moreover, the Southern region has the
highest number of universities, with the next highest being the North-Western and the Central regions. The
lowest numbers of universities are found in the Urals, the Far-Eastern, and the Siberian federal region.
20

using a bank account. The marginal effects suggest a sizeable impact: a one standard
deviation increase from the average level of financial literacy raises the likelihood of
using a bank account by 6.3–8.8%, depending on the measure used. Also note that adding
financial literacy does not much affect the estimates of education; thus, financial
knowledge has an effect above and beyond general schooling.
[Insert Table 4 about here]
Panel B of Table 4 presents IV probit estimates of the probability of using a bank
account. In this specification, we take into account that financial literacy could be an
endogenous variable. Moreover, financial literacy can be measured with error, and this
can also affect the estimated effect of financial literacy on the probability of having a
bank account. As discussed earlier, the set of instruments used to instrument financial
literacy is the total number of newspapers in circulation and the number of public and
private universities in every Russian oblast. The first-stage regressions are shown in
Appendix Table B1. The two instruments have a positive and statistically significant
impact on financial literacy. Both the F-statistics from the tests of joint significance and
the LM tests of omitted variables shown at the bottom of the table reject the null
hypotheses of joint insignificance and “significant improvement” to the model.13
The estimates in the second stage, reported in the last two columns of Table 4,
show that the relationship between literacy and bank account ownership remains positive,
statistically significant, and is somewhat larger in the IV probit estimates than in the OLS
estimates. Moreover, the exogeneity test is not rejected. Thus, the OLS estimates do not

13

The tests stem from two separate specifications for the first stage models, i.e. one incorporating the two
instruments and another without the two instrumental variables, respectively.
21

differ significantly from the IV estimates. Moreover, the Hansen J statistic of
overidentifying restriction at the bottom of the table shows that the instruments are valid.
In Table 5, we examine the impact of financial literacy on the probability of using
formal bank credit. The probit estimates with past values (dated 2008) of the independent
variables in Columns A2 and A3 show that financial literacy is significantly positively
related to the likelihood of having formal credit. The marginal effects show that a one
standard deviation increase from the average level of financial literacy raises the
likelihood of acquiring formal credit by 14–18%, depending on the measure used.
[Insert Table 5 about here]
Panel B of Table 5 presents IV probit estimates. The statistics reported at the
bottom of the table reject the hypothesis that the instruments are not valid.14 The
estimates confirm the positive and statistically significant association between financial
literacy and formal credit. The magnitude of the marginal effects is very similar to the
baseline probit estimates.
One concern is that there are omitted variables (for example, ability) that can bias
the estimated effect of financial literacy. In Panels C and D of Table 5 we make use of the
panel aspect of the data and report estimates from random effects probit and fixed effects
logit models. The latter model excludes observations that do not vary within the panel,15
and hence uses a smaller sample. Both the marginal effects from the random effects

14

Additional linear probability models examine instrument validity. The results are available upon request.
The weak-instrument robust-inference tests examine the null hypothesis that the coefficients of the
endogenous regressors in the structural equation are jointly equal to zero and that the overidentifying
restrictions are not rejected. Both tests are robust to the use of weak instruments. The tests are equivalent to
estimating the reduced form of the equation (with the full set of instruments as regressors) and testing that
the coefficients of the excluded instruments are jointly equal to zero. The Hansen J statistic of
overidentifying restriction at the bottom of the table marginally rejects the null hypothesis that the
instruments are valid at the 10% level.
15
Moreover, we exclude age in the fixed effects model to achieve identification.
22

model and the odds ratios for the fixed effects model confirm the positive association
between financial literacy and bank credit. Hence, an increase in the financial literacy
score within the year is associated with a higher likelihood of acquiring formal credit.
Finally, Table 6 examines the likelihood of using informal credit as the dependent
variable. The marginal effects from the probit model with past values of the independent
variables, shown in Column 1, suggest that single individuals (those living in single
person households) and those with low educational attainment are more likely to use
informal credit. Moreover, individuals who experienced a negative income shock during
the last year are more likely to use informal credit, which provides some evidence as to
how Russians have dealt with shocks. Columns A2 and A3 add financial literacy
measures, i.e., the index and the number of correct responses, respectively. Financial
literacy is negatively associated with the likelihood of using informal credit. The
marginal effects suggest that a one standard deviation increase from the average level of
financial literacy reduces the likelihood of acquiring formal credit by 10–13%, depending
on the measure used and given the overall predicted probability of the model. The effects
are statistically significant at the 1% level.
[Insert Table 6 about here]
Panel B presents the marginal effects and robust standard errors from the IV
probit regressions using the same instruments that were mentioned previously. The tests
at the bottom of the table confirm the validity of the instruments. The results confirm the
negative association seen previously between financial literacy and use of informal credit.
The magnitude of the coefficient estimates increased by almost twofold compared to the

23

simple probit model estimates, and the coefficient becomes statistically significant at the
1% level.
The models in Panels C and D indicate weaker negative associations between
financial literacy and informal credit, and the negative effects shown are not significant at
any conventional levels. Interestingly, the significance of the year 2009 crisis dummy and
income shock dummy in the fixed effects model appear to highlight the use of informal
credit as a primary way to deal with shocks.

5.3

Real effects of financial literacy
We turn now to the real consequences of financial literacy. In this section, we

examine the relationship between financial literacy and financial vulnerability indicators,
such as respondent level of spending capacity and availability of unspent income. Tables
7 and 8 replicate the same four sets of estimates as the previous tables, using as
dependent variables (a) an ordinal spending capacity variable, ranging from 1 (high
spending) to 5 (low spending), and (b) an ordinal variable capturing the availability of
unspent income, ranging from 1 (low frequency) to 5 (high frequency).
The results in Table 7 show that older individuals, as well as those in the lowest
income quartiles, are more likely to experience low spending capacity. The addition of
the financial literacy variables in the ordered probit models of Columns A2 and A3
indicates that financial literacy also matters for spending; those who are more financially
literate are less likely to report low spending capacity during the financial crisis. The IV
estimates in Panel B continue to confirm the negative association between financial
literacy and low spending capacity.

24

[Insert Table 7 about here]
Moreover, the panel models in Panels C and D of Table 7 confirm the negative
relationship between financial literacy and low spending capacity, both in the random
effects GLS model and within groups, in the fixed effects model. The results are
statistically significant at all conventional levels, and the magnitude of the effects is
similar to those of the previous model. In the panel models of Table 7, two additional
specifications are introduced in Columns C2 and D2.16 These include interaction terms
between financial literacy variables and the dummy variable for the year 2009. The
rationale for adding those variables is to examine whether the interaction between
financial literacy and the year of the financial crisis is significantly associated with lower
spending capacity. However, both sets of interaction terms are not statistically significant.
[Insert Table 8 about here]
In Table 8, we use the frequency of having unspent income as (an ordinal)
dependent variable and present estimates of ordered probit models and linear models for
two-stage least squares, random effects GLS, and fixed effects in Panels A, B, C, and D,
respectively. The model’s first three rows show a significantly positive coefficient of
financial literacy on the availability of unspent income. The baseline ordered probit
estimates in Column 1 show that males and high-income individuals are more likely to
have income that is unspent on a regular basis. Columns A2 and A3 add the financial
literacy variables to the ordered probit specification and show that financial literacy is
significantly positively related to the incidence of having unspent income available. The

16

These results are robust to the substitution of the financial literacy index with the number of correct
responses, which are not shown.
25

finding is robust. The IV probit estimates in Panel B confirm a significant and positive
effect of financial literacy.17
Moreover, the estimates from random effects GLS models in Panel C show a
positive effect of financial literacy in the panel sample, with marginal effects similar in
magnitude to those of the probit model. The inclusion of the interaction terms between
financial literacy and the year 2009 in the panel models shows a significant positive
interaction term. Thus, financially literate individuals are significantly more likely to
have unspent income in the year 2009. Moreover, the fixed effects model in Panel D
shows a positive interaction term for the effect of financial literacy. This suggests that
more literate individuals in 2009 are more likely to save more frequently, as compared to
less literate individuals.

5.4

Robustness exercises
In Appendix Tables B2–B4 we perform three sets of robustness exercises to check

the validity of our findings. The estimates in Table B2 in the Appendix replicate the level
of spending estimates, using a binary variable for low spending as the dependent variable.
All four panels of Table B2 exhibit statistically significant negative coefficients of the
financial literacy measures on spending. In the panel models, the interaction terms
between financial literacy and the year 2009 are negative, but once again statistically
insignificant. The magnitude of the marginal effects in the probit model of Panel A is
such that a one standard deviation from the average level of financial literacy reduces the
likelihood of experiencing low levels of spending capacity by 8.5–10%, depending on the

17

Similarly, Klapper and Panos (2011) find that financial literacy is positively related to participating in
private and public retirement plans and negatively related to informal ways of saving for retirement.
26

measure used and given the overall predicted probability of the model. The IV probit
estimates in Panel B confirm the negative association between financial literacy and low
spending, along with the validity of the instruments used. The magnitude of the
coefficients in the IV model is very similar to the probit model. Moreover, the sign and
statistical significance (10% level) of financial literacy is the same, which suggests that
the instruments used are valid.
Appendix Table B3 presents estimates for models with a binary version of
unspent income as the dependent variable. Columns A2 and A3 show that financial
literacy is significantly positively related to the incidence of having unspent income. The
magnitude of the marginal effects presented suggests that a one standard deviation
increase in financial literacy raises the likelihood of having unspent income by 10–
11.5%. The IV probit estimates in Panel B confirm this. They show a significant positive
marginal effect of financial literacy, of a slightly lower magnitude than the probit model,
and also confirm the validity of the instruments used. Moreover, the estimates from
random effects probit models in Panel C show a positive effect of financial literacy in the
panel sample, with marginal effects similar in magnitude to those of the probit model.
The inclusion of the interaction terms between financial literacy and the year 2009 in the
panel models shows a significant positive interaction term. Hence, financially literate
individuals are significantly more likely to have unspent income available in the year
2009. However, the fixed effects models in Panel D fail to show significance of the
financial literacy variables within individuals although the odds ratios obtained are
positive and greater than one.

27

Finally, in Appendix Table B4, we perform an additional robustness check
concerning the validity of our instruments. We use specifications similar to our IV
regressions in the previous tables, but also include control variables for the log values of
the regional unemployment rate and the average monthly income per capita in every
administrative region.18 These robustness checks largely refute that the impact of our
instrumental variables is due to regional differences in living standards. All financial
literacy effects remain large and statistically significant, with the only exception being the
effects in the spending regressions, where the coefficients become smaller in magnitude
and statistically insignificant. This is indeed the variable that is likely to be affected the
most by regional living standard differences. Hence, the results confirm the robustness of
our instruments, and the magnitude of the majority of the effects remains high and
statistically significant.
In unreported regressions, we use self-assessed financial literacy (on a scale from 1
to 5) in place of the financial literacy measures used so far. Our results prove robust to
the use of this measure and are available upon request.

6.

Conclusion
Our study contributes to the literature on financial literacy by examining its

effects on both financial and real behavior in a relatively understudied context, that of an
emerging market experiencing a financial crisis. We find that financial literacy is
significantly related to greater participation in formal financial markets and negatively
related to the use of informal sources of borrowing. Moreover, individuals with higher

18

The data is available from the Russian Federation Federal State Statistics service at:
http://www.gks.ru/bgd/regl/b10_06/IssWWW.exe/Stg/1/17-01.htm
28

levels of financial literacy are significantly more likely to report greater levels of unspent
income and less likely to report lower levels of spending. Finally, the relationship
between financial literacy and the level of unspent income is higher during the financial
crisis, after controlling for household characteristics. Our results suggest that greater
financial literacy can help individuals face unexpected macroeconomic and income
shocks.

29

References
Agarwal, S., J. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson (2009). The age of reason: Financial
decisions over the lifecycle with implications for regulation, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Fall 2009, 51–101.
Almenberg, J., and A. Dreber (2011). Gender, financial literacy and stock market
participation. Working Paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Almenberg, J., and J. Widmark (2011). Numeracy, financial literacy and participation in
asset markets. Mimeo, Swedish Ministry of Finance.
Anderson, J.A. (1984). Regression and Ordered Categorical Variables. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society Series B 46:1, 1–30.
Banks, J., and Z. Oldfield (2007). Understanding pensions: Cognitive functions,
numerical ability and retirement saving. Fiscal Studies 28(2): 143-170.
Behrman, J., O. S. Mitchell, C. Soo, and D. Bravo (2010). Financial literacy, schooling,
and wealth accumulation. NBER WP 16452.
Bernheim, D. (1995). Do households appreciate their financial vulnerabilities? An
analysis of actions, perceptions, and public policy, in: Tax Policy and Economic
Growth, American Council for Capital Formation, Washington, DC, 1–30
Bernheim, D. (1998). Financial illiteracy, education and retirement saving. In O. Mitchell
and S. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions, University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 38–68.
Bernheim, D. and D.M. Garrett (2001). The effects of financial education in the
workplace: evidence from a survey of households. Journal of Public Economics
87(7-8), 1487–1519
Brown, J., Z. Ivkovic, P. Smith, and S. Weisbenner (2008). Neighbors matter: Causal
community effects and stock market participation. Journal of Finance 63, 1509–
1531.
Calvet, L., J. Campbell, and P. Sodini. 2007. Down or out: Assessing the welfare costs of
household investment mistakes, Journal of Political Economy 115: 707–747
Calvet, L., J. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2009). Measuring the financial sophistication of
households. American Economic Review 99(2): 393–398.
Campbell, J. (2006). Household Finance, Journal of Finance, 61, 1553–1604.

30

Central Bank of Russia (2011). Banking Supervisions Report, Moscow
Christelis, D., T. Jappelli, and M. Padula (2010). “Cognitive Abilities and Portfolio
Choice”. European Economic Review 54, 18–38.
Christiansen, C., J. Joensen and J. Rangvid. (2008). Are economists more likely to hold
stocks? Review of Finance 12, 465–496.
Claudill, S. B. (2000). Pooling choices or categories in multinomial logit models.
Statistical Papers No. 41, pp. 353–358
Cole, S., T. Sampson, and B. Zia (2011). Prices or Knowledge? What Drives Demand for
Financial Services in Emerging Markets? Journal of Finance (66)6, 1933–1967.
Danske Bank (2011). Business Guide Russia. Danske Bank: Copenhagan.
Disney, R., and J. Gathergood (2011). Financial literacy and indebtedness: New evidence
for UK Consumers. Mimeo, University of Nottingham
Doing Business (2011). Available on-line at: www.doingbusiness.org
Duflo, E., and E. Saez (2003). The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 118:3, 815–842.
EBRD (2006). Life in Transition Survey. European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development: United Kingdom.
Gerardi, K., L. Goette, and S. Meier (2010). Financial literacy and subprime mortgage
delinquency: Evidence from a survey matched to administrative data. Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2010-10.
Hastings, J., and O. S. Mitchell (2011). How financial literacy and impatience shape
retirement wealth and investment behaviors. NBER Working Paper 16740.
Hastings, J., and L. Tejeda-Ashton (2008). Financial Literacy, Information, and Demand
Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence from Mexico. NBER Working
Paper No. 14538
Hilgert, M., J. Hogarth, and S. Beverly (2003). Household Financial Management: The
Connection between Knowledge and Behavior, Federal Reserve Bulletin, 309–32.
Hong, H., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein (2004). Social Interaction and Stock-Market
Participation. The Journal of Finance 59(1), 137–163

31

Klapper, L., and G.A. Panos (2011). “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning: the
Russian Case.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 40, no 4, pp. 599–
618.
Kolenikov, S., and G. Angeles (2004). The Use of Discrete Data in Principal Component
Analysis With Applications to Socio-Economic Indices. CPC/MEASURE
Working paper No. WP-04-85.
Kolenikov, S., and G. Angeles (2008). Socioeconomic status measurement with discrete
proxy variables: Is principal component analysis a reliable answer? Working
paper.
Lance, C., M. Butts, and L. Michels (2006). The sources of four commonly reported
cutoff criteria: What did they really say? Organizational Research Methods, No.
9, pp. 202-220.
Long, J.S., and J. Freese (2006). Regression Models for Categorical Dependent Variables
Using Stata (2nd Edition). StataCorp LP.
Lusardi, A. (2008). Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of
Financial Education and Saving Programs. University of Chicago Press.
Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell (2007a). Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Role of
Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth. Journal of Monetary
Economics, 54, pp. 205–224
Lusardi, A., and O.S. Mitchell (2007b), Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning: New
Evidence from the Rand American Life Panel. MRRC Working Paper n. 2007157.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell (2008). Planning and Financial Literacy. How Do Women
Fare? American Economic Review, 98(2), pp. 413–417.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell (2009). How ordinary consumers make complex
economic decisions: Financial literacy and retirement readiness NBER Working
Paper 15350.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell (2011a). Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
Retirement Wellbeing, forthcoming in A. Lusardi and O. Mitchell (eds.),
Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial
Marketplace, Oxford University Press, 2011.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell (2011b). Financial literacy around the world: an
overview. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4), pp.497–508.

32

Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell (2011c). Financial literacy and retirement planning in the
United States. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4), pp. 509–525.
Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. (2011d). Financial literacy and retirement planning in the
United States, forthcoming Journal of Pension Economics and Finance.
Lusardi, A., O. S. Mitchell, and V. Curto. (2010). Financial literacy among the young,
Journal of Consumer Affairs 44 (2): 358–380.
Lusardi, A., and P. Tufano (2009a). Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and
Overindebtedness. NBER Working Paper n. 14808.
Lusardi, A. and P. Tufano (2009b). Teach Workers about the Perils of Debt. Harvard
Business Review
McMillan, J. and C. Woodruff (2002). The Central Role of Entrepreneurs in Transition
Economies. Journal of Economic Literature. 16:3, 153–170.
Moore, D. (2003). Survey of Financial Literacy in Washington State: Knowledge,
Behavior, Attitudes, and Experiences. Technical Report n. 03-39. Social and
Economic Sciences Research Center, Washington State University.
Oxford Analytica (2007b). RUSSIA: Consumer credit rises but problems persist. Global
Strategic Anlysis.08.10.2007
Presniakova, L. (2006). Consumer Credit. The Public Opinion Foundation Database.
June.
Rohland, K. (2008). Russian Banking Sector Recent Progress and Challenges For the
Future. Banking Forum of the CIS Countries and Eastern Europe, Vienna, April
24–27.
Russia

Longitudinal Monitoring Survey
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/rlms-hse

(2002).

Available

on-line

at:

Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2009). Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance.
Journal of Finance 64. 2807–2849.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie (2011). Financial Literacy and Stock Market
Participation. Journal of Financial Economics.
World Development Indicators (2011). Available on-line at: data.worldbank.org.
Yoong, J. (2011). Financial illiteracy and stock market participation: Evidence from the
RAND American Life Panel. In Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi.
Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial
Marketplace. Forthcoming, Oxford University Press.
33

34

Figure 1: Financial Literacy, % of individuals answering correctly

Source: Cole, et al. (2010); the authors; Cole, et al. (2010); Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a); van Rooij, et al.
(2008), respectively.

Figure 2: Russian Household Debt (US$, billions) and Per Capita Income (US$)
240

12000

210

10000

173.8

180

8000

150
124.5

121.3

120

6000

90

76.4

60

4000

42.0
2000

21.3

30
1.7

3.3

4.6

9.7

'00

'01

'02

'03

0

‐
'04

'05

Household debt, US$, billions (left axis)

Source: WB-WDI Statistics (2010)

35

'06

'07

'08

GDP per capita, US$ (Right axis)

'09

Table 1
Summary Statistics
Pooled
sample
2,148
43.9%
11.6%
45.13
28.2%
35.9%

Financial Literacy Index
High (≥median) Low (<median)
986
1,162
46.7%**
41.5%
8.7%
14.0%***
41.36
48.33***
37.0%
35.0%
32.2%***
24.9%

#Obs.
Male
Single Person Household
Age
Urban region
Has experienced negative income shock in last year
Education:
Primary or Incomplete
8.4%
4.3%
11.9%***
29.9%
26.3%
33.0%***
Secondary
Vocational-Technical
38.4%
41.1%**
36.1%
Higher or incomplete higher
23.4%
28.4%***
19.1%
Occupation:
Skilled Non-Manual
9.0%
11.7%***
6.8%
Skilled Manual
26.9%
30.0%***
24.3%
Unskilled Non-Manual
13.5%
15.6%***
11.7%
Unskilled Manual
3.1%
3.0%
3.1%
Entrepreneur
2.8%
3.1%
2.5%
Unemployed
0.9%
0.8%
1.0%
Pensioner
25.5%
15.5%
34.0%***
Other
18.3%
20.2%**
16.6%
20,354.3
23,511.1***
17,675.7
Family Income
- 1st Quartile - (lowest)
26.3%
18.1%
33.2%***
- 2nd Quartile 25.1%
25.3%
24.9%
- 3rd Quartile 23.1%
24.4%
22.0%
- 4th Quartile - (highest)
25.6%
32.3%***
19.9%
Federal region:
Central
27.1%
27.9%
26.4%
North-Western
10.0%
11.0%
9.1%
Southern
17.3%
14.5%
19.7%***
Volga
22.9%
24.3%
21.7%
Urals
5.8%
5.6%
5.9%
Siberian
11.3%
11.5%
11.1%
Far-Eastern
5.7%
5.3%
6.0%
Financial Penetration:
Bank Account
34.4%
37.2%**
32.0%
Formal Credit
17.9%
21.5%***
14.8%
Informal Credit
14.9%
14.4%
15.4%
Financial Vulnerability:
Low Spending
31.6%
24.1%
37.9%***
Low Spending Index (1-5)
3.22
3.06
3.36***
Unspent Income
39.4%
44.9%***
34.7%
Unspent Income Index (1-5)
2.36
2.49***
2.24
Financial Literacy:
Fin. Literacy: Index
0.00
Fin. Literacy: #Correct Responses
1.85
Fin. Literacy: Self-Assessment
2.55
Regional statistics (by 2-digit region):
Total number of newspapers
55.80
Total number of universities
18.54
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01: From a t-test of mean differences between individuals with high
and low financially literacy
36

Table 2
Panel A: Changes in main variables

Bank Account
Formal Credit
Informal Credit
Low Spending
Decreased Level of Spending
Unspent Income
Increased Level of Unspent Income
Negative Income Shock

2008, not 2009
%
(#Obs.)
0.0%
(0)
12.2%
(131)
13.0%
(140)
13.8%
(148)
22.5%
(242)
16.1%
(173)
25.1%
(270)
22.4%
(240)

2009, not 2008
%
(#Obs.)
1.2%
(13)
11.8%
(127)
9.0%
(97)
16.8%
(180)
27.5%
(295)
26.9%
(289)
44.3%
(476)
23.8%
(256)

Table 3
Summary Statistics of Financial Literacy Questions, 2008 and 2009 Surveys
Variable
Interest_1

Interest_2

Inflation

Discounts

Panel A: Summary Statistics

Definition
Let’s assume that you deposited 100,000 rubles in a bank
account for 5 years at 10% interest rate. The interest will
be earned at the end of each year and will be added to the
principal. How much money will you have in your account
in 5 years if you do not withdraw either the principal or the
interest
Let’s assume that you took a bank credit of 10,000 rubles
to be paid back during a year in equal monthly payments.
The credit charge is 600 rubles. Give a rough estimate of
the annual interest rate on your credit.
Let’s assume that in 2010 your income is twice as now, and
the consumer prices also grow twofold. Do you think that
in 2010 you will be able to buy more, less, or the same
amount of goods and services as today?
Let’s assume that you saw a TV-set of the same model on
sales in two different shops. The initial retail price of it was
10,000 rubles. One shop offered a discount of 1,500 rubles,
while the other one offered a 10% discount. Which one is
a better bargain – a discount of 1,500 rubles or 10%?

37

Year

Correct

2008

41.43%

Incorrect “Don’t’ Know”

31.19%

27.37%

2009

34.64%

32.02%

33.33%

2008

23.37%

28.31%

48.32%

2009

35.94%

14.06%

50.00%

2008

45.62%

31.47%

22.91%

2009

50.47%

24.12%

25.42%

2008

69.55%

9.12%

21.32%

2009

69.55%

8.38%

22.07%

Table 4
Bank Account: Past-value models; Marginal Effects and Robust Standard Errors
Dependent variable: Bank Account (1/0)
Financial Literacy: Index
Financial Literacy: #Correct Responses
Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock in the last year
Education (Ref:. Primary/Incomplete)
Secondary
Vocational-Technical
Higher or incomplete higher

Probit Model
(A1)
-

Probit Model with IV

-

(A2)
0.022*
[0.013]
-

(A3)
-

0.036
[0.032]
0.035
[0.053]
0.129**
[0.052]
-0.019
[0.032]

0.035
[0.033]
0.036
[0.053]
0.132**
[0.052]
-0.016
[0.032]

0.018*
[0.010]
0.035
[0.033]
0.036
[0.053]
0.132**
[0.052]
-0.016
[0.032]

0.110*
[0.067]
0.140**
[0.065]

0.107
[0.067]
0.134**
[0.065]

0.107
[0.067]
0.134**
[0.065]

0.211*** 0.199*** 0.199***
[0.072]
[0.073]
[0.073]
Family Income (Ref: - 1st - (lowest))
- 2nd - 3rd - 4th - (highest)
No. of Observations
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
Wald χ2

(A1)
0.037*
[0.019]
-

(A2)
-

0.033
[0.031]
0.035
[0.050]
0.129***
[0.050]
-0.014
[0.031]

0.030*
[0.016]
0.033
[0.031]
0.035
[0.050]
0.129***
[0.050]
-0.014
[0.031]

0.098
[0.062]
0.121**
[0.061]
0.177***

0.098
[0.062]
0.121**
[0.061]
0.176***

[0.066]

[0.066]

0.057
[0.047]
0.082*
[0.049]
0.046
[0.057]

0.055
[0.047]
0.080
[0.049]
0.040
[0.057]

0.055
[0.047]
0.080
[0.049]
0.040
[0.057]

0.051
[0.044]
0.075*
[0.045]
0.035
[0.054]

0.051
[0.044]
0.075*
[0.045]
0.035
[0.054]

1,074
0.039
-668.0

1,074
0.041
-667.1

1,074
0.041
-667.1

1,074
-1,567.4
56.25***

1,074
-1,784.4
56.30***

1.86
0.0238
12.87***

1.90
0.0231
12.41**

51.95*** 53.82*** 53.76***

Predicted Probability
0.3502
0.3503
0.3503
Wald χ2 test of exogeneity
Partial R2 of excluded instruments:
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic: χ2 (2)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic: χ2 (2)
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F statistic
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F(2,1050)
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test : χ2(2)
(c) Stock-Wright LM S statistic: χ2 (2)
(d) Hansen J statistic: χ2 (1)

27.95***
26.39***
12.87***
1.94
3.97
3.91
1.482

27.07***
25.44***
12.41**
1.94
3.97
3.91
1.489

Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The specifications also include a constant term and dummy
variables for occupation (8) and federal region (7). The observed probability is 0.1769 for Panel (A). (a)
denotes underidentification tests, (b) weak identification test, (c) denotes weak-instrument-robust
inference (tests of joint significance of endogenous regressors in main equation), and (d) denotes
overidentification tests. Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values: 10% maximal IV size: 19.93.
38

Table 5
Formal Credit
Dependent Variable:
Formal Credit (1/0)

Probit Model
(Marginal Effects)

(A1)
Fin. Literacy: Index

-

Fin. Literacy: #Correct Responses

-

Year 2009

-

Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock
in the last year
Education (Ref:. Primary/Incomplete)
Secondary
Vocational-Technical
Higher or incomplete higher
Family Income (Ref: - 1st - (lowest))
- 2nd - 3rd - 4th - (highest)
No. of Observations
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
Wald χ2 /LR for LogitFE

(A2)

(A3)

0.032***
[0.012]
0.025***
[0.009]
-

(Panel)
(Panel)
Probit Model with Probit Model with Logit Model with
Random Effects
Fixed Effects
IV (Marginal
(Marginal Effects)
(Odds Ratios)
Effects)

(B1)

0.030**
[0.015]
-

(B2)

(C1)

(C2)

-

-0.049** -0.050** -0.050**
[0.024]
[0.024]
[0.024]
0.001
0.002
0.002
[0.043]
[0.043]
[0.043]
-0.053
-0.048
-0.048
[0.039]
[0.039]
[0.039]
-0.003
0.001
0.001
[0.025]
[0.025]
[0.025]

0.026***
[0.009]
0.024**
0.021***
[0.012]
[0.007]
-0.006
-0.006
[0.015]
[0.015]
-0.051** -0.051** -0.046** -0.046**
[0.024]
[0.024]
[0.019]
[0.019]
0.001
0.002
-0.037
-0.037
[0.043]
[0.043]
[0.032]
[0.032]
-0.048
-0.048
-0.043
-0.043
[0.039]
[0.039]
[0.030]
[0.030]
0.001
0.001
0.018
0.018
[0.025]
[0.025]
[0.017]
[0.017]

-0.012
[0.051]
-0.029
[0.051]
0.011
[0.056]

-0.017
[0.050]
-0.039
[0.050]
-0.007
[0.054]

-0.017
[0.050]
-0.038
[0.050]
-0.007
[0.054]

-0.017
[0.052]
-0.039
[0.052]
-0.006
[0.055]

-0.017
[0.052]
-0.039
[0.052]
-0.006
[0.055]

0.029
[0.042]
-0.005
[0.042]
0.025
[0.044]

0.029
[0.042]
-0.005
[0.042]
0.025
[0.044]

-0.003
[0.034]
0.011
[0.036]
-0.025
[0.038]

-0.005
[0.033]
0.01
[0.036]
-0.032
[0.037]

-0.005
[0.033]
0.01
[0.037]
-0.032
[0.037]

-0.005
[0.034]
0.010
[0.036]
-0.033
[0.040]

-0.005
[0.034]
0.010
[0.036]
-0.033
[0.040]

0.001
[0.025]
0.012
[0.026]
0.006
[0.029]

0.001
[0.025]
0.012
[0.026]
0.006
[0.029]

2,148

2,148

1,074
1,074
1,074
1,074
1,074
0.084
0.090
0.090
-464.8
-461.5
-461.6 -1,362.8 -1,577.5
86.86*** 87.69*** 87.74*** 86.52*** 86.59***

Predicted Probability
0.1767
0.1766
0.1766
Wald χ2 test of exogeneity
0.03
0.02
Partial R2 of excluded instruments:
0.0238
0.0231
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
12.87*** 12.41***
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic χ2(2)
27.95*** 27.07***
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic χ2(2)
26.39*** 25.44***
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistic
12.87*** 12.41**
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F(2,1050)
1.68
1.68
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: Chi-sq(2)
3.45
3.45
(c)Stock-Wright LM S statistic Chi-sq(2)
3.43
3.43
(d) Hansen J statistic Chi-sq(1)
3.423*
3.420*
Notes: The comments in Table 4 hold.
39

(D1)

(D2)

1.392***
[0.147]
1.328***
[0.114]
0.920
0.918
[0.118] [0.118]
-

-

-

-

1.173
[0.214]

1.164
[0.213]

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

516
516
0.032
0.036
-173.0
-172.4
11.62*** 12.85***

Table 6
Informal Credit
Dependent Variable:
Informal Credit (1/0)

Probit Model
(Marginal Effects)

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

Financial Literacy: Index

-

-

Fin. Literacy: #Correct Responses

-

-0.017*
[0.010]
-

Year 2009

-

Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock
in the last year
Education (Ref:. Primary/Incomplete)
Secondary
Vocational-Technical
Higher or incomplete higher
Family Income (Ref: - 1st - (lowest))
- 2nd - 3rd - 4th - (highest)
No. of Observations
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
Wald χ2 /LR χ2 in (D)
LR χ2 (ρ=0)

-0.013*
[0.006]
-

(Panel)
(Panel)
Probit Model with Probit Model with Logit Model with
IV (Marginal
Random Effects Fixed Effects (Odds
Effects)
(Marginal Effects)
Ratios)

(B1)

(B2)

-0.038***
[0.014]

(C1)

(C2)

(D1)

(D2)

-0.009
[0.008]
-

-

0.898
[0.110]
-

-

-0.006
[0.021]
0.107**
[0.047]
-0.067*
[0.034]
0.052**
[0.023]

-0.031***
[0.012]
-0.036***
[0.014]
-0.005
-0.005
-0.004
-0.004
-0.017
[0.021]
[0.021] [0.021]
[0.021]
[0.017]
0.105** 0.105** 0.087*** 0.088*** -0.012
[0.046]
[0.046] [0.033]
[0.033]
[0.027]
-0.068** -0.068** -0.074** -0.074** -0.041
[0.035]
[0.035] [0.036]
[0.036]
[0.027]
0.049** 0.049** 0.048** 0.048** 0.079***
[0.022]
[0.022] [0.021]
[0.021]
[0.015]

0.088*
[0.053]
0.103**
[0.050]
0.009
[0.049]

0.092*
[0.052]
0.111**
[0.049]
0.020
[0.050]

0.091*
[0.052]
0.110**
[0.049]
0.020
[0.050]

0.089**
[0.044]
0.113***
[0.043]
0.030
[0.048]

0.089**
[0.044]
0.113***
[0.043]
0.030
[0.048]

0.052
[0.033]
0.048
[0.033]
-0.021
[0.037]

0.052
[0.033]
0.048
[0.033]
-0.02
[0.037]

0.043
[0.033]
0.049
[0.034]
0.002
[0.037]

0.044
[0.033]
0.051
[0.034]
0.005
[0.038]

0.044
[0.033]
0.051
[0.034]
0.004
[0.038]

0.047
[0.029]
0.052*
[0.031]
0.013
[0.038]

0.047
[0.029]
0.052*
[0.031]
0.013
[0.038]

0.004
[0.021]
-0.043*
[0.024]
-0.042
[0.027]

0.004
[0.021]
-0.043*
[0.024]
-0.042
[0.027]

2,148

2,148

1,074
1,074
1,074
1,074
1,074
0.067
0.070
0.070
-386.2
-384.9
-385.0 -1,283.7 -1,498.2
58.08*** 64.77*** 63.78*** 75.25*** 75.20***

Predicted Probability
0.1294
0.1293
0.1293
Wald χ2 test of exogeneity
4.97**
5.66**
2
Partial R of excluded instruments:
0.0238
0.0231
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
12.87*** 12.41***
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic χ2(2)
27.95*** 27.07***
2
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic χ (2)
26.39*** 25.44***
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistic
12.87*** 12.41**
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F(2,1050)
1.85
1.85
2
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test χ (2)
3.79
3.79
(c) Stock-Wright LM S statistic χ2(2)
3.72
3.72
(d) Hansen J statistic χ2(1)
2.431
2.436
Notes: The notes in Table 4 hold.
40

-0.008
[0.006]
-0.036**
[0.014]
-0.017
[0.017]
-0.012
[0.027]
-0.041
[0.027]
0.079***
[0.015]

-851.4
-851.2
77.08*** 77.29***
10.79*** 10.78***

0.702***
[0.095]
-

0.905
[0.091]
0.704***
[0.095]
-

-

-

-

-

1.766***
[0.357]

1.768***
[0.358]

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

474
0.050
-156.0
16.58***

474
0.051
-155.9
16.81***

Table 7
Level of Spending Capacity
Ordered
Probit Model
(Coefficients)

Dependent Variable:
Level of Spending
(1: high-5: low)
(A1)
Fin. Literacy: Index

-

Fin. Literacy: #Correct Responses

-

Year 2009

-

2009*(Fin. Lit. Index)

-

Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock in
the last year
Secondary Education
Vocational-Technical Education
Higher or incomplete higher
- 2nd Income quartile
- 3rd Income quartile
- 4th Income quartile (highest)
No. of Observations
R2 (Overall)
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
F-statistic
Wald χ2

(A2)

2SLS Model
(Coefficients)

(A3)

-0.075**
[0.036]
-0.064**
[0.029]
-

-

(B1)
-0.085**
[0.038]
-

(B2)

Notes: The remaining notes in Table 4 hold.

(Coefficients)

(C1)

(C2)

(Panel)
Fixed Effects
Model
(Coefficients)

(D1)

(D2)

-

-0.100*** -0.085*** -0.091*** -0.077**
[0.016]
[0.022]
[0.023]
[0.030]
-0.071**
[0.032]
0.085*** 0.085*** 0.056*
0.056*
[0.027]
[0.027]
[0.029]
[0.029]
-0.030
-0.027
[0.030]
[0.038]
-0.070
-0.022
-0.022
[0.047]
[0.037]
[0.037]
0.121
0.069
0.067
[0.079]
[0.052]
[0.052]
0.226*** 0.121** 0.121**
[0.075]
[0.061]
[0.061]
0.077*
0.126*** 0.130*** 0.131*** 0.134***
[0.047]
[0.032]
[0.032]
[0.043]
[0.043]
0.117
0.103
0.104
[0.069]
[0.069]
[0.091]
0.016
0.042
0.042
[0.089]
[0.069]
[0.069]
-0.087
-0.034
-0.034
[0.098]
[0.075]
[0.075]
-0.459*** -0.463*** -0.464***
[0.070]
[0.046]
[0.046]
-0.639*** -0.674*** -0.674***
[0.074]
[0.050]
[0.050]
-0.902*** -0.900*** -0.899***
[0.083]
[0.056]
[0.056]
1,044
2,101
2,101
2,101
2,101
0.323
0.291
0.291
0.026
0.027

-0.043
-0.040
-0.040
-0.070
[0.074]
[0.074]
[0.074]
[0.047]
0.19
0.186
0.185
0.121
[0.127]
[0.127]
[0.127]
[0.079]
0.296** 0.286** 0.286** 0.227***
[0.120]
[0.120]
[0.120]
[0.075]
0.045
0.038
0.038
0.076
[0.073]
[0.073]
[0.073]
[0.047]
0.004
0.010
0.010
0.117
[0.145]
[0.145]
[0.145]
[0.091]
-0.042
-0.022
-0.021
0.015
[0.147]
[0.147]
[0.147]
[0.089]
-0.193
-0.161
-0.159
-0.089
[0.160]
[0.161]
[0.160]
[0.098]
-0.355*** -0.347*** -0.347*** -0.459***
[0.100]
[0.100]
[0.100]
[0.070]
-0.344*** -0.339*** -0.339*** -0.639***
[0.107]
[0.107]
[0.107]
[0.074]
-0.580*** -0.564*** -0.564*** -0.903***
[0.123]
[0.123]
[0.123]
[0.083]
1,044
1,044
1,044
1,044
0.323
0.065
0.066
0.066
-1,183.8 -1,181.7 -1,181.5 -1,083.7
-1,083.7
20.88*** 20.89***
155.66*** 160.25*** 161.12***

Partial R2 of excluded instruments:
0.0238
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
12.14***
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic χ2 (2)
27.95***
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic χ2 (2)
26.39***
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistic
12.87***
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test F(2,1050)
2.46*
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test χ2 (2)
5.03*
2
(c) Stock-Wright LM S-statistic χ (2)
5.04*
(d) Hansen J statistic χ2 (1)
0.005

(Panel)
GLS Model with
Random Effects

0.0231
11.59***
27.07***
25.44***
12.41**
2.46*
5.03*
5.04*
0.006

-1,338.2
9.13***
755.03*** 755.98***

-1,337.7
6.98***

Table 8
Availability of Unspent Income
Dependent Variable:
Availability of Unspent Income
(1: low-5: high)

(A1)

Ordered
Probit Model
(Coefficients)

(Coefficients)

(B2)

0.137
[0.085]
0.002
[0.138]
-0.076
[0.138]
0.073
[0.085]
-0.040
[0.164]
-0.121
[0.168]
0.035
[0.183]
0.336***
[0.117]
0.291**
[0.123]
0.635***
[0.149]
1,074
0.087

0.137*** 0.062
0.021
-0.056
[0.028] [0.039]
[0.040]
[0.052]
0.134***
[0.044]
0.399*** 0.399*** 0.425*** 0.425***
[0.050] [0.050]
[0.050]
[0.050]
0.148***
0.150**
[0.052]
[0.064]
0.138
0.130** 0.130**
[0.085] [0.060] [0.060]
0.002
0.075
0.085
[0.138] [0.090] [0.090]
-0.076
-0.086
-0.085
[0.138] [0.100] [0.099]
0.072 -0.235*** -0.250*** -0.259*** -0.277***
[0.085] [0.055] [0.055]
[0.073]
[0.073]
-0.040
-0.116
-0.122
[0.164] [0.113] [0.113]
-0.121
-0.115
-0.117
[0.168] [0.113] [0.112]
0.034
0.022
0.021
[0.183] [0.123] [0.123]
0.336*** 0.152* 0.156**
[0.117] [0.079] [0.079]
0.290** 0.314*** 0.310***
[0.123] [0.086] [0.086]
0.636*** 0.477*** 0.475***
[0.149] [0.096] [0.096]
1,074
2,148
2,148
2148
2148
0.088
0.107
0.110
0.074
0.079

-1,786.9
4.24***

-1,786.5
4.25***

Partial R2 of excluded instruments:
0.0238
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
12.87***
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic χ2(2)
27.95***
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic χ2(2)
26.39***
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F statistic
12.87***
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F(2,1050)
0.36
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: χ2(2)
0.73
2
(c) Stock-Wright LM S-statistic: χ (2)
0.73
(d) Hansen J statistic χ2(1)
0.009

0.0231
12.41***

Fin. Literacy: #Correct Responses

-

Year 2009

-

2009*(Fin. Lit. Index)

-

Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock in
the last year
Secondary Education
Vocational-Technical Education
Higher or incomplete higher
- 2nd Income quartile
- 3rd Income quartile
- 4th Income quartile (highest)
No. of Observations
R2 (Overall)
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
F-statistic
Wald χ2

0.109***
[0.036]
0.093***
[0.029]
-

-

0.126*
0.123*
0.123*
[0.071]
[0.071]
[0.071]
-0.028
-0.023
-0.023
[0.119]
[0.120]
[0.120]
-0.098
-0.083
-0.083
[0.114]
[0.115]
[0.115]
0.037
0.049
0.049
[0.072]
[0.072]
[0.072]
0.015
0.004
0.004
[0.146]
[0.147]
[0.147]
-0.042
-0.074
-0.074
[0.149]
[0.150]
[0.150]
0.139
0.088
0.085
[0.158]
[0.159]
[0.159]
0.303*** 0.295*** 0.295***
[0.101]
[0.101]
[0.101]
0.257** 0.251** 0.250**
[0.107]
[0.107]
[0.107]
0.531*** 0.506*** 0.506***
[0.124]
[0.124]
[0.124]
1,074
1,074
1,074
0.027
-1,581.5

0.030
-1,576.8

0.030
-1,576.4

90.43*** 100.83*** 101.95***

Notes: The remaining notes in Table 4 hold.

-

27.07***
25.44***
12.41***
0.36
0.73
0.73
0.009

(C1)

(C2)

(Panel)
Fixed Effects
Model
(Coefficients)

0.164***
[0.055]

-

(A3)

(Panel)
GLS Model with
Random Effects
(Coefficients)

(B1)

Fin. Literacy: Index

(A2)

2SLS Model

245.40*** 254.13***

(D1)

-2,599.7
28.45***

(D2)

-2,594.3
22.80***

Appendix A: Construction of the Financial Literacy Index
Panel A: Polychoric Pairwise Correlations Between Financial Literacy Responses
The variables have been transformed to dummies, equal to 1 for correct response, equal to 0 for incorrect
responses and “Do not know”.
Interest_1
Interest_1

Interest_2

Inflation

1.000
0.225***

1.000

Inflation

0.203***

0.295***

1.000

Discounts

0.586***

0.411***

0.378***

Interest_2

Panel B: Polychoric Pairwise Correlations between Financial Literacy Questions, 2008
Component

Eigenvalues
2.117

Proportion
explained
0.529

Cum.
explained
0.529

1
2

0.909

0.227

0.756

3

0.604

0.151

0.908

4

0.370

0.092

1.000

Panel C: Scoring Coefficients for PCA, 2008
Variable

Coeff. 1

Coeff. 2

Coeff. 3

Interest_1

0.455

-0.600

-0.060

Interest_2

0.617

0.620

-0.935

Inflation

0.394

0.469

0.605

Discounts

0.293

-0.139

-0.008

Panel D: Parallel Analysis for the Optimal Number of Factors, 2008
PA based on 10 replications

.6

.8

Eigenvalues
1
1.2

1.4

1.6

Parallel Analysis

1

2

3

4

Component
PCA

Parallel Analysis

Panel E: Financial Literacy Index, 2008

0

.5

1

Density
1.5

2

2.5

First principal component based on 4 financial literacy questions, equally weighted; “Difficulty
Answering” is coded as 0.

-2

-1

0
Financial Literacy Index

44

1

2

Pooling Financial Literacy Responses
We deviate from the approach taken by Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011),
who perform an iterated principal factor analysis of dummies based on the correct and
“do not know” responses to each financial literacy question, since (a) binary data do not
lend themselves to traditional factor analysis (Shapiro, Lasarev, and McCauley; 2002),
and (b) creating multiple binary variables based on categorical data introduces spurious
correlation into the principal factor procedure (Kolenikov and Angeles; 2008).
For robustness, we compute two versions of a financial literacy index using the
Van Rooij et al. (2011) method: one based on the four dummies used in our approach and
another based on two dummies for each question – one each for the correct and “do not
know” responses. Both versions of these indices are highly correlated with our index
(Panel B).
To test whether two alternatives can be pooled in a multinomial logistic model –
Anderson (1984) refers to this as “alternatives being indistinguishable with respect to the
independent variables in the model” – we employ a simple likelihood ratio (LR) test for
the following hypothesis:
H0: β1,A|B = … βK,A|B = 0 for alternatives A and B in a model with K parameters (1)
We fit two models: an unrestricted model with test statistic LR2F and a restricted
model with outcome A as the base category and all coefficients except the intercept for
outcome B restricted to 0, with test statistic LR2R. The test statistic for combining
categories A and B is LR2A/B = LR2F – LR2R ~ χ2 with K degrees of freedom (Long and
Freese, 2006; Claudill, 2000).

45

Following Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a), we classify responses to the financial
literacy questions in the survey as either “correct”, “incorrect”, or “do not know”. We test
whether the last two alternatives can be pooled, and the resulting test statistics (available
upon request) indicate that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that “incorrect” and “do
not now” responses are indistinguishable in our model.
As a second test, we construct for each financial literacy variable an ordered
variable = 0 if answered “difficulty answering”, = 1 if answered incorrectly, and = 2 if
answered correctly. We find no significant differences between logit and ordered logit
tests on the determinants of financial literacy responses (results available upon request).

46

Appendix B: Additional Results
Table B1
Financial Literacy: 1st stage Regressions

(A)
Fin. Lit.: Index

0.041
[0.063]
-0.049
[0.097]
-0.136
[0.098]
-0.108*
[0.061]

0.116**
[0.046]
0.004***
[0.001]
0.037
[0.063]
-0.045
[0.095]
-0.151
[0.098]
-0.126**
[0.061]

(B)
Fin. Lit.: #Correct
Responses
0.141**
[0.057]
0.005***
[0.001]
0.049
0.043
[0.078]
[0.077]
-0.060
-0.055
[0.119]
[0.117]
-0.168
-0.187
[0.121]
[0.120]
-0.124*
-0.146*
[0.074]
[0.075]

0.112
[0.116]
0.294**
[0.117]
0.486***
[0.127]

0.13
[0.118]
0.319***
[0.118]
0.506***
[0.128]

0.14
[0.141]
0.357**
[0.142]
0.604***
[0.155]

0.161
[0.143]
0.387***
[0.144]
0.627***
[0.156]

0.577*
[0.306]
0.484
[0.294]
0.486
[0.299]
0.528
[0.332]
0.655*
[0.337]
0.177
[0.304]
0.486*
[0.295]

0.575*
[0.318]
0.504
[0.307]
0.482
[0.311]
0.48
[0.343]
0.679*
[0.348]
0.157
[0.317]
0.477
[0.308]

0.724*
[0.373]
0.607*
[0.358]
0.606*
[0.364]
0.662
[0.404]
0.838**
[0.412]
0.236
[0.370]
0.620*
[0.359]

0.722*
[0.389]
0.631*
[0.374]
0.601
[0.380]
0.604
[0.419]
0.867**
[0.425]
0.211
[0.387]
0.61
[0.375]

0.094
[0.089]
0.069
[0.090]
0.231**
[0.109]

0.081
[0.089]
0.023
[0.090]
0.144
[0.109]

0.110
[0.109]
0.087
[0.110]
0.280**
[0.135]

0.095
[0.109]
0.032
[0.110]
0.174
[0.135]

0.131
[0.094]
0.059
[0.099]
0.220**
[0.090]
0.294*
[0.150]
0.002
[0.114]
0.289**
[0.139]
-0.388
[0.483]

1.316***
[0.491]
0.038
[0.099]
0.355***
[0.096]
2.003***
[0.665]
0.854**
[0.359]
1.454***
[0.460]
-7.348***
[2.762]

0.125
[0.115]
0.056
[0.121]
0.269**
[0.110]
0.386**
[0.183]
0.003
[0.141]
0.345**
[0.171]
1.366**
[0.592]

1.558**
[0.604]
0.029
[0.121]
0.433***
[0.118]
2.453***
[0.819]
1.032**
[0.443]
1.752***
[0.567]
-7.048**
[3.403]

Number of newspapers per region

-

Number of universities per region

-

Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock
in the last year
Education (Ref: Primary or Incomplete)
Secondary
Vocational-Technical
Higher or incomplete higher
Occupation (Ref: Unemployed)
Skilled Non-Manual
Skilled Manual
Unskilled Non-Manual
Unskilled Manual
Entrepreneur
Pensioner
Other
Family Income (Ref: - 1st - (lowest))
- 2nd - 3rd - 4th - (highest)
Federal Region (Ref: Central)
North Western
Southern
Volga
Urals
Siberian
Far Eastern
Constant
IV: Test of joint significance:
IV: Test of omitted variables
No. of Observations
R2
Log-Likelihood
F-statistic

12.87***
31.45***
30.54***
48
1,074
1,074
1,074
0.124
0.145
0.125
-1,433.6
-1,420.7
-1,651.9
7.40***
8.09***
7.46***

12.41**
1,074
0.145
-1,639.4
8.02***

Table B2
Low Spending
(Panel)
Probit Model with Probit Model with
IV (Marginal
Random Effects
Effects)
(Marginal Effects)

Probit Model

Dependent Variable:
Low Spending (1/0)

(Marginal Effects)

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

Fin. Literacy: Index

-

Fin. Literacy: #Correct Responses

-

Year 2009

-

2009*(Fin. Lit. Index)

-

-

-

-0.028
[0.032]
0.093*
[0.052]
0.153***
[0.053]
0.039
[0.033]
0.052
[0.058]
0.031
[0.056]
-0.001
[0.061]
-0.229***
[0.028]
-0.296***
[0.026]
-0.354***
[0.026]
1,074
0.229
-506.7
261.16***

-0.026
[0.032]
0.092*
[0.052]
0.147***
[0.053]
0.036
[0.032]
0.054
[0.058]
0.041
[0.056]
0.018
[0.062]
-0.227***
[0.028]
-0.296***
[0.026]
-0.350***
[0.027]
1,074
0.232
-504.2
264.85***

-0.026
[0.032]
0.092*
[0.052]
0.146***
[0.053]
0.036
[0.032]
0.054
[0.058]
0.041
[0.056]
0.018
[0.062]
-0.227***
[0.028]
-0.296***
[0.026]
-0.350***
[0.027]
1,074
0.232
-504.2
264.66***

Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock in
the last year
Secondary Education
Vocational-Technical Education
Higher or incomplete higher
- 2nd Income quartile
- 3rd Income quartile
- 4th Income quartile (highest)

-0.034**
[0.016]
-0.028**
[0.013]
-

(B1)
-0.031*
[0.019]
-0.021
[0.026]
0.070*
[0.038]
0.120***
[0.044]
0.029
[0.026]
0.044
[0.046]
0.034
[0.045]
0.016
[0.051]
-0.223***
[0.031]
-0.314***
[0.032]
-0.402***
[0.041]
1,074

(B2)

(C1)

(C2)

-0.042*** -0.038***
[0.010]
[0.014]
-0.026*
[0.016]
0.053*** 0.052***
[0.017]
[0.017]
-0.008
[0.018]
-0.021
-0.007
-0.007
[0.026] [0.022]
[0.022]
0.070* 0.069** 0.068**
[0.038] [0.030]
[0.030]
0.119*** 0.088** 0.088**
[0.037]
[0.044] [0.037]
0.029
0.062*** 0.063***
[0.026] [0.019]
[0.019]
0.044
0.065*
0.066*
[0.045]
[0.039]
[0.039]
0.034
0.053
0.053
[0.045]
[0.039]
[0.039]
0.017
0.028
0.028
[0.051]
[0.044]
[0.044]
-0.223*** -0.220*** -0.220***
[0.031] [0.023]
[0.023]
-0.314*** -0.338*** -0.337***
[0.032] [0.025]
[0.025]
-0.402*** -0.409*** -0.409***
[0.041] [0.031]
[0.031]
1,074
2,148
2,148

No. of Observations
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
-1,630.9 -1,870.0 -1,053.2 -1,053.1
Wald χ2 / LR χ2 in (D)
264.78*** 264.82*** 276.3*** 277.0***
26.67*** 26.45***
LR χ2 (ρ=0)
Predicted Probability
0.3310
0.3309
0.3309
Wald χ2 test of exogeneity
0.05
0.07
Partial R2 of excluded instruments:
0.0238
0.0231
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
12.87*** 12.41***
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic χ2 (2)
27.95*** 27.07***
2
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic χ (2)
26.39*** 25.44***
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistic
12.87*** 12.41**
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F(2,1050)
1.58
1.58
2
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: χ (2)
3.24
3.24
(c) Stock-Wright LM S-statistic: χ2(2)
3.23
3.23
2
(d) Hansen J statistic χ (1)
0.031
0.032
Notes: The observed probability is 0.3305 for Panel (A). The remaining notes in Table 4 hold.

(Panel)
Logit Model with
Fixed Effects
(Odds Ratios)

(D1)

(D2)

0.813**
[0.069]
-

0.828*
[0.094]
-

1.218*
[0.138]
-

1.213*
[0.140]
0.964
[0.141]
-

-

-

-

-

1.581***
[0.258]
-

1.589***
[0.262]
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

656
0.035
-219.5
15.73***

656
0.035
-219.5
15.79***

Table B3
Unspent Income
Dependent Variable:
Unspent Income (1/0)

Probit Model
(Marginal Effects)

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

Fin. Literacy: Index

-

Fin. Literacy: #Correct Responses

-

Year 2009

-

2009*(Fin. Lit. Index)

-

-

-

0.048
[0.034]
-0.003
[0.054]
-0.088
[0.056]
0.004
[0.034]
-0.055
[0.064]
-0.068
[0.064]
-0.035
[0.070]
0.156***
[0.048]
0.145***
[0.050]
0.267***
[0.054]
1,074
0.055
-698.0
78.00***

0.046
[0.034]
0.001
[0.054]
-0.081
[0.056]
0.010
[0.034]
-0.061
[0.064]
-0.084
[0.064]
-0.061
[0.070]
0.152***
[0.048]
0.142***
[0.050]
0.257***
[0.055]
1,074
0.062
-693.0
83.70***

0.046
[0.034]
0.001
[0.054]
-0.081
[0.056]
0.010
[0.034]
-0.061
[0.064]
-0.084
[0.064]
-0.062
[0.070]
0.152***
[0.048]
0.142***
[0.050]
0.257***
[0.055]
1,074
0.062
-692.6
84.33***

Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock
in the last year
Secondary Education
Vocational-Technical Education
Higher or incomplete higher
- 2nd Income quartile
- 3rd Income quartile
- 4th Income quartile (highest)
No. of Observations
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
Wald χ2 /LR χ2 in (D)
LR χ2 (ρ=0)

0.053***
[0.017]
0.045***
[0.014]
-

Probit Model with
IV (Marginal
Effects)

(B1)

0.041**
[0.020]
-

(B2)
-

(Panel)
Probit Model
with RE
(ME)

(C1)

(C2)

(Panel)
Logit Model with
FE
(Odds Ratios)

(D1)

0.056*** 0.037** 1.057
[0.011]
[0.016]
[0.082]
0.033**
[0.016]
0.100*** 0.098*** 1.689***
[0.020]
[0.020]
[0.164]
0.036*
[0.021]
0.044
0.044
0.036
0.036
[0.023]
[0.032]
[0.032]
[0.023]
0.001
0.001
0.024
0.026
[0.051]
[0.051]
[0.036]
[0.036]
-0.078
-0.078
-0.051
-0.05
[0.052]
[0.052]
[0.039]
[0.039]
0.008
0.008 -0.070*** -0.073*** 0.676***
[0.032]
[0.032]
[0.022]
[0.022]
[0.100]
-0.056
-0.056
-0.060
-0.062
[0.061]
[0.061]
[0.044]
[0.044]
-0.076
-0.076
-0.056
-0.057
[0.061]
[0.061]
[0.044]
[0.044]
-0.053
-0.053
-0.023
-0.023
[0.067]
[0.067]
[0.048]
[0.048]
0.143*** 0.143*** 0.058*
0.059*
[0.044]
[0.044]
[0.032]
[0.032]
0.133*** 0.133*** 0.111*** 0.110***
[0.046]
[0.046]
[0.034]
[0.034]
0.245*** 0.245*** 0.194*** 0.194***
[0.053]
[0.053]
[0.037]
[0.037]
1,074
1,074
2,148
2,148
924
0.058
-1,594.0 -1,810.4 -1,345.9 -1,344.5 -301.6
79.47*** 79.44*** 158.1*** 160.7*** 37.23***
2.12*
2.08*

Predicted Probability
0.4481
0.4483
0.4483
Wald χ2 test of exogeneity
0.54
0.81
2
Partial R of excluded instruments:
0.0238
0.0231
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
12.87*** 12.41***
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic χ2(2)
27.95*** 27.07***
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic χ2(2)
26.39*** 25.44***
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistic
12.87*** 12.41***
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F(2,1050)
1.06
1.06
2
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: χ (2)
2.17
2.17
(c) Stock-Wright LM S-statistic: χ2(2)
2.16
2.16
(d) Hansen J statistic χ2(1)
0.331
0.331
Notes: The observed probability is 0.4479 for Panel (A). The remaining notes in Table 4 hold.

(D2)

0.991
[0.099]
1.679***
[0.164]
1.137
[0.141]
1.679***
[0.164]
924
0.06
-301.1
38.30***

Table B4
Instrumental Variables Regressions: Robustness tests

Fin. Literacy: Index
Log(regional unemployment rate)
Log(monthly income per capita)
Male
Single Person Household
Log(Age)
Has experienced income shock
in the last year
Secondary Education
Vocational-Technical Education
Higher or incomplete higher
- 2nd Income quartile
- 3rd Income quartile
- 4th Income quartile (highest)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Bank
Account

Formal
Credit

Informal
Credit

Low
Spending

0.041**
[0.019]
-0.137*
[0.075]
-0.151**
[0.073]
0.03
[0.031]
0.036
[0.049]
0.133***
[0.050]
-0.012
[0.031]
0.099
[0.062]
0.123**
[0.061]
0.174***
[0.066]
0.06
[0.044]
0.087*
[0.045]
0.055
[0.055]

0.031**
[0.015]
-0.023
[0.053]
-0.058
[0.055]
-0.051**
[0.024]
0.003
[0.043]
-0.046
[0.039]
0.001
[0.025]
-0.016
[0.052]
-0.039
[0.052]
-0.007
[0.055]
-0.002
[0.034]
0.015
[0.036]
-0.022
[0.042]

-0.038***
[0.014]
0.089*
[0.047]
0.027
[0.048]
-0.004
[0.022]
0.090***
[0.033]
-0.072**
[0.036]
0.046**
[0.021]
0.089**
[0.043]
0.110***
[0.043]
0.031
[0.048]
0.047
[0.030]
0.052*
[0.031]
0.022
[0.038]

-0.012
[0.019]
-0.176***
[0.061]
-0.309***
[0.061]
-0.027
[0.026]
0.078**
[0.039]
0.137***
[0.043]
0.032
[0.026]
0.044
[0.045]
0.031
[0.044]
0.007
[0.050]
-0.206***
[0.030]
-0.286***
[0.033]
-0.349***
[0.042]

(5)
Level of
Low
Spending
-0.050
[0.038]
-0.387***
[0.122]
-0.520***
[0.110]
-0.077*
[0.046]
0.127
[0.080]
0.248***
[0.075]
0.084*
[0.046]
0.118
[0.090]
0.014
[0.088]
-0.104
[0.097]
-0.433***
[0.069]
-0.596***
[0.075]
-0.827***
[0.087]

0.36
0.0179
8.56***
19.96***
17.58***
8.56***
0.18
0.38
0.38
0.355

Wald χ2 test of exogeneity
2.17
0.03
5.24**
Partial R2 of excluded instruments:
0.0179
0.0179
0.0179
Test of excluded instruments F(2, 1050)
8.56***
8.56***
8.56***
Additional statistics based on Linear Probability Models (available upon request)
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic χ2(2)
19.96*** 19.96*** 19.96***
(a) Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald statistic χ2(2)
17.58*** 17.58*** 17.58***
(b) Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-statistic
8.56***
8.56***
8.56***
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: F(2,1050)
2.43*
1.78
0.59
(c) Anderson-Rubin Wald test: χ2(2)
4.98*
3.66
1.22
(c) Stock-Wright LM S-statistic: χ2(2)
4.87*
3.61
1.21
(d) Hansen J statistic χ2(1)
2.309
3.513*
0.77
No. of Observations
Pseudo R2
Log-Likelihood
Wald χ2
F-statistic

1,074
-1,562.1
59.21***
-

1,074
-1,358.8
90.05***
-

Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

51

1,074
-1,278.2
77.20***
-

(6)

0.041**
[0.020]
-0.039
[0.080]
-0.008
[0.077]
0.043
[0.032]
-0.002
[0.051]
-0.08
[0.052]
0.01
[0.032]
-0.056
[0.061]
-0.074
[0.061]
-0.053
[0.067]
0.143***
[0.044]
0.132***
[0.047]
0.239***
[0.055]

(7)
Level of
Unspent
Income
0.169***
[0.055]
-0.264
[0.217]
-0.181
[0.209]
0.135
[0.085]
-0.004
[0.138]
-0.079
[0.139]
0.079
[0.085]
-0.037
[0.164]
-0.113
[0.168]
0.033
[0.183]
0.343***
[0.117]
0.298**
[0.123]
0.635***
[0.153]

0.0176
8.22***

0.57
0.0179
8.56***

0.0179
8.56***

19.28
16.88
8.22
0.18
0.36
0.37
0.201

19.96***
17.58***
8.56***
0.83
1.71
1.71
0.064

19.96***
17.58***
8.56***
0.35
0.71
0.71
0.16

Income
Unspent

1,074
1,057
1,074
1,074
0.338
0.088
-1,615.7
-1,590.4
269.05*** -1,071.5*** 80.52*** -1,786.1***
20.98
4.07

Table B5

#Correct
Responses

Self-Assessment

1.00
-0.19*
-0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.03

1.00
0.07*
-0.06*
0.06*
-0.08*

1.00
-0.26*
0.84*
-0.28*

1.00
-0.31*
0.85*

1.00
-0.34*

1.00

# Newspapers
# Universities

-0.03
0.00

-0.06*
-0.05*

0.04*
-0.04

0.02
-0.07*

-0.01
0.01

0.02
-0.10*

-0.04
0.01

1.00
0.15*

1.00

Index
#Correct Responses
Self-Assessment

0.09*
0.09*
0.11*

0.10*
0.10*
0.14*

-0.02
-0.03
0.01

-0.20*
-0.20*
-0.20*

0.15*
0.16*
0.22*

-0.25*
-0.25*
-0.27*

0.16*
0.16*
0.24*

0.34*
0.34*
0.16*

0.12* 1.00
0.12* 0.99* 1.00
0.01 0.37* 0.36*

1.00

0.09*
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.04

0.03
0.03
0.00
-0.07*
-0.15*

-0.04*
0.13*
-0.02
-0.02
-0.06*

-0.34*
0.06*
-0.07*
0.19*
0.27*

0.19*
-0.07*
0.04*
-0.02
-0.09*

-0.44*
0.09*
-0.07*
0.17*
0.28*

0.19*
-0.09*
0.05*
-0.02
-0.09*

0.15*
0.01
0.02
-0.11*
-0.18*

0.19*
-0.04*
0.00
0.01
0.00

0.23*
0.02
0.05*
-0.13*
-0.27*

0.23*
0.03
0.05*
-0.13*
-0.27*

0.23*
0.02
0.07*
-0.13*
-0.25*

-0.08*
-0.05*
0.02
0.07*

-0.07*
0.02
-0.01
0.04

-0.02
0.05*
0.03
-0.07*

0.12*
0.05*
-0.02
-0.12*

-0.03
-0.04*
-0.01
0.08*

0.14*
0.09*
-0.02
-0.16*

-0.04*
-0.04*
-0.01
0.09*

-0.13*
-0.06*
0.04*
0.10*

0.00
-0.03
-0.04*
0.08*

-0.18*
-0.07*
0.03
0.16*

-0.18*
-0.07*
0.03
0.16*

-0.24* -0.18* -0.04
-0.08* -0.08* 0.03
0.04* 0.03 0.00
0.19* 0.16* -0.02

Urban region

Unspent
Income

1.00
0.05*
-0.01
-0.05*
0.12*
-0.08*
0.16*

Level of
Unspent
Income

Low
Spending

1.00
0.01 -0.01
-0.05* 0.02
-0.10* -0.05*

Informal
Credit

1.00
-0.05*
0.08*
-0.17*
-0.31*

Formal
Credit

Income shock

Index

Indiv. Charact.
Family Income

Financial Literacy

# Universities

Instr. variables

Bank
Account

Level of Low
Spending

Outcome variables

# Newspapers

Pairwise Correlation Matrix

Outcome variables
Bank Account
Formal Credit
Informal Credit
Low Spending
Unspent Income
Low Spending Index
Unspent Income Index

Instrumental variables
Financial Literacy

Individual Characteristics
Family Income
Income shock in last year
Male
Single Person Household
Age

Education
Primary or Incomplete
Secondary
Vocational-Technical
Higher or incomplete higher

-0.11*
-0.08*
0.04
0.12*

Occupation
Skilled Non-Manual
Skilled Manual
Unskilled Non-Manual
Unskilled Manual
Entrepreneur
Unemployed
Pensioner
Other

0.03
-0.01
0.06*
-0.05*
0.02
0.03
-0.01
-0.05*

0.01
0.12*
0.06*
0.00
0.04*
0.00
-0.18*
-0.02

0.00
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.02
-0.04*
0.06*

-0.06*
-0.12*
-0.06*
0.05*
-0.02
0.00
0.26*
-0.07*

0.06*
0.01
0.03
-0.03
0.02
0.01
-0.08*
0.00

-0.09*
-0.11*
-0.06*
0.06*
-0.05*
0.03
0.27*
-0.06*

0.05*
0.01
0.05*
-0.04*
0.03
0.00
-0.09*
0.00

0.07*
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.05*
0.00
-0.18*
0.04*

0.03
-0.07*
0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.02
0.00
0.03

0.10*
0.09*
0.06*
0.00
0.02
-0.01
-0.28*
0.07*

0.10*
0.08*
0.06*
0.00
0.02
-0.01
-0.27*
0.07*

0.13*
0.04
0.08*
0.01
0.03
-0.03
-0.24*
0.03

0.12*
0.11*
0.05*
-0.05*
0.05*
0.00
-0.32*
0.09*

-0.02
0.03
0.02
0.04
-0.01
0.03
-0.10*
0.05*

0.00
0.06*
0.07*
-0.08*
0.00
-0.01
-0.10*
0.01

Urban
Central
North Western
Southern
Volga
Urals
Siberian
Far-Eastern

0.05*
0.09*
0.01
-0.04*
-0.10*
0.02
0.00
0.02

-0.03
-0.07*
0.00
-0.02
0.02
0.00
0.05*
0.07*

-0.04*
-0.04
-0.04*
0.03
0.04*
-0.02
0.00
0.01

-0.13*
-0.11*
0.00
0.04
0.11*
-0.02
-0.02
0.00

0.03
0.08*
0.05*
-0.02
-0.06*
0.00
-0.07*
0.02

-0.17*
-0.12*
-0.01
0.07*
0.10*
-0.02
-0.02
0.00

0.01
0.07*
0.08*
-0.05*
-0.07*
0.01
-0.05*
0.01

0.08*
0.19*
-0.21*
0.09*
0.08*
-0.18*
-0.07*
-0.12*

0.28*
0.17*
0.11*
0.01
-0.15*
-0.07*
-0.06*
-0.06*

0.11*
0.04*
0.00
-0.05*
0.00
0.01
0.01
-0.04*

0.11*
0.04*
0.00
-0.05*
0.00
0.01
0.01
-0.04

0.08*
0.01
0.01
-0.01
-0.06*
-0.01
0.04
0.03

0.24*
0.29*
0.04*
-0.13*
-0.20*
0.02
-0.05*
0.00

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
0.03
0.03
0.00
-0.05*
0.04*

1.00*
0.08*
0.05*
-0.07*
-0.01
0.01
0.01
-0.11*

Federal Regions

Notes:
*: p<0.05

53

Appendix C: Instrumental Variables (2007)
Panel A: Number of newspapers by federal region (darker higher)

Panel B: Number of Universities

Source: The data sources are: Bank branches and Number of Universities: Central Bank of Russia (2007);
Number of newspapers: East View Information Services (2008), http://www.eastview.com/Online/DBtitlelists.aspx.
The map coordinates for the Russian administrative regions, along with map platforms are available at:
http://www.diva-gis.org/gData.

