NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAILSPOTTING: IDENTIFYING AND PROFITING FROM CEO VACATION TRIPS
David Yermack
Working Paper 17940
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17940
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

This paper previously circulated as "Tailspotting: How Disclosure, Stock Prices and Volatility Change
When CEOs Fly to Their Vacation Homes." For helpful comments I thank Yakov Amihud, Sreedhar
Bharath, Jonathan Cohn, Claudia Custodio, Ran Duchin, Robert Engle, Dan Galai, Marc Gabarro,
William Greene, Peter Koudijs, Michael Knobler, Kate Litvak, Vikas Mehrotra, Lalitha Naveen, Ed
Rice, Rik Sen, Denis Sosyura, Christopher Stanton, Nancy Su, Ralph Walkling, Wei Wang, an anonymous
referee, and seminar participants at Adelaide, Alberta, Arizona State, Bocconi, Copenhagen, Frankfurt
Center for Financial Studies, Hong Kong Polytechnic, LSU, Melbourne, Michigan, Norwegian School
of Business, Oklahoma, Purdue, Queens University, Utah, University of Western Australia, Yale Law
School, and the Drexel University Corporate Governance, Erasmus University Rotterdam Corporate
Governance, and NYU-Penn Law and Finance conferences. Mark Maremont of The Wall Street Journal
offered invaluable help with aircraft flight data, and Maria Aristizabal and Emiliya Schain provided
superb research assistance. Part of this research was completed while I was a visiting professor at Erasmus
University Rotterdam. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Tailspotting: Identifying and profiting from CEO vacation trips
David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 17940
March 2012, Revised December 2013
JEL No. G14,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper shows close connections between CEOs’ absences from headquarters and corporate news
disclosures. I identify CEO absences by merging corporate jet flight histories with records of CEOs’
property ownership near leisure destinations. I find that CEOs go to their vacation homes just after
companies report favorable news, and CEOs return to headquarters right before subsequent news is
released. When CEOs are away, companies announce less news than usual, mandatory disclosures
are more likely to occur late, and stock prices exhibit sharply lower volatility. Volatility increases
when CEOs return to work. CEOs spend fewer days out of the office when their ownership is high
and when the weather is bad at their vacation homes.
David Yermack
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
dyermack@stern.nyu.edu

Tailspotting:
Identifying and profiting from CEO vacation trips

I.

Introduction
This paper documents a close connection between the timing of corporate news

disclosures and CEOs’ absences from headquarters. I identify CEO absences by merging
publicly available flight histories of corporate jets with real estate records of CEOs’ property
ownership near leisure destinations. I find that CEOs go to their vacation homes just after
companies report favorable news, and CEOs return to headquarters right before subsequent news
is released. More good news is released when CEOs are back at work, and CEOs appear not to
leave headquarters at all if a firm has adverse news to disclose. When CEOs are away from the
office, stock prices behave quietly with sharply lower volatility. Volatility increases immediately
when CEOs return to work. Mandatory Form 8-K disclosures of material company news are
more likely to be filed late if news occurs while CEOs are at their vacation homes.
An example illustrating many of these patterns appears in Figure 1. On January 7, 2010,
aerospace manufacturer Boeing Co. disclosed a 28% increase in annual commercial airliner
deliveries and also issued an earnings forecast for the year ahead. Boeing stock rose 4%, capping
three days in which it outperformed the market by almost 10%. The company’s shares were
quiet for the next several weeks, not moving significantly again until January 27, when Boeing
1

announced strong quarterly earnings and its stock rose more than 7%. In between these
announcements, Boeing’s CEO appears to have been at his vacation home, an inference based
upon Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records of company aircraft trips to and from an
airport near his vacation residence in Hobe Sound, FL. During this period, the annualized
volatility of Boeing’s stock dropped to 0.16, an unusually low level for a major blue chip.
During the three days before and three days after his trip, the volatility was more than twice as
high at 0.40. I find patterns similar to Figure 1 for a sample of 217 trips to vacation homes
lasting five work days or longer, taken by CEOs of 65 major U.S. companies during the four year
period 2007-2010.
The paper’s results seem consistent with an agency cost hypothesis, under which CEOs
might slow down their firms’ news disclosures for personal convenience on the days that they
requisition company aircraft for golf or ski trips. However, the observed associations between
news disclosures and vacation schedules may well be endogenous, if CEOs plan to be away from
the office when the company expects to have little news to announce. To understand more
clearly the direction of causation between disclosures and CEO absences, I conduct a variety of
tests, examining how company news announcements change when CEOs return to headquarters
at unexpected times. I also estimate a bivariate probit model of news days and vacation days, in
which weather at the CEO’s vacation site is used as an instrumental variable that should be
associated with trips to the vacation home but not be connected to company news developments.
Much of the analysis from these tests supports the agency interpretation, with news releases
appearing to occurr less frequently simply because the CEO is absent from the office. However,
it is difficult to test causation in the other direction, which would require an instrumental variable
2

associated with news at headquarters but uncorrelated with the CEO’s decision to take time off.
A persuasive instrumental variable with these characteristics is hard to find. In addition, overall
patterns of CEO vacations do not provide clear-cut support for the agency hypothesis. CEOs do
not seem to over-consume leisure, as they spend about 17 work days a year at their vacation
homes, in line with the schedules of typical mid-level managers.1 Many of their trips are short,
and some appear to be interrupted for returns to headquarters when required.
A number of benign explanations also seem consistent with results in the paper. Some
CEO responsibilities, such as secret merger negotiations, may require meetings at remote
locations and put the CEO out of contact with headquarters or the news media. This “distance”
hypothesis implies that corporate disclosure may be affected by the CEO’s mere absence from
headquarters, even for business trips, due to logistical complications. In principle one could test
this conjecture by using business-related aircraft flights to identify the CEO’s days away from
headquarters and comparing news on those days with disclosures on vacation days. However,
CEOs’ business trips are hard to pinpoint, because we do not have passenger manifests for
individual flights. Due to the difficulty of identifying a CEO’s business flights, the paper does
not have a benchmark for differentiating how company news disclosures change when the CEO
leaves for vacation compared to routine trips away from headquarters for business.
A further “effort” hypothesis would suggest that companies disclose less news when the
CEO is at his vacation home not because he is a great distance away, but merely because he is
working less and producing less news. The effort hypothesis seems plausible since technology

1

U.S. professional employees with 15 or more years service receive an average of 17 paid vacation days each
year, according to a government study. See http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ebs.t05.htm.

3

should allow most managers to communicate with headquarters from afar. This hypothesis is
difficult to test directly, since we cannot observe the CEO’s hour-to-hour activities at any
location. Evidence that CEOs work less while at their vacation homes is circumstantial, based to
their proximity to beaches, marinas, and ski resorts, as well as large perquisite disclosures for
many of them of corporate aircraft use for personal reasons.2 However, the “effort” hypothesis is
difficult to separate empirically from the “distance” hypothesis, and my inability to distinguish
between them represents a limitation of the paper’s research design.
This study illuminates a facet of corporate disclosure policy rarely noticed by investors or
regulators. Since the 1930s U.S. authorities have established detailed regulations for the timing
of company disclosures by enacting rules such as Regulation FD and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
(SOX). Since it became effective in 2003, SOX has required companies to report a wide range of
material events on Form 8-K within either two or four business days. Notwithstanding these
regulations, my results indicate systematic coordination between public news disclosures and the
personal schedules of company CEOs.
The movements of company aircraft to and from CEOs’ vacation residences provide very
visible signals of pending news announcements and silences. With a trivial amount of research
and monitoring, investors could observe flights of corporate aircraft in real time between the
headquarters airport and CEOs’ vacation locales, either by watching live FAA data on the

2

Mandatory executive compensation disclosures indicate substantial leisure use of corporate aircraft use by
nearly all the CEOs in the sample. In the case of Boeing, the company disclosed an incremental cost of $303,962 for
personal use of company aircraft in 2010 by its CEO, W. James McNerney Jr. Estimates on the Jet Tracker database put
the incremental cost of a typical corporate aircraft flight in the neighborhood of $5,000 to $10,000 (depending on the
plane model and distance flown), implying that Boeing’s CEO took a fairly large number of personal trips on the
company’s executive jet in 2010. Conversations by the author with practitioners indicate that when preparing these
disclosures, companies tend to classify a CEO’s flight expenses as leisure-related only when necessary, for those trips on
when he does no identifiable work.

4

Internet or stationing scouts for “tailspotting” of the tail numbers of planes that land at leisure
airports favored by CEOs such as Nantucket, Ma. or Naples, Fl. This information could support
straightforward trading strategies, such as using derivatives to bet on declines in volatility when a
CEO arrives at his vacation airport and increases in volatility when he departs. A similar pattern
of volatility changes tied to the arrival of transport vessels is described by Koudijs (2013) in his
historical account of British company shares trading on the Amsterdam exchange during the 18th
century. By merging the schedules of mail boats carrying news from England with daily share
price changes in Amsterdam, Koudijs shows that volatility of stocks rose markedly when English
ships docked in Amsterdam. In this study, the mechanism by which information reaches the
market is somewhat different than in Koudijs’s; whereas the mail boats in 18th century Europe
transported market-relevant news from abroad directly to investors, a 21st century CEO’s
corporate jet seems to carry a gatekeeper who personally controls the release of news, and whose
absence from headquarters implies silence by the firm.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a literature
review connecting the results of this study to research in law, finance, and accounting. Section
III describes the data collection and presents descriptive statistics about the sample. Section IV
contains an analysis of stock returns and changes in volatility when a CEO is out of the office at
his vacation home, as well as an analysis of corporate news releases. Section V concludes the
paper.

II.

Literature review
A large academic literature has investigated the strategic timing of news disclosure by
5

corporations. These papers generally focus upon firms’ attempts to influence analysts and
journalists or exploit gaps in investors’ attention. For instance, Patell and Wolfson (1982),
Damodaran (1989), and many other studies find that firms release adverse news on late Friday
afternoons, or in the evenings after the stock exchange has closed. Dye (2010) studies conditions
under which companies will cluster or “bunch” several disclosures together in order to diminish
the focus of investors upon any one announcement. Ahern and Sosyura (forthcoming) show that
when negotiating stock-for-stock acquisitions, a bidder firm will often flood the news media with
positive announcements, attempting to drive its share price higher and obtain a more favorable
exchange ratio with the target firm.
Delaying or advancing news based upon the CEO’s personal work schedule represents an
additional aspect of disclosure policy that has not been previously noted by researchers.
Numerous studies in the Management field have analyzed top managers’ daily activities, though
it is unusual for these papers to document direct associations between CEO schedules and
companies’ financial performance. One exception is Bandiera, Guiso, Prat, and Sadun (2011),
who study one week of detailed work diaries for CEOs of 94 large Italian companies, tracking
such variables as the number of hours worked and the frequency of meetings with colleagues and
customers. The authors find a positive association between company productivity, measured as
sales per employee, and hours worked by CEOs, especially for hours spent inside the firm rather
than externally in meetings with outsiders such as investors or customers. Bennedsen, PérezGonzalez, and Wolfenzon (2012) study CEO illnesses and find a negative relation between CEO
hospitalizations and subsequent company profitability. In both of these papers the outcome
variables are reported at the annual level, in contrast to this study which looks more finely at
6

daily stock price behavior when a CEO is in or away from the office.
Previous literature suggests that if a company were to alter its disclosure practices to
accommodate absences of top managers, investors may react negatively over time. When a
company delays or reduces its news disclosures, research indicates that a number of financial
problems arise for the firm. Most of these studies rely on indexes of firms’ disclosure quality
created by analysts or other financial market professionals. These indexes evaluate firms
according to the frequency, timeliness, and informativeness of their news announcements.
According to this research, better corporate disclosure is associated with a lower cost of debt
(Sengupta, 1998), greater liquidity for the firm’s stock (Welker, 1995), increased willingness of
institutional investors to hold a company’s shares (Healy, Hutton, and Palepu, 1999; Bushee and
Noe, 2000), and reduced litigation risk (Skinner, 1997). Leuz and Wysocki (2008) provide a
recent survey of these studies.
This paper also extends a growing literature based upon CEOs’ corporate jet usage.
While early research such as Rajan and Wulf (2006) and Yermack (2006) focused upon
connections between jet usage and company performance, this paper does not directly analyze the
impact of jet flights. Instead, it employs data about CEOs’ air travel as an identification strategy
to identify their absences from headquarters. Two other recent working papers use The Wall
Street Journal’s Jet Tracker database, the same source employed in this study, to identify
executive trips to specific locations. Bushee, Gerakos and Lee (2013) study executive trips to
the “money center” cities of New York, Boston, Chicago, and San Francisco, where the
managers are likely to be meeting with bankers, analysts, or investors. Lee, Lowry and Shu
(2013) use aircraft travel records to compile data about the frequency of managers’ trips from
7

headquarters to company subsidiaries and other business locations.

III.

Data description
Data for this study comes from the Jet Tracker online database made available for public

search by The Wall Street Journal since May 2011 (Maremont and McGinty, 2011). The
database, derived from FAA data, consists of “every private aircraft flight recorded in the FAA's
air-traffic management system for the four years from 2007 through 2010,” according to the
newspaper. The database lists the tail number used to identify each aircraft, which the newspaper
matches to individual companies using an FAA registry obtained with a Freedom of Information
Act request as discussed below.
I search the Jet Tracker database for all companies included in the S&P500 index
between 2007 and 2010, using a list of companies and CEOs downloaded from ExecuComp.
Approximately three-quarters of the S&P500 appear in the database, with the frequency declining
in relation to company size. If a company operates its own aircraft, the database rank-orders its
2007-2010 flights by airport. Invariably the headquarters city of the company is the first airport
listed. For those companies whose aircraft fly often to airports serving leisure destinations such
as Martha’s Vineyard or Key Largo – which happens for perhaps half of all firms with planes – I
search on-line real estate records available on Lexis-Nexis to determine whether the company’s
CEO owns property near that airport.3 This requirement of vacation property ownership causes a

3

Searchable real estate databases include records of housing sales, property taxes, and mortgages and list the
owner and exact address of properties across the United States. These data have been used by several recent papers such
as Liu and Yermack (2012) and Cronqvist, Makhija, and Yonker (2012) to identify the main residences of corporate
managers. To search these databases accurately, one must sometimes consult biographical sources to obtain information
such as the CEO’s middle initial or spouse’s name. CEOs with common last names such as Smith or Johnson can be
problematic, and in several such cases I excluded companies from the sample when I could not link an individual CEO to

8

substantial reduction of the sample, as I am able to identify vacation homes owned by about onethird of those CEOs whose firms frequently operate aircraft to and from leisure destinations
(many of the other CEOs may rent or stay at resort hotels, for instance, even if they visit the same
destinations regularly). If I locate a property, I query the database for exact details of each flight
to and from the vacation airport, on the assumption that those flights transport the CEO. I then
use this flight information to construct a record of the CEO’s trips to and from his vacation
home.
Using the CEO’s real estate ownership represents an identification strategy that allows me
to infer, with high probability, that the CEO is actually a passenger on certain specific flights
operated by his company’s aircraft. Because it is far more difficult to know whether the CEO
was aboard an aircraft that flew to a generic commercial destination, the paper lacks a benchmark
to differentiate the effects of the CEO’s business travel from his vacation trips.
Compiling flight records for individual trips requires some subjective judgment. Many
companies’ aircraft follow a pattern of flying from headquarters to a vacation destination, staying
only a few minutes (presumably to discharge passengers), and then immediately returning to the
headquarters airport or perhaps flying on to another city. This allows the plane to avoid local
hangar fees near the CEO’s vacation home and to undertake other corporate missions while the
CEO is inactive. Some days later, a company aircraft will travel again to the CEO’s vacation
airport, stop briefly to pick up passengers, and then return once again to headquarters, so that
CEO vacations often involve two separate round-trips by a company plane. Sometimes a CEO
specific real estate records with high confidence. On the advice of the staff of The Wall Street Journal, I excluded one
company (Cintas Corp.) in which both the CEO and his father, the Chairman and predecessor CEO, had access to the
company plane and each owned vacation property in the Florida Keys, making it impossible to infer which flights carried
the CEO and which carried the father.

9

appears to fly from his vacation airport to cities other than headquarters, often for an up-and-back
trip in one day. Many of these side trips are to obvious leisure destinations, such as Napa, Ca., or
Augusta., Ga., which many CEOs appear to visit for day trips of six hours or less, enough time
for a tour of vineyards or a round of golf. If the CEO travels from his vacation home to another
leisure destination, I count it as a continuation of the vacation trip, but if the trip appears to be to
an urban or commercial destination, I treat it as the end of the vacation. If the corporate aircraft
travels to the CEO’s vacation airport but no return flight ever appears in the database, I do not
include the trip in my sample; in these cases the CEO probably leaves by commercial air service
or surface transport at a time I cannot identify. To classify a departure day from headquarters as
either a work day or day away from the office, I use a cutoff of 4:00 p.m. takeoff, so if the CEO’s
plane leaves the headquarters city later than 4:00, I count the trip as having begun the next
working day. For return days, if the flight lands in the headquarters city or another non-leisure
destination at 12:00 noon or earlier, I count that as a work day.
These methods will obviously yield only an incomplete record of a CEO’s vacation trips
with some measurement error, since I will record trips to locations where he owns homes but not
to other destinations where he may vacation without owning property. A few companies’ planes
travel regularly to Bermuda and Mexico resort towns and to Europe, but I do not have access to
foreign real estate records to verify whether CEOs own property in these locations. On occasion
CEOs may travel on commercial airlines or use time-sharing private jet services from an outside
company such as NetJets, and I will miss these trips as well. Even when a CEO travels to his
vacation home, he may spend time working on company business while there, so my measure of

10

vacation travel may be overinclusive.4 I also cannot verify that CEOs are passengers on every
flight made on company planes to the airports near their vacation homes; some of these trips may
transport a CEO’s family members or junior executives from the company, for instance.
My sampling procedure yields vacation schedules for 66 CEOs from 65 companies. I
tabulate a binary vacation variable for each CEO each day, with the U.S. stock market calendar
used to distinguish working days from weekends and holidays. For CEOs who hold their jobs
continuously for the entire 2007-2010 period, the sample includes 1,008 days of data, an average
of 252 stock market days per year. For CEOs who were appointed or resigned during this period,
I tabulate daily vacation data only during their time in office, even though some seem to have
access to their firms’ planes while not serving in the CEO role. Table 1 presents basic overview
statistics about the sample. In all, the database contains 51,426 company-days, of which 3,504,
or 6.8%, are spent by CEOs at their vacation homes, an average of about 17 work days per year.
The data exhibit considerable variation across companies, with one CEO recording only three
work days at his vacation home during the four-year, 1,008-day sample period, and another
spending 197 days at his retreats during the same period.
Table 1 presents additional descriptive detail about CEOs’ vacation trips. Generally these
days out of the office follow unsurprising patterns, with Fridays and Mondays represented more
than midweek days and a high concentration of absences from the office during July, August, and
the winter holiday season. The frequency of CEO absences was higher in 2010 than 2007-09,

4

An interesting recent case involves Houston company Nabors Industries Ltd. and its CEO Eugene Isenberg,
who owns homes in Palm Beach and Martha’s Vineyard, locations frequently visited by the company’s aircraft. The
CEO’s employment contract entitles him to establish offices at any of his personal residences and to perform his work
duties from those locations. In November 2011 the SEC opened an investigation because the company had disclosed zero
expense for the CEO’s personal use of company aircraft, apparently under a rationale that the CEOs’ trips to these
locations were always for business purposes. McGinty and Maremont (2011).

11

perhaps because improved conditions in the national economy permitted CEOs to spend more
time away from the office. In all, I identify a total of 1,150 distinct CEO vacation trips,
uninterrupted by days back at headquarters, with lengths varying between one and 28 continuous
work days. More than half of all CEO trips are just one or two days in length, but approximately
50% of all vacation days occur in trips at least one week (five working days) long, and I focus
much of the analysis below on this subsample.
Table 2 presents a panel probit model of CEOs’ decisions about when to spend days at
their vacation homes. The binary dependent variable equals one if the CEO is at the vacation
home on a weekday that the stock market is open. Explanatory variables include personal
characteristics of each CEO, including age, percent ownership, and the log of total compensation
(the TDC1 quantity reported by ExecuComp); net-of-market stock performance over the prior six
months; variables about the weather at the vacation site and at headquarters; and indicator
variables for each calendar month.5 I also include indicator variables for work days immediately
preceding and immediately following public holidays. Each CEO is allocated a unique intercept
term and standard errors are robust to serial correlation and heteroskedasticity. About 4 percent
of the company-day observations drop out of regressions due to missing values for days that
weather stations are off-line and do not report any data.
Estimates in Table 2 reveal a number of interesting patterns. CEO ownership and

5

Daily weather data is available from the Internet portal of National Climatic Data Center of the U.S. National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). I download the high temperature and depth of precipitation at the
airport weather station closest to the CEO’s vacation home for each day in the sample (most of these weather stations are
at the commuter airports used by their aircraft), and I obtain the same information for the headquarters airport of each
company. A small number of CEOs maintain pairs of leisure homes and visit them seasonally – for instance, Palm Beach
in the winter and Martha’s Vineyard in the summer. In these cases I use weather data for the winter location between
October 1 and March 31, and the summer destination from April 1 through September 30 of each year.

12

compensation both enter the model negatively with strong levels of significance, suggesting an
incentive effect of CEOs spending less time away from the office when they have more personal
wealth tied to performance. Older CEOs appear to take more vacation days than younger ones,
an effect that may be somewhat endogenous, since more senior CEOs would not have survived in
the job unless their firms were well managed. One variable that does not seem to matter is recent
company performance: the company’s net-of-market stock returns over the prior six months do
not have a significant coefficient estimate. This conclusion does not change for alternative
windows of past performance or if the variable is decomposed into separate company and market
returns. CEOs are significantly more likely to take vacation days in proximity to public holidays
when the stock market is closed.
Weather conditions at both the CEO’s vacation home and at headquarters appear to be an
important factor in choosing vacation days. Estimates in the second and third columns show that
CEOs are less likely to spend a day at their vacation homes when the weather at the vacation site
is rainy or cold, with opposite effects attributable to the weather at headquarters. Squared terms
on the two temperature variables both have significant estimates with signs opposite linear terms,
indicating that temperature-driven vacation patterns taper off and then reverse when heat or cold
becomes extreme. The estimates on the linear and squared temperature terms in the second
column indicate that CEOs are most likely to visit their vacation homes when the high daily
temperature there is about 83N F. In the third column, I test whether these effects vary for
vacation homes near ski resorts in Colorado, Wyoming, Utah and Idaho. I interact the weather
variables with an indicator that equals 1 for vacation homes in these locations between the
months of October and March. All the weather patterns are reversed for ski locations: CEOs
13

with ski lodges are more likely to take vacation days when it is snowing and when the
temperature is colder (the estimates imply a local minimum of the likelihood function at 45N F but
no local maximum; the function simply increases in value as the weather gets colder). When the
ski variable equals zero, the estimates in the third column imply that the optimal temperature for
a vacation day at a warm-weather location is 75N F.

IV.

Analysis
In the sections below I analyze the impact of CEO absences from the office upon the daily

performance of a company’s stock. Section A has three subsections that document empirical
relations between CEO absences and abnormal stock price behavior, changes in volatility, and
patterns of corporate news announcements, respectively. Section B presents a range of tests
useful for assessing the direction of causality between vacation trips and news announcements.
These results appear in three subsections that examine news releases following vacation trips that
are unexpectedly cut short, a bivariate probit model that jointly estimates the occurrence of news
announcements and vacation trips, and analysis of firms’ compliance with mandatory Form 8-K
disclosure deadlines that are triggered when news occurs during CEO vacation trips. Section C
discusses implications of the results for investors.

A.

Empirical Relations
i.

Abnormal stock returns

I investigate whether stock prices exhibit abnormal behavior around the days that the
CEO is out of the office. Table 3 presents an analysis of abnormal stock returns in a standard
14

four-factor Fama-French model, with indicator variables added to identify the days around CEO
vacation trips. Standard errors are clustered at the company level. In column two, the estimate
for an indicator for all CEO vacation days shows that stock returns are generally not different
than normal on days that the CEO is absent from headquarters.
To increase the power of my statistical tests, I focus on long CEO vacations, which I
define as those lasting five or more consecutive work days. If a CEO flies back to headquarters
for one day and then returns to his vacation home, I count the one day as an “interruption” of a
trip, with the additional spell of days treated as a continuation of the first trip. In all I identify
217 distinct long vacations by the 66 CEOs in the sample, which include 1,806 total work days
away from the office, plus 36 interruption days, along with an uncounted number of weekend and
holiday days. I do not include trips lasting four work days plus a weekday that is a stock market
holiday, and I include interrupted trips only when there is a continuous stay of at least five days
on either or both sides of the interruption. In the third column of Table 3, the vacation indicator
is decomposed into pieces representing days of short and long trips, defined as those five or more
working days in length. Again, the estimates for these variables seem uninteresting.
The most significant abnormal return estimates appear in columns four and five of Table
3, when the model includes indicators for the three-day periods immediately before and after the
CEO leaves for a long trip of five or more work days. As shown in the table, abnormal stock
returns are about 17 basis points higher than usual for each of the three days just before the CEO
leaves the office, and about 20 basis points higher than usual for each of the three days after he
returns. The latter window includes the CEO’s second, third, and fourth days back in the office,
during which the stock market would react to news disclosed at the close of the first three work
15

days following the trip. Given the three-day length of these periods, the estimates correspond to
appreciations in the company’s stock of about 0.51% and 0.59%, respectively, significant at the
5% and 1% levels, respectively. These patterns seem surprising, especially when the CEO
returns to headquarters, since investors should be able to anticipate the pattern of returns and
price them into stock prices in advance. This could be done by observing individual aircraft trips
or becoming aware of those companies whose CEOs follow a regular vacation schedule every
year (the short time series for this study – four years – precludes any robust identification of
CEOs who have predictable schedules).
These estimates imply that companies release good news just before the CEO leaves for a
long trip, disclose very little while he is gone, and finally announce more good news on his
return. This interpretation is reinforced by the analyses of news releases and stock price volatility
that appear below. Bad news announcements do not seem to occur in proximity to CEOs’ longer
trips away from the office. Since many CEOs begin or end vacations in the first month of the
year, these data may have a plausible connection to the well-known “January effect” of stocks
performing unusually well in the first weeks of a new year.
These findings are broadly consistent with recent papers by Tsiakas (2006, 2010), who
studies abnormal stock returns around market holidays, which occur nine times each year during
my sample period. Tsiakas finds positive expected returns both before and after mid-week
holidays. For market holidays on Mondays or Fridays that represent part of a three-day weekend,
abnormal returns are positive in advance of the long weekend, as found in my sample, but
negative on the first day back to work. Inspection of my data shows that close to half of the
lengthy CEO vacation trips are coordinated with holidays. Of the 217 individual trips in the
16

sample, 31 begin at the start of a three-day holiday weekend or immediately prior to a mid-week
holiday, and 35 trips end just after a holiday weekend or mid-week holiday. Many other trips
include stock market holidays in the middle, so that a total of 107 out of 217 vacations coincide
in some way with the holiday calendar.

ii.

Volatility

Table 4 presents data about stock volatility when CEOs are at work, and when they are
out of the office at their vacation homes. I calculate intra-day realized volatilities for the 65
companies in the sample, based on the standard deviation of stock returns calculated at fiveminute intervals using the method introduced by Andersen and Bollerslev (1997). At the top of
Table 4, the data indicate significant drops in stock volatility when the CEO is at his vacation
home: on these days, realized volatility is 0.307, compared to 0.330 on all other days. In other
words, volatility falls by about 10% when the CEO is out of the office, and the difference in the
mean volatilities for these subgroups is significant below the 1% level.
The difference becomes even more dramatic when the CEO leaves for a long trip instead
of a short one. Realized volatility during long CEO vacations, 0.287, is about 13% below workday volatility. During short CEO trips of less than five days volatility also drops slightly below
normal, to 0.328, though this is not significantly less than the volatility on a work day. The
volatility drop for long trips is more substantial, to 0.270, when the period away includes a public
holiday.
Changes in stock volatility around CEO vacations are economically large, similar to
results in other studies that have examined important corporate events. Patell and Wolfson
17

(1979, 1981) and a number of successor papers show significant increases in stock volatility on
dates of earnings announcements, followed by immediate decreases the next day. While these
studies concern changes in volatility around short news announcement windows, other papers
have found sustained volatility changes after important events. For example, Ohlson and
Penman (1985) find that volatility rises by approximately 30% following stock splits. Clayton,
Hartzell and Rosenberg (2005) find that volatility increases by approximately 23% in the year
following forced turnover of a CEO. That paper cites about 15 other studies than have found
significant volatility changes after corporate events such as tender offers and dividend
announcements.
Further detail in Table 4 show volatilities during periods around the start and end of long
CEO trips. The data show that volatility gradually trends down in the three days before the CEO
leaves, dropping more on his first day of trip, before bottoming out during the middle days of the
trip. On the final day of a long trip, volatility is higher than before, and it rises further during the
CEO’s first three days back in the office.
The strong volatility patterns associated with CEO absences from headquarters might be
endogenous, if CEOs cut short trips when the activity level at headquarters increases or are more
likely to leave when the office is quiet. In general, CEOs’ trips do not exhibit strong associations
with certain days of the week or holidays that might be affected by market-wide changes in
volatility. For instance, CEOs are most likely to be out of the office on Mondays and Fridays,
according to data in Table 1. However, these two days have the highest, rather than lowest,
market-wide volatility, an effect generally attributed to drops in liquidity that occur when traders
leave for three-day weekends, taking either Friday or Monday off. See Kiymaz and Berument
18

(2003). Tsiakas (2006) studies volatility around market holidays and finds an ambiguous pattern,
with lower market volatility prior to mid-week holidays, higher volatility after long weekend
holidays, and no significant effects in other cases.
My calculation of realized volatility on vacation days for all companies pooled together
may be biased if CEOs from quieter companies with lower volatilities are away from the office
more often than their counterparts from higher volatility companies, since CEOs in the first
group would account for more observations in the sample. To examine this possibility, Table 5
shows the comparison between volatilities when the CEO is in the office and when he is away on
a long trip, with the comparison statistics calculated separately for each of 49 companies (for the
other companies in the sample, the CEO never is away for five or more consecutive days). As
shown in Table 5, volatility is lower for the large majority of the 49 companies when the CEO is
away on a long trip.
Data in Table 5 seem to provide some support for the effort hypothesis discussed above..
More news may be announced by firms when the CEO is at headquarters simply because he is
directly involved in creating significant news events, by signing major contracts, meeting with
regulators, deciding upon new strategies and the like. If this is the case, we would expect those
firms whose CEOs take relatively little vacation time to respond most dramatically when the
CEO is away. This is generally consistent with a pattern in the table that shows the largest
volatility differentials occur for those firms whose CEOs take the fewest days off for long trips
during the 2007-10 sample period. In contrast, for companies whose CEOs spend large amounts
of time away, volatility seems to change little when they are absent, probably because they have
developed a management style relying heavily upon delegation to subordinates.
19

iii.

News announcements

The patterns of stock price volatility described above are consistent with companies
releasing news to the market just before the CEO leaves for a long trip, and CEO returning to the
office just before the next major announcement by the firm. I test this possibility directly using
daily news announcement data from the Thomson Reuters Significant Developments database,
which the vendor describes as “a unique news analysis and filtering service providing a concise
description of crucial, market-moving company news.” This source consolidates major news
affecting public companies from hundreds of worldwide sources and tabulates the date and time
that information first becomes public. The database covers topics such as dividend
announcements, mergers, earnings guidance, new product announcements, major contracts,
regulatory decisions, and the like. I tabulate a binary variable that takes the value of one if the
company makes a significant news announcement or an earnings announcement on each day in
the sample. For announcements that occur after the 4:00 p.m. close of the stock market or over a
weekend, I align them in the database with the next working day.
Studying news announcements in relation to CEO absences offers an advantage compared
to investigating realized volatility, stock returns, or other market outcomes. When CEOs leave
for vacation, many stock traders or analysts may also be out of the office, and volatility could
change market-wide. Focusing only on a company’s news disclosures allows the reader to
evaluate directly the flow of raw material from a firm to its investors. If the news flow changes
when a CEO is away, the result would help clarify the importance of the agency, distance, and
effort hypotheses without any reference to how or when investors choose to act on the
information they receive.
20

Data in the third column of Table 4 show a pattern of news releases similar to that
suggested by the analysis of realized volatilities discussed above and shown in the second
column. On days that CEOs are in the office, companies announce earnings or significant news
13.3% of the time, a frequency that drops by about one-third to 9.6% when CEOs are away from
the office. The effect is greater for longer trips, when the daily news announcement frequency
drops to 8.3%, compared to shorter trips, when it is 11.0%. Differences in all of these numbers
are statistically significant according to t-tests. The daily news announcement frequency tapers
downward from 11.1% on the day before a CEO leaves for a long trip, to 9.2% on the first day
away, then 8.2% on subsequent days in the middle of the trip, and finally 8.1% on the last day. It
then shoots up to 14.3% on a CEO’s first day back in the office. Longer trips that include public
holidays have daily news frequencies of 7.8%, below the frequency of 8.8% during longer trips
that do not include public holidays.
Table 4's results showing declines in the frequency of company news announcements may
seem surprising in the context of modern technology, since mobile phones, fax machines, and
other innovations should permit top managers to stay in close contact with headquarters. To
examine this conjecture, I study two subsamples of trips during which CEOs may face greater
communication difficulties: ski vacations and trips to Hawaii. I assume that trips to Western ski
resorts such as Aspen and Sun Valley, occurring between October and March, are associated with
skiing. On these trips, CEOs may spend much of the workday on a mountain with limited
cellphone coverage and no easy access to fax or video conference equipment. For Hawaii trips,
the large difference in time zones compared to the continental United States may create
difficulties in reaching the CEO and releasing timely news releases to the market. Data in Table
21

4 support the hypothesis that when the CEO has especially limited access to communications
technology, companies issue less news to investors. For ski trips, the daily frequency of material
news falls to 6.8%, much lower than the frequency of 9.6% for all vacation days, and for Hawaii
trips (which are associated with just two firms in the sample), news disclosures almost stop
completely, dropping to a daily frequency of 0.6%.
While the data indicate fewer company news announcements when CEOs leave the
office, the existence of a direct causal relationship at first seems ambiguous. CEOs may
deliberately schedule vacations when they expect business to be quiet, as suggested by the data
above indicating that nearly half of CEOs’ long trips occur either adjacent to or overlapping a
public holiday.
Attempting to understand the direction of causation between CEO vacations and news
represents an important aspect of this study. If CEO vacations affect company news
announcements, the results would imply an agency problem, with CEOs delaying news for
personal convenience, undermining price discovery in the market. Alternatively, if CEOs modify
vacation plans on account of news at headquarters, the results would suggest that CEOs make
compromises in their work schedules for the sake of investor transparency. Ideal experiments to
test these relations would involve suddenly forcing CEOs to take vacations and then observing
their firms’ disclosures, or randomly assigning material news to companies whose CEOs
happened to be out of the office. Neither of these strategies is possible to implement in real life.
Instead, I rely on two pieces of analysis to help identify the direction of causation, including (i) a
comparison of news released when the CEO flies back from vacation at an unusual time,
apparently for business reasons, with news released when the CEO flies back apparently due to
22

poor weather at the vacation site; and (ii) bivariate probit models that estimate jointly the
incidence of vacations and news releases, with the news and vacation variables modeled
endogenously as a function of instrumental variables.

B.

The direction of causation
The empirical results presented above might have very different implications depending

upon the direction of causation between CEO absences and company news announcements. If
companies delayed news announcements to accommodate CEOs’ vacation schedules, the pattern
would support an agency interpretation, but if CEOs scheduled their vacations during quiet news
periods, the results would be consistent with a value-maximizing practice of CEOs absenting
themselves from work at optimal times. To help identify the direction of causation, three types
of analysis appear below. Subsection (i) examines news releases that occur when CEO vacation
trips are cut short for business reasons and for weather reasons; the analysis compares the
consequences of random variations in weather patterns with the consequences of random
variations in business requirements. Subsection (ii) presents results from a bivariate probit
model that estimates jointly the probability of vacation days and significant news days, with
exogenous instrumental variables used to identify causation in each direction. Subsection (iii)
examines firms’ compliance with mandatory Form 8-K disclosure deadlines when news occurs
during CEO vacation trips. If compliance is impacted during CEO absences, the results would be
consistent with poor planning and an adverse tradeoff between CEO effort and disclosure.

i.

Vacation trips cut short by business and by weather
23

I create two subsamples of vacations that appear to end unexpectedly, one group
apparently for business reasons, and the other apparently for weather reasons. If the company’s
release of news to the market depends upon the presence of the CEO at headquarters, we should
observe similar frequencies of disclosure at the end of both subsamples of trips, although the
news announced by the first group of firms should be materially more important than the
disclosures by the second group.. The two subsamples attempt to emulate the ideal experiments
of exogenously terminating trips (which should resemble vacations halted for bad weather) and
exogenously delivering material information to a company (in the case of mid-week trip
interruptions), although this emulation almost surely involves some degree of measurement error
since some of the news disruptions and inclement weather events are likely foreseeable.
I identify business-related interruptions based upon the timing of flights back to
headquarters. Minute-by-minute flight data indicate that CEOs rarely fly from their vacation
homes back to headquarters on weekday mornings, except Mondays. Of the 1,150 individual
vacation trips in the sample, only 42, or 3.7%, involve a return flight that arrives at the
headquarters airport between 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. Tuesday through Friday (excluding two
cases where the flight occurs on a holiday). I assume that these trips are likely to occur because
of pressing business at headquarters that requires the executive to stop his vacation at an
inconvenient time. The comparison sample involves rain-shortened vacations. This subsample
includes 38 cases in which the CEO returns to headquarters on a Monday through Thursday, and
the next day is a workday with at least 10 mm. of precipitation at the vacation site. I assume that
these trips are more likely to occur due to an adverse weather forecast than because of news at
headquarters. Two events fall into both subsamples, so I delete them.
24

In each subsample, news announcements increase despite the evident differences in
motivations for the CEO’s trips back to headquarters. When the CEO flies back apparently for
business reasons, the company announces significant news that day 15.0% of the time, and on the
following day, 12.5% per the time. When the CEO flies back apparently for weather reasons, the
significant news disclosure frequencies are slightly higher, 15.7% on the day following the return
day and 13.1% the next day. These news frequencies are modestly above those shown in Table 4
for CEOs’ first two days back from long vacations, 14.3% and 11.0%, respectively, and are also
well above the 9.6% news frequency for CEO vacation days, though the differences are not
statistically significant due to the small sample sizes of 40 and 38 trips, respectively. These data
support an interpretation that news releases are tied to the CEO’s presence at the office, rather
than the converse. Although companies seem to announce more news simply because the CEO
is back at work, disclosures connected to the business-related trips appear to be more material in
the eyes of the market. The abnormal stock return over the first three days back is a significant
+0.45% for these 40 observations (t-statistic 1.70), similar to the sample average reported above
after the conclusions of CEOs’ longer vacations. Intra-day volatility exhibits a day-over-day
increase of 2.5 percentage points on the return day, increasing a further 1.4 percentage points the
next day. The two-day increase in volatility has a significant t-statistic of 2.18. In the weatherrelated subsample, by contrast, the three-day abnormal stock return is a negative and insignificant
-0.53% (t-statistic -1.32) and intra-day volatility rises by only 0.8 percentage points and then 0.2
percentage for the first two days, with the two-day change not significant (t-statistic = 0.65).
A comparison of the actual news announced by companies in these two subsamples
highlights differences in their importance, although the data must be interpreted with caution due
25

to the small sample sizes. Among the set of CEOs with business-related vacation interruptions,
eight announcements seem to have been especially noteworthy. Four of these disclosed
significant merger and acquisition activity by their firms, including two cases of tactical moves in
hostile takeover attempts, a successful completion of a tender offer, and government antitrust
approval received for a very large acquisition (Comcast’s merger with NBC-Universal). Another
material announcement involved a company reducing its quarterly earnings guidance to analysts,
and a further story announced a settlement with government authorities in a consumer safety
investigation. Two quarterly earnings announcements also occurred. The remaining stories
involved minor contract awards or joint venture announcements. In contrast, CEOs’ vacations
with weather-related disruptions were followed by news announcements of lower materiality,
with only three of them appearing to have notable importance. One company disclosed the
cancellation of an $800 million government defense contract, one quarterly earnings release
occurred, and in another case a company increased its earnings guidance. The remaining stories
involved mostly minor contract awards, joint venture announcements, acquisitions of small
private companies, two reiterations of earnings guidance, and a jury verdict against one firm for
$47 million that could not have been known at the time of the flight back to headquarters.

ii.

Bivariate probit analysis

To investigate whether CEO absences from the office have a causal effect upon
companies’ news releases or vice versa, one must estimate joint models of CEO vacation trips
and company news releases that treat either the vacation or news variable as endogenous.
Because the two dependent variables of interest, company news releases and CEO vacation days,
26

are binary (0, 1) variables, I cannot rely on standard simultaneous equations techniques such as
two-stage least squares, and I instead use the bivariate probit model. Greene (1998) introduces
the recursive bivariate probit as the most efficient estimator for a system of equations with binary
dependent variables, in which one of the binary outcome variables also enters the equation of the
counterpart variable as an explanatory on the right-hand side.6 It is not possible to model the
endogeneity in both directions in the same system by placing each outcome variable on the righthand side of the counterpart equation, because such a model lacks statistical coherence and
cannot be estimated.
Table 6, panel A, presents the bivariate probit estimates for the two-equation model of
CEO vacation trips and company news releases, with the vacation variable modeled as
endogenous using the six vacation site weather variables as instruments. As shown in Table 2,
the weather (temperature and rainfall) at a CEO’s vacation home has a strongly significant
impact on a CEO’s daily vacation decisions, and it seems implausible that the weather at a
distant leisure location should have any connection to news developments at company
headquarters.7 Maximum likelihood estimation of the two-equation model proved difficult given
the size of the dataset, and to achieve convergence I had to exclude the indicator variables for

6

Greene shows that the bivariate probit approach has a simple, appealing and counterintuitive property, because
it does not require the use of a fitted value of one variable in the model for the other as would be done in two-stage least
squares. In the bivariate probit, the investigator can simply put either dependent variable on the right-hand side of the
other equation, and the likelihood function for the joint model is structured in a way that accounts for the variable’s
underlying endogeneity. See Greene (1998, pp. 294-295). Recent applications in the finance literature include Naveen’s
(2006) bivariate probit model of CEO turnover in the presence of a endogenously designated “heir apparent” presumptive
successor, and Jiang, Li and Wang’s (2012) analysis of bankruptcy outcomes in the presence of endogenously determined
activism by hedge funds.
7

When the six vacation weather variables are included in a univariate probit model of company news releases,
the two precipitation variables have estimates near zero with an insignificant likelihood ratio χ(2) test statistic of 1.12 for
their joint significance. Some of the vacation site temperature variables do exhibit significant associations with news
announcements made back at headquarters, but I can rely on the precipitation variables to identify the model.

27

individual CEOs.
The model for news announcements includes, in addition to the endogenous CEO
vacation variable, weather variables for the headquarters city, indicator variables for days of the
week, indicators for individual months, and indicators for days immediately before or
immediately after public holidays. I also include the company’s difference in realized volatility
compared to the prior day, with this difference lagged one day. This variable is used below in the
estimation in Panel B before as an instrumental variable for significant news announcements.
The news variable follows the definition in Table 4 and equals one for those days on which the
company makes a quarterly earnings announcement or a significant news announcement,
according to the Thomson Reuters Significant Developments database.
Estimates in Table 6, panel A, show that, even after accounting for the endogeneity of
CEO vacation days, trips out of the office by the CEO appear to have a significantly negative
relation with companies’ daily decisions about whether to release news to investors. The
estimated correlation of the residuals of the two equations, shown by the ρ coefficient at the
bottom of the table, is strongly positive and significant at 0.5035, highlighting the need for the
endogeneity correction. Other estimates in Table 6 closely follow intuition: news releases are
more likely on Monday through Thursday as compared to Friday, while vacation days follow
exactly the opposite pattern. News is less likely to be released and CEOs are more likely to be
out of the office on work days that are adjacent to public holidays. Companies tend to announce
news the day after a significant increase in realized volatility.
I reverse this analysis in panel B of Table 6, modeling the news variable as endogenous in
order to investigate whether CEOs are more likely to be away from the office when significant
28

news announcements are not expected. The one-day lagged difference in realized volatility
serves as the instrumental variable for significant news announcements. While this variable
exhibits the statistical properties required of an instrument, because of the nonlinear nature of the
bivariate probit model no test exists for whether it meets the exclusion restriction.8 To justifying
using the lagged change in realized volatility as an instrument requires a persuasive argument
that the variable should be associated with expected news releases, which seems clear, but not
with CEOs’ decisions to leave for vacation, which is more uncertain. For the variable to be
credibly unassociated with CEO absences, one would conjecture that top managers take little
account of the intraday volatility of their share prices. In other words, if a company’s shares
closed unchanged in price from the prior day, the CEO would be indifferent to whether the stock
behaved quietly or exhibited large swings during trading hours.
The recursive bivariate probit estimates in panel B do not support the hypothesis that
CEO vacation trips occur endogenously based upon expectations of future news disclosures. The
indicator variable for significant news days has an insignificant estimate in the vacation equation,
even though the instrumental variable of the first difference in realized volatility has a strongly
significant estimate. Unlike the estimates in panel A, the model in panel B exhibits very low
estimated correlation of the residuals, 0.0180, implying that the endogeneity correction may not
be important. However, if the rationale for the instrumental variable presented above seems
unpersuasive, the inconclusive results in panel B could be interpreted as the byproduct of a weak
instrument.
8

As shown in the table, this variable has a significantly positive association with subsequent news releases.
Further investigation shows that it has close to zero correlation with the CEO vacation variable, and if it is included as a
regressor in the probit model of CEO vacation days, it has an estimate near zero with an insignificant p-value of 0.78. I
am grateful to Nancy Su and Dan Galai for discussions that led to my choice of this instrument.

29

As a robustness test of the interpretations from Table 6, I disaggregate the news
announcements in the database according to whether the company controlled the timing of the
disclosure, or whether the news was announced by an outside agent such as a competitor,
regulator, or court of law. In the latter case, the company should have had little or no ability to
anticipate the timing of the news, so that CEO absences should not be expected to exhibit
significant associations with the news variable.
I partition the news observations by reading the headlines and synopses of the significant
announcements used in the sample. The Thomson Reuters news database provides 7,722
individual items for my 65 companies during the sample period (this number does not include
quarterly earnings announcements, which are obtained from a separate database, and it is not
adjusted for the fact that companies sometimes make multiple announcements on the same day).
I classify 16% of the news announcements as having been generated by external sources. The
leading categories include government contract awards (522 items), regulatory decisions by
government agencies (432 items), court rulings and jury verdicts (142 items) and lawsuits filed or
threatened by competitors or plaintiffs’ attorneys (133 items). Other externally created news
items, much less numerous, include analyst rating changes, activism by major shareholders, and
developments related to hostile takeover attempts.
Table 7 presents recursive bivariate probit estimates of the incidence of CEO vacation
days and significant news announcements, with the news separated according to internal and
external origin. For brevity, I tabulate estimates only for the key news and vacation dependent
variables in each equation, but all regressions include the full range of explanatory variables used
in Table 6. In the left column, the news variable equals one only for days in which significant
30

news is generated internally by the firm itself, and I drop from the estimation all days with
externally generated news (including a minor number of overlap days during which news occurs
both internally and externally). In the right column, the news variable is defined in the opposite
way, as it is set equal to one only for days with externally generated news, and observations are
dropped for those days on which news is generated internally by the firm and also for overlap
days. Estimates for the internal news model on the left of Table 7 are similar to those for the
sample overall in Table 6; the vacation indicator variable has a negative and significant estimate
in the news equation, while the news variable has only an insignificant variable in the vacation
equation. In contrast, for the external news model on the right of Table 7, neither variable has a
statistically significant estimate. This pattern of estimates is consistent with an interpretation that
the timing of company news announcements are influenced by CEO absences, but only for news
that is generated by the company itself, and not for news that is generated by external actors such
as governments, courts, or competitors.

iii.

Compliance with mandatory disclosure deadlines

This section investigates companies’ compliance with Form 8-K filing requirements, to
see whether news occurring during CEO absences is released to investors with greater delay than
news which occurs when the CEO is in the office. In contrast to most countries that have a
“continuous disclosure” regulatory system, the United States permits companies some leeway in
releasing material news to the market. The SEC requires companies to file Form 8-K within four
business days of a “triggering event,” and the official instructions for this form enumerate 36
distinct categories of news for which this requirement applies (a few of these categories require
31

filing within two business days).
I use information from the S&P Filing Dates database, which provides both the event date
and filing date for Form 8-K disclosures. The database lists 2,784 filings by the 65 companies
during my sample period. When an Form 8-K filing refers to multiple corporate events, I treat
the event day as the most recent one covered by the document. If a Form 8-K is filed with the
SEC after the stock market closes at 4:00 p.m., I count it as having been filed on the next
business day. Of the set of 2,784 observations, 163 relate to company developments that occur
on the 3,504 days when CEOs are at their vacation homes, a frequency of 4.7%; the
corresponding frequency of material events on all other days is 5.5%. The drop in frequency of
significant corporate events on the CEO’s vacation days, about 15%, is much less than the 28%
drop in actual news disclosure frequencies implied by data at the top of the right column in
Table 4 (0.096 vs. 0.133). Most of the disclosures on Form 8-K filings occur for three reasons:
publication of financial statements, releases of quarterly earnings or other financial news, and the
departure of officers or members of the board of directors. These three categories comprise 65%
of the disclosures that are triggered by events while CEOs are at their vacation homes, and 66%
of the disclosures that are triggered on all other days. Among CEOs at their vacation homes and
in the office, the data exhibit slight differences among the three categories: quarterly earnings
announcements or other material financial news comprise 12% of the vacation sample and 17%
of the remaining sample, while departures of officers and directors comprise 15% of the vacation
sample and 11% of the remaining sample (p-values for these differences 0.01 and 0.04,
respectively).
Some basic data about the timeliness of Form 8-K filings indicates that CEO travel
32

schedules may impact companies’ disclosures. If material events occur when a CEO is at his
vacation home, Form 8-K is filed 44.2% of the time on the same day, but the frequency of sameday filing is higher at 50.4% if events occur when the CEO is not at his vacation home.
Similarly, the fraction of Form 8-K filings that miss the four-day deadline is 6.1% if the events
occur while the CEO is at the vacation home, vs. 2.6% at other times. Both of these differences
in means have borderline statistical significance with p-values of 0.12 and 0.07, respectively.9
Table 8 presents regression estimates that control for company and month fixed effects,
as well as various calendar-related variables such as whether news occurs just prior to a holiday
weekend. A Poisson maximum likelihood model shows that CEO vacation trips do not appear to
impact the timeliness of Form 8-K filings in a basic model, but if the vacation variable is
disaggregated based upon the length of a trip, significant patterns do emerge. If the CEO is on a
longer vacation lasting five days or more, the Form 8-K is filed significantly later (these models
omit the cases in which Form 8-K is filed after the four-day regulatory deadline). In contrast,
Form 8-K filings occur somewhat quicker than usual if the CEO is on a shorter vacation of 1 or 2
days length. A probit model estimates that the probability of a company missing the four-day
filing deadline is significantly greater if events occur when the CEO is on vacation.
Disaggregation of the vacation variable by trip length indicates a positive effect at for all
estimates, though the effect is somewhat smaller and not statistically significant if the news
occurs when the CEO is on a longer trip of at least five work days. Collectively these estimates

9

The fraction of late filings is especially high when financial results are released to investors when CEOs are at
their vacation homes: in 4 out of these 36 cases, or 11%, a company announces earnings news to the market but then files
the required Form 8-K one week (five business days) or more later. Given that the triggering events for these filings
occur due to public announcements already made, the late Forms 8-K in this category probably have little impact on
investors. The frequency with which other items occurring during CEO vacations lead to late Form 8-K filings are
generally quite close to the overall rate of 6% exhibited for triggering events during the subsample of vacation days.

33

are consistent with a conclusion that CEO vacations tend to lengthen the time taken by
companies to release material news to the public.

C.

Implications for investors
The analysis above suggests two broad implications for a company’s shareholders. First,

firms’ disclosures of news appear to depend significantly upon CEOs’ personal travel schedules.
When CEOs are away on vacation trips, less news is disclosed and certain regulatory filings are
delayed. It is possible that these patterns apply to work-related as well as leisure-related
absences, but the paper lacks an identification strategy for differentiating these types of trips. As
noted in the literature review section above, companies may expose their investors to adverse
financial consequences when the quality of disclosure deteriorates. Firms may face higher costs
of capital, less liquidity for their shares, heightened ligitation risk, and ultimately, lower
valuation of their securities.
In addition, the analysis suggest the presence of systematic profit opportunities related to
CEOs’ easily observable travel schedules, since stock prices appear to follow predictable patterns
when CEOs leave for vacation and later return. The data collection for this paper suggests that
traders could obtain information about CEO trips in real time simply monitoring Internet air
traffic websites. By taking a long position in a company’s stock for several days after a CEO
returns from a trip, an investor could outgain the market indexes by 0.20% per day, an annualized
“alpha” of about 64% per year. Along with the large daily abnormal returns, investors could
speculate on the systematic changes in volatility that appear to occur when a CEO is away on a
lengthy trip. To profit from this pattern, a trader would want to sell short derivative securities
34

with a high price sensitivity to volatility, or vega, when the CEO’s aircraft flies form
headquarters to the CEO’s vacation home, and then do the opposite when the CEO flies back.
With an appropriate portfolio, these strategies could be implemented on a delta-neutral basis,
with no sensitivity to the underlying stock price. The tools for these strategies, such as
“straddles” and “strangles” involving put and call options, are widely taught to MBA finance
students and are easily implemented by traders on the exchanges. See Chaput and Ederington
(2005).
Given the ease of observing a CEOs’ travel, the existence of these patterns of abnormal
returns and volatility seems surprising. The results imply that shareholders do not make the
small investments needed to acquire detail about managers’ travels or do not recognize the value
of the information. One obstacle could undermine investors’ ability to track CEO aircraft
movements: companies have a right to prevent their aircraft tail numbers from appearing on
public Internet sites. Congress passed legislation creating the Block Aircraft Registration
Request (BARR) program in 2000 allowing companies to opt out of live tracking sites for
security reasons, in order to frustrate potential terrorists or kidnappers. Currently the scope of the
BARR program is under reconsideration by the FAA, Congress, and the Obama administration.10
However, even if tail numbers were blocked from public Internet sites, they can be matched with
company operators either in the FAA’s online registry or by making Freedom of Information Act

10

Between 2000 and 2009, the FAA allowed any private aircraft operator to opt out of public tracking
databases for an expanded list of reasons including privacy and competitive secrecy, but this policy was reversed in 2009
after the agency was sued by a variety of media outlets seeking complete lists of tail numbers under the Freedom of
Information Act. The FAA elected to begin disclosing the identities of operators of aircraft with blocked tail numbers
(though not their flight records) in response to such requests in 2009, and a 2010 decision by a federal court rejected a
challenge by a business group to the FAA’s policy. See Grabell (2010). In August 2011 the FAA greatly reduced its
blocking of tail numbers but then reinstated the practice in December 2011, though not retroactively for aircraft that had
already been unblocked. See Federal Register vol. 76, no. 242, p. 78328 (December 16, 2011).

35

requests to the agency. Due to their large size, aircraft can also be observed physically taking off
and landing at airports by scouts stationed as “tailspotters,” a role played memorably by actor
Charlie Sheen in the 1987 feature film Wall Street.

V.

Conclusions
This paper studies patterns of corporate news disclosures associated with CEOs’ personal

travel schedules. By merging records of corporate aircraft flights with information about the
location of CEOs’ vacation residences, I identify days when CEOs are likely to have been away
from their offices. I find regularities in stock price behavior consistent CEOs going away right
after important news disclosures, and then returning just before subsequent announcements. The
CEO’s first days back in the office often feature abnormally positive news. When the CEO takes
a long vacation trip lasting five work days or more, company stock volatility declines by
approximately 13% for the period he is away. Volatility increases to normal levels in a pattern
that begins one day before the CEO returns. Observing the movements of corporate aircraft to
and from the CEO’s vacation airport could therefore give investors valuable signals about
impending disclosures by companies. CEO absences also appear to affect regulatory compliance,
as mandatory Form 8-K disclosures of material company news are more likely to occur late if
news occurs while CEOs away at their vacation homes.
The results suggest that corporations release news on a schedule determined not only by
when information may be important for investors, but also by the constraints of the CEO’s
personal schedule. However, a variety of tests above support additional hypotheses, suggesting
that delays in news announcements also occur simply due to the difficulty of involving a CEO in
36

decisions when he is a great distance from headquarters, and also because the CEO directly
produces much of a firm’s material news, and such events will inevitably occur less often if the
CEO takes time off for vacation.

37

References
Ahern, Kenneth, and Denis Sosyura, forthcoming, “Who writes the news? Corporate press
releases during merger negotiations,” Journal of Finance __, ___-___.
Andersen, Torben G., and Tim Bollerslev, 1997, “Heterogeneous information arrivals and return
volatility dynamics: Uncovering the long-run in high frequency returns,” Journal of Finance 52,
975-1005.
Bandiera, Oriana, Luigi Guiso, Andrea Prat, and Rafaella Sandun, 2011, “What do CEOs do?”
Harvard Business School working paper 11-081.
Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Pérez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2012, “Estimating the
value of the boss: Evidence from CEO hospitalization events,” unpublished manuscript, available
at gsb.columbia.edu/whoswho/getpub.cfm?pub=5556.
Bushee, Brian J., Joseph Gerakos, and Lian Fen Lee, 2013, “Corporate jets and private meetings
with investors,” unpublished manuscript, available at ssrn.com/abstract=2141878.
Bushee, Brian J., and Christopher F. Noe, 2000, “Corporate disclosure practices, institutional
investors, and stock return volatility,” Journal of Accounting Research 38, 171-202.
Chaput, J. Scott, and Louis H. Ederington, 2005, “Volatility trade design,” Journal of Futures
Markets 25, 243-279.
Clayton, Matthew C., Jay C. Hartzell, and Joshua Rosenberg, 2005, “The impact of CEO
turnover on equity volatility,” Journal of Business 78, 1779-1808.
Damodaran, Aswath, 1989, “The weekend effect in information releases: A study of earnings and
dividend announcements,” Review of Financial Studies 2, 607-623.
Dye, Ronald A., 2010, “Disclosure ‘bunching;” Journal of Accounting Research 48, 489-530.
French, Kenneth R., and Richard Roll, 1986, “Stock return variances: The arrival of information
and the reaction of traders,” Journal of Financial Economics 17, 5-26.
Grabell, Michael, 2010, “Court upholds release of corporate jets list sought by ProPublica,”
February 26, available at
propublica.org/article/court-upholds-release-of-corporate-jets-list-sought-by-propublica-0226.
Greene, William H., 1998, “Gender economics courses in liberal arts colleges: Further results,”
Journal of Economic Education 29, 291-300.

38

Healy, Paul M., Amy P. Hutton, and Krishna Palepu, 1999, “Stock performance and
intermediation changes surrounding sustained increases in disclosure,” Contemporary
Accounting Research 16, 485-520.
Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Wei Wang, 2012, “Hedge funds and Chapter 11,” Journal of Finance 67,
513-559.
Kiymaz, Halil, and Hakan Berument, 2003, “The day of the week effect on stock market
volatility and volume: International evidence,” Review of Financial Economics 12, 363-380.
Koudijs, Peter, 2013, “The boats that did not sail: News, trading and asset price volatility in a
natural experiment,” unpublished manuscript, available at nber.org/papers/w18831.
Lee, Lian Fen, Michelle Lowry, and Susan Shu, 2013, Investing in connections: Corporate jets
and firm value,” unpublished manuscript, available at ssrn.com/abstract=2259560.
Leuz, Christian, and Peter Wysocki, 2008, “Economic consequences of financial reporting and
disclosure regulation: A review and suggestions for future research,” unpublished manuscript,
available at ssrn.com/abstract=1105398.
Liu, Crocker, and David Yermack, 2012, “Where are the shareholders’ mansions? CEOs’ home
purchases, stock sales, and subsequent company performance” in Sabri Boubaker, Bang Dang
Nguyen and Duc Khuong Nguyen eds., Corporate Governance: Recent Developments and New
Trends (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag).
Maremont, Mark, and Tom McGinty, 2011, “For the highest flyers, new scrutiny,” The Wall
Street Journal, May 21, A1.
McGinty, Tom, and Mark Maremont, 2011, “Nabors draws SEC scrutiny,” The Wall Street
Journal, November 11.
Naveen, Lalitha, 2006, “Organizational complexity and succession planning,” Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 41, 661-683.
Ohlson, James A., and Stephen H. Penman, 1985, “Volatility increases subsequent to stock
splits: An empirical aberration,” Journal of Financial Economics 14, 251-266.
Patell, James M., and Mark A. Wolfson, 1979, “Anticipated information releases reflected in call
option prices,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 1, 117-140.
Patell, James M., and Mark A. Wolfson, 1981, “The ex ante and ex post price effects of quarterly
earnings announcements reflected in option and stock prices,” Journal of Accounting Research
19, 434-458.
39

Patell, James M., and Mark A. Wolfson, 1982, “Good news, bad news, and the intraday timing of
corporate disclosures,” Accounting Review 57, 509-527.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Julie Wulf, 2006, “Are perks purely managerial excess?” Journal of
Financial Economics 79, 1-33.
Sengupta, Partha, 1998, “Corporate disclosure quality and the cost of debt,” Accounting Review
73, 459-474.
Skinner, Douglas J., 1997, “Earnings disclosures and stockholder lawsuits,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics 23, 249-282.
Tsikas, Ilias, 2006, “Periodic stochastic volatility and fat tails,” Journal of Financial
Econometrics 4, 90-135.
Tsikas, Ilias, 2010, “The economic gains of trading stocks around holidays,” Journal of Financial
Research 33, 1-26.
Welker, Michael, 1995, “Disclosure policy, information asymmetry, and liquidity in equity
markets,” Contemporary Accounting Research 11, 801-827.
Yermack, David, 2006, “Flights of fancy: Corporate jets, CEO perquisites, and inferior
shareholder returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 80, 211-242.

40

Company stock return - market index return

8%

At vacation home

7%

At headquarters

6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
-1%

Jan 27

Jan 26

Jan 25

Jan 22

Jan 21

Jan 20

Jan 19

Jan 15

Jan 14

Jan 13

Jan 12

Jan 11

Jan 8

Jan 7

Jan 6

Jan 5

-2%

Figure 1
Boeing Co. daily stock returns, January 2010
The figure shows daily returns for the stock of Boeing Co. minus returns for the CRSP valueweighted market index for an interval of days during January 2010. On January 7 the company
announced that its commercial airliner deliveries had increased 28% for the prior year and also
issued an earnings forecast for the year ahead. On January 27 the company announced betterthan-expected earnings results for the 4th quarter of 2009. Little news of significance was
announced between those two dates, a period when the company’s CEO appears to have been
away from headquarters at his vacation home. Flight records for Boeing’s Executive Flight
Operations unit show that its Bombardier CL-600 corporate jet flew from its headquarters airport
near Chicago to Washington, DC on the night of January 7, then from Washington to Palm
Beach, FL, at mid-day January 8, returning to headquarters later than afternoon. On January 24,
the same aircraft flew from Chicago to Palm Beach and then back to the headquarters airport.
Boeing’s Chairman and CEO, W. James McNerney Jr., owns a vacation home in Hobe Sound,
FL, 34 miles from the Palm Beach airport, according to real estate records. Flight records are
obtained from The Wall Street Journal Jet Tracker database.

41

Table 1
Sample of CEOs’ trips to their vacation homes
The table presents descriptive statistics about 66 CEOs’ travel to their vacation homes. The
timing of trips is based upon flight records of corporate aircraft obtained from The Wall Street
Journal Jet Tracker database for the years 2007-2010. To appear in the sample, an executive
must be listed as CEO of an S&P500 firm by ExecuComp during this period, and he must own a
vacation property near a destination visited regularly by his company’s aircraft. Property
ownership is determined from real estate records available on Lexis-Nexis. Data for vacation
lengths are based upon weekdays when the U.S. stock market is open for trading and do not
include weekends or holidays. A travel day counts as part of a vacation trip if the aircraft takes
off from headquarters earlier than 4:00 p.m., or if the return flight lands at the headquarters
airport at 12:00 noon or later.
CEOs in sample
Age (years), mean
Ownership, mean
Total compensation (TDC1, millions), mean

66
58.0
1.83%
$12.6

Company-day observations (total)
Company-day observations (at vacation home)
Fraction of days spent by CEO at vacation home

51,426
3,504
6.8%

Fraction of days spent by CEO at vacation home, by year
2007
2008
2009
2010

6.9%
5.6%
6.9%
8.0%

Fraction of days spent by CEO at vacation home, by day of week
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday

7.5%
6.0%
6.0%
6.3%
8.3%

42

Table 1
continued
Fraction of days spent by CEO at vacation home, by month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

6.7%
7.3%
9.0%
4.9%
3.9%
4.7%
9.9%
9.8%
4.8%
4.3%
6.5%
9.9%

Location of CEOs’ vacation homes, by state
Florida
Colorado
Massachusetts
South Carolina, New Jersey
Alabama, California, Hawaii, New York, Wyoming
Arizona, Idaho, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Texas, Utah
Length of trips to vacation home
(work days only)
1 day
2 days
3 days
4 days
5 or more days

43

34
10
9
3 each
2 each
1 each

Fraction of trips

Fraction of total days

37%
23%
12%
8%
19%

12%
15%
12%
11%
50%

Table 2
Factors associated with CEO vacation days
The table presents probit regression models with the dependent variable equal to one if the CEO spends a
day at his vacation home. The sample includes data for 66 CEOs of S&P500 companies between 2007
and 2010, with observations included for all weekdays in which the CEO holds his position and the stock
market is open. The vacation day indicator equals one for days on which the CEO is out of the office at
his vacation home, as determined from a database of corporate aircraft flight records maintained by the
Federal Aviation Administration. Data about CEO characteristics is obtained from the ExecuComp
database. Total compensation is the TDC1 quantity reported by ExecuComp. Weather data at the
location of the CEO’s vacation home is obtained from the National Climatic Data Center website. The
Ski House indicator variable equals 1 during the October-March period for CEOs who own vacation
homes in Colorado, Wyoming, and Idaho. Standard errors robust to serial correlation and
heteroskedasticity appear in parentheses below each coefficient estimate.

44

Variable

Estimate

Estimate

Estimate

Stock return - market return (prior six months)

0.0692
(0.0477)

0.0712
(0.0477)

0.0716
(0.0483)

CEO age (years)

0.0307 a
(0.0089)

0.0342 a
(0.0088)

0.0369 a
(0.0088)

CEO ownership

-12.7942 a
(1.9648)

-12.5882 a
(1.9600)

-12.4752 a
(1.9762)

-0.1730 a
(0.0221)

-0.1751 a
(0.0224)

-0.1753 a
(0.0227)

High daily temperature at headquarters (celsius)

-0.0165 a
(0.0030)

-0.0170 a
(0.0030)

High daily temperature at headquarters squared

0.0005 a
(0.0001)

0.0005 a
(0.0001)

Daily precipitation at headquarters (millimeters)

-0.0001
(0.0012)

-0.0001
(0.0012)

High daily temperature at CEO vacation home (celsius)

0.0361 a
(0.0047)

0.0679 a
(0.0044)

High daily temperature at CEO vacation home squared

-0.0006 a
(0.0001)

-0.0014 a
(0.0001)

Daily precipitation at CEO vacation home (millimeters)

-0.0038 a
(0.0011)

-0.0043 a
(0.0012)

Log of CEO total compensation

High daily temperature at CEO vacation home (celsius)
x Ski House indicator variable

-0.1066 a
(0.0083)

High daily temperature squared
x Ski House indicator variable

0.0041 a
(0.0004)

Daily precipitation at CEO vacation home (millimeters)
x Ski House indicator variable

0.0313 a
(0.0073)

Day prior to holiday (indicator)

0.6000 a
(0.0801)

0.6266 a
(0.0820)

0.6094 a
(0.0814)

Day following holiday (indicator)

0.7369 a
(0.0743)

0.7681 a
(0.0766)

0.7389 a
(0.0757)

47,211
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1414

47,211
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1484

47,211
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1564

Observations
Day of week fixed effects
Calendar month fixed effects
CEO fixed effects
Pseudo R2
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.

45

Table 3
Abnormal stock returns
The table presents Fama-French four-factor models of company stock returns estimated by
ordinary least squares. The dependent variable equals the daily stock returns for a sample of 65
companies between 2007 and 2010. The four factors are the return on the market portfolio minus
the risk-free rate (MktRF), the difference in returns for portfolios of growth vs. value stocks
(HML), the difference in returns for portfolios of small vs. large stocks (SMB), and the difference
in returns for portfolios of rising minus falling stocks (UMD). All returns are compounded
continuously. The vacation day indicator equals one for days on which the CEO is out of the
office at his vacation home, as determined from a database of corporate aircraft flight records
maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration. Long vacations are those of five work days
or longer. The indicator for days prior to long vacation equals 1 for each of the three days
preceding a long vacation. The indicator for days following long vacation equals 1 for the
second, third, and fourth days after a long vacation ends. Standard errors clustered by company
appear in parentheses below each coefficient estimate.

46

Variable

Estimate

Estimate

Estimate

Estimate

Estimate

Intercept

0.00004
(0.00006)

0.00004
(0.00006)

0.00004
(0.00006)

0.00001
(0.00006)

0.00002
(0.00006)

MktRF

1.0294 a
(0.0464)

1.0294 a
(0.0464)

1.0294 a
(0.0464)

1.0294 a
(0.0465)

1.0295 a
(0.0465)

HML

0.0196
(0.0775)

0.0196
(0.0775)

0.0196
(0.0775)

0.0195
(0.0775)

0.0196
(0.0775)

SMB

-0.0447
(0.0540)

-0.0448
(0.0540)

-0.0447
(0.0540)

-0.0450
(0.0541)

-0.0450
(0.0540)

UMD

-0.0748 b
(0.0366)

-0.0748 b
(0.0366)

-0.0748 b
(0.0366)

-0.0745 b
(0.0366)

-0.0746 b
(0.0366)

-0.0002
(0.0003)

Vacation day indicator

Short vacation indicator

0.0001
(0.0004)

0.0001
(0.0004)

Long vacation indicator

-0.0004
(0.0004)

-0.0004
(0.0004)

Days prior to long vacation

0.0017 b
(0.0008)

0.0017 b
(0.0008)

Days following long vacation

0.0020 a
(0.0007)

0.0020
(0.0007)

51,426
0.4358

51,426
0.4358

Observations
R2

51,426
0.4357

51,426
0.4357

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.

47

51,426
0.4357

Table 4
Stock volatility and frequency of news announcements for subsamples of trading days
The table shows realized stock volatility and frequencies of significant news announcements for
subsamples of trading days for 65 large companies between 2007 and 2010. CEO vacation
schedules are inferred from corporate aircraft flight records maintained by the Federal Aviation
Administration. Volatilities are calculated as the standard deviations of continuously
compounded daily stock returns, annualized by multiplying by the square root of 252, the number
of trading days in a typical year. Dates of news announcements and earnings releases are
obtained from the Thomson Reuters Significant Developments database. A long vacation is one
lasting five or more work days. A ski trip is one occurring between October and March at a
Western ski resort destination. All of the estimated long vacation day volatilities are different
from the volatility on the CEOs’ days in the office at very low significance levels according to Ftests. Similarly, all of the vacation day news frequencies are significantly different from the
office day news frequency at very low levels according to t-tests.

Subsample

Daily
obs.

Annualized
intra-day
volatility

CEO days in office
CEO days at vacation home

47,922
3,504

0.330
0.307

0.133
0.096

CEO days at vacation home
short trips
long trips
long trips including holidays
long trips with no holidays
ski trips
Hawaii trips

1,698
1,806
902
904
752
176

0.328
0.287
0.270
0.304
0.333
0.310

0.110
0.083
0.078
0.088
0.069
0.006

Three days before long vacations
Two days before long vacations
Last days before long vacations
First days of long vacations
Middle days
Last days of long vacations
First days back after long vacations
Second days back after long vacations
Third days back after long vacations

206
217
217
217
1,379
210
210
209
201

0.302
0.309
0.301
0.286
0.287
0.283
0.283
0.292
0.304

48

Change in
intra-day
volatility

+0.002
+0.006
- 0.008
-0.015
- 0.002
+0.003
+0.000
+0.008
+0.013

Significant news
or earnings
frequency

0.102
0.101
0.111
0.092
0.082
0.081
0.143
0.110
0.109

Table 5
Stock volatilities for individual companies
The table shows average intra-day stock volatilities for 48 companies on days that the CEOs are on long vacation tripss and days that the CEOs
are in the office. A long vacation is defined as a trip to the CEO’s vacation home for at least five consecutive working days. Office days are all
days excluding both long and short trips to the vacation home. Trips are inferred from flight records of corporate aircraft maintained by the
Federal Aviation Administration. The sample period includes all trading days between 2007 and 2010 for which the individual manager served in
the CEO position. Eighteen additional firms are in the sample, but their CEOs do not take any long vacation trips during the sample period. The
right column shows the ratio for each company between the average volatilities on office days and long vacation days. Intra-day volatilities are
calculated using stock price data based on five-minute trading intervals.
Days

General Dynamics
Unum Group
Bank of America
Johnson & Johnson
Leucadia National
Yum Brands
Marathon Oil
Abbott Laboratories
ConocoPhillips
Verizon
General Electric
Tesoro
Computer Sciences
W.W. Grainger
ConAgra Foods
Novellus Systems
International Paper
EMC
Pfizer
CVS Caremark
Comcast
AK Steel
Boeing
Wyndham Worldwide

Volatility

Days

Office

Vacation

Office

Vacation

Ratio

577
969
748
979
754
967
978
990
992
939
966
962
115
305
948
836
911
756
942
853
811
966
954
975

5
28
6
12
103
10
12
5
6
33
15
27
7
24
54
146
47
103
6
76
98
10
37
10

0.281
0.399
0.509
0.166
0.382
0.275
0.355
0.219
0.289
0.246
0.315
0.494
0.160
0.216
0.215
0.373
0.407
0.338
0.246
0.282
0.331
0.603
0.277
0.488

0.132
0.214
0.309
0.108
0.253
0.182
0.235
0.147
0.200
0.171
0.243
0.388
0.126
0.174
0.176
0.306
0.347
0.288
0.210
0.243
0.285
0.521
0.241
0.427

0.468
0.536
0.608
0.648
0.661
0.662
0.664
0.673
0.691
0.693
0.772
0.786
0.788
0.805
0.819
0.821
0.851
0.853
0.854
0.861
0.862
0.864
0.871
0.875

Nabors Industries
Mccormick
Starbucks
Hess
Duke Energy
VF
Covidien
Anadarko Petroleum
ExxonMobil
Amgen Inc
Air Products
H.J. Heinz
Limited Brands
Boston Scientific
Entergy
Johnson Controls
Airgas
Fortune Brands
Ball
Procter & Gamble
American International Group
PNC Financial Services Group
Lincoln National

49

Volatility

Office

Vacation

Office

Vacation

Ratio

816
237
712
932
963
708
154
939
995
882
663
824
961
602
960
150
889
205
977
589
336
948
148

105
11
30
16
28
119
48
75
89
29
5
68
40
15
32
6
75
38
20
16
24
24
14

0.455
0.172
0.376
0.404
0.232
0.309
0.209
0.402
0.236
0.249
0.299
0.187
0.423
0.385
0.246
0.214
0.304
0.161
0.273
0.213
0.264
0.406
0.176

0.400
0.151
0.332
0.361
0.210
0.287
0.196
0.386
0.227
0.241
0.295
0.187
0.440
0.426
0.281
0.247
0.357
0.193
0.368
0.289
0.424
0.824
0.363

0.879
0.879
0.881
0.893
0.908
0.928
0.939
0.960
0.965
0.967
0.987
1.001
1.038
1.107
1.140
1.154
1.176
1.196
1.350
1.355
1.606
2.027
2.068

Table 6
Bivariate probit estimates of CEO vacation days and significant company news days
The table presents bivariate probit regression estimates in which the probabilities of CEO vacation days and significant company news
announcements are modeled jointly. Panel A shows estimates for a bivariate model in which the vacation day indicator appears as an
explanatory variable in the news equation, and Panel B shows estimates for a bivariate September 19, 2013 model in which the
significant news day indicator appears as an explanatory variable in the vacation equation. The models are identified by using weather
variables from the vacation site as instruments for CEO vacation days, and by using the daily change in the company’s realized stock
volatility as an instrument for significant news announcements. The sample includes data for 66 CEOs of S&P500 companies
between 2007-10, with observations included for all weekdays in which the CEO holds his position and the stock market is open. The
vacation day indicator equals one for days on which the CEO is out of the office at his vacation home, as determined from a database
of corporate aircraft flight records maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration. The significant news indicator equals one for
days on which the company makes a quarterly earnings announcement or releases significant news, according to the Thomson Reuters
Significant Developments database. CEO ownership and compensation data is obtained from the ExecuComp database. Weather data
is obtained from the National Climatic Data Center website. Realized volatility is calculated using intra-day returns at five-minute
intervals. Standard errors robust to serial correlation and heteroskedasticity appear in parentheses below each coefficient estimate.

50

Panel A: Significant news days modeled as endogenous to vacations
Intercept
Stock return - market return (prior six months)
CEO age
CEO ownership
Log of CEO total compensation
High temperature at CEO vacation home ("C)
High temperature squared
Precipitation at CEO vacation home (mm)
High temperature at CEO vacation home ("C) x ski house indicator
High temperature squared x ski house indicator
Precipitation at CEO vacation home (mm) x ski house indicator
High temperature at headquarters ("C)
High temperature at headquarters squared
Precipitation at headquarters (mm)
Pre-holiday indicator
Post-holiday indicator
Change in realized volatility from previous day
CEO at vacation home indicator

CEO vacation day
Coef.
-2.8424
0.1122
0.0195
0.7874
0.0046
0.0747
-0.0020
-0.0032
-0.1064
0.0032
0.0314
-0.0095
0.0001
-0.0007
0.5270
0.6326

Significant news day

Std.Err.
0.1399 a
0.0398 a
0.0016 a
0.3025 a
0.0111
0.0036 a
0.0001 a
0.0011 a
0.0067 a
0.0003 a
0.0053 a
0.0028 a
0.0001
0.0010
0.0770 a
0.0728 a

47,117
Yes
Yes
No
0.5035 a

Observations
Calendar month fixed effects
Day of week fixed effects
CEO fixed effects
ρ

51

Coef.
-1.1795

-d.Err.
0.0461 a

-0.0069
-0.0003
-0.0005
-0.2270
-0.2540
0.1609
-1.0638

0.0023 a
0.0001 a
0.0008
0.0921 b
0.1061 b
0.0426 a
0.1089 a

CEO vacation day

Panel B: CEO vacation days modeled as endogenous to news
Intercept
Stock return - market return (prior six months)
CEO age
CEO ownership
Log of CEO total compensation
High temperature at CEO vacation home ("C)
High temperature squared
Precipitation at CEO vacation home (mm)
High temperature at CEO vacation home ("C) x ski house indicator
High temperature squared x ski house indicator
Precipitation at CEO vacation home (mm) x ski house indicator
High temperature at headquarters ("C)
High temperature at headquarters squared
Precipitation at headquarters (mm)
Pre-holiday indicator
Post-holiday indicator
Change in realized volatility from previous day
Significant news day indicator

Significant news day

Coef.
-3.0783
0.0830
0.0256
-0.1893
0.0234
0.0768
-0.0021
-0.0033
-0.1121
0.0033
0.0313
-0.0088
0.0001
-0.0007
0.5168
0.6250

Std.Err.
0.1539 a
0.0416 b
0.0016 a
0.3084
0.0116 b
0.0037 a
0.0001 a
0.0011 a
0.0069 a
0.0003 a
0.0053 a
0.0029 a
0.0001
0.0010
0.0874 a
0.0850 a

-0.1584

0.6184
47,117
Yes
Yes
No
0.0180

Observations
Calendar month fixed effects
Day of week fixed effects
CEO fixed effects
ρ
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.

52

Coef.
-1.3668

-d.Err.
0.0343 a

-0.0048
-0.0003
-0.0003
-0.3752
-0.4570
0.1725

0.0024 a
0.0001 a
0.0008
0.0932 a
0.1062 a
0.0441 a

Table 7
Bivariate probit estimates for subsamples of internal and external news days
The table presents bivariate probit regression estimates in which the probabilities of CEO
vacation days and significant company news announcements are modeled jointly. The sample
includes data for 66 CEOs of S&P500 companies between 2007-10, with observations included
for all weekdays in which the CEO holds his position and the stock market is open. The vacation
day indicator equals one for days on which the CEO is out of the office at his vacation home, as
determined from a database of corporate aircraft flight records maintained by the Federal
Aviation Administration. The significant news indicator equals one for days on which the
company makes a quarterly earnings announcement or releases significant news, according to the
Thomson Reuters Significant Developments database. In the left column, the news variable is
restricted to announcements that originate within the company, and observations are dropped
when news is generated by external sources such as governments, courts of law, plaintiffs’
lawyers, ratings agencies, or shareholder activists. In the right column, the news variable equals
one when news is generated by these external sources, and observations are dropped for days on
which the company announces news generated internally. The models include the full range of
independent variables and also the same instrumental variables used in Table 6.
News = 1 for
internal news only

News = 1 for
external news only

46,205
0.111

41,964
0.021

Dependent variable: Significant news day
Estimate for CEO vacation variable
Standard error

-0.9516 a
(0.1263)

-0.2368
(0.3612)

ρ

0.4366 a

0.0959

Dependent variable: CEO vacation day
Estimate for significant news variable
Standard error

0.4782
(0.5427)

-0.6892
(1.2019)

ρ

-0.2946

0.2772

Observations used in estimation
Mean of news indicator variable

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.

53

Table 8
Timing of Form 8-K filings
The table presents regression estimates for models of how quickly companies file required Form
8-K disclosures of material news developments with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In most cases companies must file Form 8-K within four business days of a triggering event, and
columns 1 and 3 present estimates from Poisson maximum likelihood models of the days elapsed
between the event and the filing. Columns 2 and 4 present estimates from probit models in
which the dependent variable equals 1 if a company misses the four-day filing deadline. The
model includes 2,784 observations for Form 8-K filings by 65 companies between 2007-2010.
The Poisson models exclude the 78 cases in which firms did not comply with the four-day filing
deadline. Filings made after 4:00 p.m. are counted as having occurred on the next business day.
Data are obtained from the S&P Filing Dates database. Standard errors robust to serial
correlation and heteroskedasticity appear in parentheses below each coefficient estimate.
Estimation
Dependent variable

Poisson
(1 + days)

Probit
(late = 1)

Event occurs on a CEO vacation day,
during a trip of 1-2 days (indicator)

-0.123 c
(0.072)

0.400 b
(0.179)

Event occurs on a CEO vacation day,
during a trip of 3-4 days (indicator)

-0.009
(0.096)

0.527 b
(0.245)

Event occurs on a CEO vacation day,
during a trip of 5+ days (indicator)

0.308 a
(0.097)

0.188
(0.307)

Event occurs on a CEO vacation day
(indicator)

Poisson
(1 + days)

Probit
(late = 1)

0.045
(0.060)

0.380 a
(0.179)

Form 8-K is filed on a Friday
(indicator)

0.108 b
(0.047)

-0.073
(0.112)

0.107 b
(0.047)

-0.072
(0.112)

Event occurs on day prior to holiday
weekend (indicator)

-0.003
(0.083)

0.845 a
(0.223)

-0.004
(0.088)

0.847 a
(0.219)

-2.054 a
(0.194)

Intercept
Calendar month fixed effects
Company fixed effects
Observations

Yes
Yes
2,706

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.

54

Yes
No
2,784

-2.050 a
(0.193)
Yes
Yes
2,706

Yes
No
2,784

