                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO PRIVATE EQUITY MANAGERS EARN THEIR FEES? COMPENSATION, OWNERSHIP,
                    AND CASH FLOW PERFORMANCE

                                         David T. Robinson
                                          Berk A. Sensoy

                                        Working Paper 17942
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17942


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012




We thank Dan Bergstresser, Harry DeAngelo, Steve Kaplan, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, Andrew Metrick,
Oguzhan Ozbas, Ludovic Phalippou, Antoinette Schoar, Per Strömberg, René Stulz, Mike Weisbach,
and seminar and conference participants at Baylor University, UC San Diego, AFA 2012 Annual Meeting,
Duke/Kaufmann Entrepreneurial Finance Conference, and Kaufmann/RCFS Entrepreneurial Finance
and Innovation Conference for helpful comments and discussions. This paper, along with a companion
paper entitled "Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and Cash Flow Liquidity in Private Equity",
supersedes the paper that previously circulated under the title "Private Equity in the 21st Century:
Cash Flows, Performance, and Contract Terms from 1984-2010". The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by David T. Robinson and Berk A. Sensoy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Private Equity Managers Earn Their Fees? Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow
Performance
David T. Robinson and Berk A. Sensoy
NBER Working Paper No. 17942
March 2012
JEL No. G00,G23,G24,G34

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the relation between compensation practices, incentives, and performance in private equity
using new data that connect ownership structures, management contracts, and quarterly cash flows
for a large sample of buyout and venture capital funds from 1984-2010. Although many critics of private
equity argue that PE firms earn excessive compensation and have muted performance incentives, we
find no evidence that higher compensation or lower managerial ownership are associated with worse
net-of-fee performance, in stark contrast to other asset management settings. Instead, compensation
is largely unrelated to net-of-fee cash flow performance. Nevertheless, market conditions during fundraising
are an important driver of compensation, as pay rises and shifts to fixed components during fundraising
booms. In addition, the behavior of distributions around contractual triggers for fees and carried interest
is consistent with an underlying agency conflict between investors and general partners. Our evidence
is most consistent with an equilibrium in which compensation terms reflect agency concerns and the
productivity of manager skills, and in which managers with higher compensation earn back their pay
by delivering higher gross performance.


David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
davidr@duke.edu

Berk A. Sensoy
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
sensoy_4@fisher.osu.edu
                                      I.   Introduction

      In private equity, the agency relationship between fund managers (the general partners,
or GPs) and investors (the limited partners, or LPs) is governed by a management contract
signed at the inception of the fund. This contract specifies the compensation of the GPs and
the GPs’ own investment in the fund. Because private equity involves long-term financial
commitments from LPs (funds typically last 10 to 13 years), and because LPs have limited
recourse to alternative governance mechanisms, understanding how the incentives provided
by these contracts affect fund performance and GP behavior is a critical question in private
equity, and is important for our understanding of delegated asset management more generally.
      As private equity has grown in prominence, the industry’s compensation practices and
incentive structures have come under increasing scrutiny by industry observers and limited
partners alike. Critics argue that the typical private equity contract allows GPs to earn
excessive compensation and does too little to discipline GPs or provide them with incentives
to maximize LP returns. For example, Phalippou (2009) argues that the confusing nature of
management contracts allows GPs to charge high fees for low average performance. Others
have argued that excessive fees dampen managers incentives to deliver good performance.1
Concerns about such excesses are particularly acute in boom fundraising periods and among
large funds. The fact that private equity contractual arrangements and performance are
typically shielded from public disclosures not only adds fuel to these claims, but also makes
them inherently difficult to evaluate.
      In this paper, we use a novel dataset of 837 buyout and venture capital (VC) private equity
funds from 1984-2010 to study the relations between contracting terms and performance and
cash flow behavior in private equity. The data include information on the fixed management
fees and performance-based carried interest that the GP earns as compensation, as well as
the GP’s own investment in the fund, which determines their ownership stake. The data
also contain the complete sequence of cash flows between LPs and GPs, which we use to
construct detailed relative performance measures and to examine cash flow behavior directly.
The dataset is the first available in the literature to combine information on management
  1
   See, for example, “Private Equity Firms Reap Big Fees, Report Says”, New York Times DealBook,
November 1, 2010.


                                                 1
contract terms with fund cash flows.
   We begin by offering new descriptive evidence on GP compensation and ownership terms.
This part of our analysis enhances the picture of private equity compensation previously
painted in work by Metrick and Yasuda (2010a) and Gompers and Lerner (1999). The
typical fund follows a “2/20/1” rule: 2% management fee, 20% carried interest, and 1%
GP ownership. At the same time, there is substantial variation in terms, both in the cross-
section and over time. Our results indicate that during boom periods in private equity, when
fund sizes grow, overall pay goes up (even as a fraction of fund size) and shifts towards fixed
compensation (fees) and away from variable compensation (carry).
   By itself, this finding is consistent with the idea that compensation practices in boom
periods undermine the incentives of GPs to deliver good performance. Yet, the real question
is whether performance suffers as a result of these practices. We find no evidence that funds
with higher fixed management fees underperform net of fees. This basic result is robust to a
variety of controls and performance measures and is unlikely to be driven by differences in
systematic risk. This result also holds true among high-fee funds raised in boom fundraising
periods, as well as funds that are both large in size and have high fractional fees.
   This result means that, relative to lower fee funds, more expensive private equity funds
earn sufficiently higher gross returns to offset their higher fees. This pattern stands in
striking contrast to results in the mutual fund literature, which finds a strong negative
relation between mutual fund fees and net-of-fee performance (e.g. Carhart, 1997; Fama
and French, 2010), consistent with the relative lack of sophistication of retail mutual fund
investors (Berk and van Binsbergen, 2011).
   We find no evidence that funds with low GP ownership underperform, despite concerns
that managers of such funds are insufficiently bonded to the fund. In fact, for buyout funds
the opposite is true: low-ownership buyout funds outperform. This is consistent with the
view that high-ability GPs prefer to diversify their personal portfolios.
   Turning to carried interest, despite the limited variation in carried interest in the data,
we find some evidence that buyout funds with high carried interest outperform, which is
contrary to the view that high carried interest is excessive. On the other hand, we find that
high-carry venture capital funds underperform. While this result is weak overall, it grows


                                              2
stronger in fundraising booms and among large VC funds, and suggests that carried interest
in VC funds is sometimes excessive.
   Overall, the data offer little support for the view that private equity management con-
tracts allow GPs to charge excessive compensation for the performance they deliver or to
hold ownership stakes that are too low to provide adequate incentives to deliver good per-
formance. (The exception is the results on VC carried interest.) Instead, the evidence is
most consistent with the alternative view that limited partners are relatively sophisticated
investors who understand the long-term nature of private equity investments and the limited
opportunities for alternative governance mechanisms. Under this alternative view, compen-
sation and ownership terms reflect GP skill, agency concerns, and the demand for GP services
over time, with higher compensation justified by greater ability to generate gross-of-fee re-
turns. Further, consistent with a Berk and Green (2004)-type equilibrium, the evidence is
consistent with higher-ability GPs largely (but not exclusively) capturing the excess returns
they generate. In short, GP compensation and ownership practices in private equity are not
so distorted that LP returns are compromised.
   Of course, these findings by no means indicate that agency tensions between GPs and
LPs do not exist or cannot be observed in the data. Agency conflicts exist largely because
GPs possess private information about both the underlying quality of their investments at
a particular point in time, as well as their ability to exit the investments over a given time-
frame at a particular price. This information asymmetry allows GPs to potentially game
the timing of exit decisions to exploit contractual provisions that are designed to protect the
LP’s return.
   Accordingly, in the final part of the paper we investigate the behavior induced by the
finer-grained incentives embedded in two such contractual provisions. The typical manage-
ment contract calls for GPs to first return to LPs all contributed capital (including that for
management fees), plus in the case of buyout funds an 8% preferred return, before carried
interest is earned. This “waterfall” has the clearly desirable effect, from LPs’ perspective, of
allowing them to receive “their money back” before GPs earn any profit-sharing. Yet these
provisions also create an incentive for the GP to time distributions so that they cluster at
and just after the waterfall date. By doing so, the GP earns immediate carried interest on


                                               3
those distributions, and avoids the risk that the investments might later decline in value.
The problem is that this behavior will lead some investments to be harvested too early, when
delaying would have generated more value for LPs. Consistent with these concerns, we find
that distributions cluster around the waterfall date. Such clustering is difficult to rationalize
as an innocuous response to changes in exit opportunities, because there is no reason – other
than the GP’s particular incentives – why the attractiveness of an exit would spike around
waterfall dates.
      We find further evidence of the underlying agency problem between LPs and GPs when we
examine the impact of the terms upon which GPs earn their management fees on distribution
behavior. In about a third of funds, the basis of the management fee shifts to net invested
capital (cost basis of all investments less cost basis of realized investments) during the funds
life (usually after 4-5 years). While the goal of such a contractual provision is to lower
the expenses that LPs pay, it also creates the incentive for GPs to hold on to living dead or
zombie investments rather than liquidate them and distribute the (modest) proceeds in order
to continue earning management fees on the capital invested.2 We find evidence consistent
with this concern. Funds whose fee basis changes from committed capital to net invested
capital are indeed more likely to exit investments later in the funds life.
      The findings in this paper contribute to several branches of the literature on private equity
and delegated asset management. Our work links the branch of the private equity literature
that studies aspects of management contracts with that studying cash flow performance.
The former literature includes Metrick and Yasuda (2010a), Gompers and Lerner (1999),
and Litvak (2009). The latter literature includes Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Phalippou and
Gottschalg (2009), Ljungqvist, Richardson, and Wolfenzon (2007), Jones and Rhodes-Kropf
(2003), and more recently Robinson and Sensoy (2011) and Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan
(2011). DaRin, Hellmann, and Puri (2011) and Metrick and Yasuda (2011) survey the private
equity literature.
      Our work also adds to the literature studying compensation, ownership, and their link to
performance in other delegated asset management settings, notably mutual funds and hedge
funds. As noted above, several studies find a negative relation between mutual fund fees and
  2
      See for example “Private Equity Trapped in ‘Zombie Funds’”, The Financial Times, December 11, 2011.


                                                    4
net-of-fee returns. Busse, Goyal, and Wahal (2010) find that institutional investment portfo-
lios come much closer to earning back their fees on average than do mutual funds. Khorana,
Servaes, and Wedge (2007) find that mutual fund manager ownership is positively associated
with performance. Agrawal, Daniel, and Naik (2009) find that hedge fund managers with
stronger incentive compensation and higher ownership earn higher net returns, suggesting
that hedge fund managers do not capture excess returns in the form of higher compensation
to the same extent that is true in private equity.
         This paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents the data. Section III studies the
determinants of compensation and ownership terms, both across funds and over time. Section
IV relates these terms to the cash flow performance of the funds. Section V studies agency
issues involving distribution behavior. Section VI concludes.


                           II.   Data and Sample Construction

A.        Coverage, Variables, and Sample Selection

         Our analysis uses a confidential, proprietary dataset obtained from a large, institutional
limited partner with extensive investments in private equity. Table 1 reports that there are
837 buyout and venture capital funds in our sample, representing almost $600 billion in
committed capital spanning vintage years 1984-2009. The sample comprises a significant
fraction of the documented universe of private equity. We have 34.4% of the Venture Eco-
nomics (VE) universe of total capital committed to U.S. venture capital and buyout funds,
and 55.7% of that committed to U.S. buyout funds, over the same time period.3
         For each fund, the data contain fund-level information on the management fees and
carried interest that the GPs earn as compensation, as well as the GPs’ own investment
(capital commitment) in the fund. The GP’s capital commitment determines their direct
ownership stake in the fund. The data also contain the complete quarterly cash flows (capital
calls and distributions) to and from the funds and their limited partners, as well as quarterly
estimated (by the GP) market values of unrealized investments. The cash flows are net of
     3
   We have about 80% as many U.S. buyout funds in our data as the number for which VE, Preqin, and
Cambridge Associates report (only) fund-level IRRs.



                                                   5
all management fees and carried interest, and comprise over 41,000 time-series observations
extending through the second quarter of 2010. We also have data on fund size and on
each fund’s position in its partnership’s sequence of funds (sequence number), and we know
whether any two funds belong to the same partnership.4 The data were anonymized before
they were provided to us so we do not know the identity of the GPs or the names of the
funds.
       The dataset comprises the largest and most recent sample of private equity compensation
terms in the literature, and is the first available for academic research to include information
on GP ownership. Critically for our purpose, the dataset is also the first to combine cash
flow information with compensation and ownership data. Another important advantage of
the data is that they come directly from the LP’s internal accounting system, and so are free
from the reporting and survivorship biases that plague commercially available private equity
databases (Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke, 2010). The data are also at least partially random:
the data provider’s overall private equity portfolio was assembled over time through a series
of mergers that occurred for reasons unrelated to each company’s private equity portfolio.
       While our data have many advantages, they do not cover all aspects of the management
contracts. In particular, we lack information on the specific carry timing rules for a given
fund, and on the split of portfolio company transaction and monitoring fees between GPs
and LPs (the latter is relevant only for buyout funds). In principle, this has the potential
to create measurement error problems for our analysis. However, as we discuss in Section
IV.C, these provisions are likely uncorrelated with the variables we include in our analysis.
Thus, these omitted contractual provisions are unlikely to bias our conclusions.5
       Because our data come from a single (albeit large) limited partner, the representative-
ness of the sample is a natural concern. Robinson and Sensoy (2011) compare the data to
commercially available databases (VE, Preqin, and Cambridge Associates). They note that
assessing representativeness is difficult because the universe of private equity funds is un-
available and because commercial databases provide inconsistent accounts of private equity
   4
     All 837 funds are bona fide funds. There are no side-car or co-investment vehicles in our data.
   5
     We also do not observe the side agreements between different investors and the GPs of the funds in
question. Repeated conversations with our data provider and with other industry practitioners indicate that
this does not obscure our ability to understand what the real fees are: Moreover, side letters are made public
to all the investors in the fund through “most favored nation” clauses.


                                                      6
performance (Metrick and Yasuda, 2010b; Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke, 2010). In addition,
commercial databases include neither compensation/ownership data nor cash flow data, and
so are unsuitable for our purpose in any case. Robinson and Sensoy (2011) find no evidence
that the performance (IRR) of buyout funds in our sample differs significantly from that
reported by commercial databases. Venture capital IRRs in our data are somewhat below
what is reported in commercial databases. However, Lerner, Schoar, and Wongsunwai (2007)
show that the best-performing VC funds are concentrated among one particular class of LP
(endowments), who seem to have superior access to funds. Thus the differences for venture
capital likely reflect the GP/LP matching process more than a selection bias per se, with our
sample likely representative of funds to which the typical VC investor has access. Moreover,
our cross-sectional analyses are only sensitive to selection issues insofar as any potential bias
in the data is correlated in specific ways with the explanatory variables. In any case, our
results should be interpreted bearing in mind the caveat that we do not have the universe of
private equity funds.


B.    Summary Statistics on Fund Characteristics

     The characteristics of our sample funds are presented in Table 1. As noted above, the
837 funds in our sample represent almost $600 billion in committed capital. This figure is
26.5% of the total capitalization of the VE universe of the same fund types over the 1984-
2009 vintage year time frame. Restricting attention to U.S. funds only, we have 34.4% of
the total capitalization of the U.S. private equity universe covered by VE. Coverage varies
significantly by fund type. Our data include 295 venture capital funds representing $61.4
billion in committed venture capital, or around 16% of the VE universe of U.S. venture funds.
We have 542 buyout funds, for a total committed capital of $535.5 billion, representing 55.7%
of the total capitalization of the VE U.S. buyout universe. On average, 35% of our funds are
first funds. 23% are second funds raised by a firm, and 15% of the funds are third-sequence
funds. These numbers are similar to those for the sample used by Kaplan and Schoar (2005).
The average (median) fund size is $208 million ($106 million) for venture capital funds and
$988 million ($313 million) for buyout funds.
     Because many of the funds in our sample have recent vintage years and are still active, we

                                                7
also present summary statistics for the sample of funds that were either officially liquidated
as of 6/30/2010, or had no cash flow activity for the last six quarters of the sample and had
vintage years prior to 2006. This is called the “Liquidated Sample”, and has the advantage
that performance in this sample is largely based on actual cash flows and not potentially
subjective market values of unrealized investments. The liquidated sample includes about
two-thirds of all funds in the total sample, and represents about half of the total committed
capital in the full sample. The composition of first, second and third funds is roughly
equivalent across the full sample and the liquidated sample. The mean fund size is smaller
by some $160 million in the liquidated sample, reflecting the growing prevalence of large
buyout funds in the post-2006 vintage portion of the sample.


C.    Summary Statistics on General Partner Compensation and Ownership

     Table 2 provides summary statistics on GP compensation terms (fixed management fees
and performance-sensitive carried interest) and on their own capital commitments to the
funds they manage, which in turn determine their ownership stakes in the funds. These
terms are all contracted at the beginning of a fund’s life, and are not renegotiated during the
life of the fund. Summary statistics on these terms are useful in their own right because no
prior work has had access to data on GP ownership, and because our sample of compensation
terms is both larger and more recent than Gompers and Lerner (1999) and Metrick and
Yasuda (2010a).


                                   C.1.   Management fees

     Panel A presents statistics for the full sample, beginning with management fees. For 82
of our 837 funds, management fees are either unknown or are subject to yearly negotiation
rather than being specified in advance. We exclude these funds from the fee statistics and
analyses, as do Gompers and Lerner (1999).
     In the management contract, management fees are expressed as a fee percentage and a
basis to which the percentage applies. As Panel A of Table 2 shows, almost all funds (92%)
have an initial fee basis of committed capital (i.e., fund size, which is fixed for the life of
the fund). The initial percentage fee (the percentage in effect for the first year of the fund’s

                                               8
life) is usually in the range of 1.5% to 2.5%. The average (median) initial fee for VC funds
is 2.24% (2.50%), while the figures for buyout funds are lower, at 1.78% for the mean and
2.00% for the median.
       The contract frequently stipulates that the fee percentage and/or basis changes at some
point during the life of the fund. These changes almost uniformly result in lower management
fees later in the fund’s life. Panel A of Table 2 shows that 45% of funds see their fee percentage
change at least once, while 33% have a change in basis.6 59% of funds have one type of change
or the other (or both), while 18% have both. Venture capital funds are more likely to have
the fee percentage change compared to buyout (55% compared to 38% of funds), while the
opposite is true for fee basis changes (12% of VC funds have their fee basis change, compared
to 41% of buyout funds).
       Changing fee percentages and bases imply that it is not sufficient to simply compare
management fees across funds solely on the basis of their initial fee percentages and bases.
Instead, to conduct an apples-to-apples comparison, we use the fee basis and percentage
information to forecast the expected (at fund inception) dollar management fee for each year
of the fund’s expected life (assumed to be 10 years for all funds). We then calculate each
fund’s “lifetime fees”, defined as the undiscounted sum of the expected annual fees. We
also calculate the present value (at fund inception) of these lifetime fees by discounting each
expected annual fee using the 10-year Treasury bond rate in effect at the fund’s inception
(“PV lifetime fees”).7 These calculations follow Metrick and Yasuda (2010a), and details are
provided in the Appendix.
       Panel A of Table 2 displays summary statistics for lifetime fees and their present value,
expressed as a percentage of committed capital. The average (median) lifetime fee is 20.37%
(21.38%) of committed capital for VC funds, and 14.49% (14.23%) for buyout funds. The
present value of the lifetime fee is on average (median) 16.01% (16.69%) of committed cap-
ital for VC funds, and 11.65% (11.52%) for buyout funds. For both types of funds, fixed
management fees are a substantial fraction of the total capital committed by LPs. More-
   6
     The most common basis change is to “net invested capital”, defined as the total (equity) capital invested
in portfolio companies to date minus the (equity) cost basis of all realized investments. The change to net
invested capital has the effect that fees are earned only on active, and not on realized, investments.
   7
     We choose the risk-free rate over the contracted life of the fund as the discount rate because management
fees are a contractual obligation over this horizon.


                                                      9
over, consistent with the initial fee percentage, buyout fund fees are a significantly smaller
percentage of fund size than venture capital fund fees. However, dollar fees are on average
higher in buyout funds because of their greater size.
   Panel B of Table 2 displays the same summary statistics for the sample of liquidated
funds. These statistics are similar to those in Panel A.
   Overall, while the median initial fee percentage is indeed 2%, consistent with the “2 and
20” conventional wisdom, there is a substantial amount of variation in management fee terms
and expected values, both across and within fund classes.


                                    C.2.   Carried Interest

   Panel A of Table 2 also shows summary statistics for the carried interest (or carry) of the
full sample of funds. The carry specifies the GP’s share of the profits earned by the fund.
Consistent with prior work, a carried interest of 20% is the norm, obtained by 89% of VC
funds and 97% of buyout funds. 1% of VC funds and 2% of buyout funds have carry below
20%. 10% of VC funds and 1% of buyout funds have carry above 20%. The average carried
interest is 20.44% for VC funds and 19.96% for buyout funds. Thus, the median fund in our
sample has the conventional wisdom “2 and 20” management fee and carried interest. There
is considerably less variation in carried interest than in management fees. What variation
does exist is largely in venture funds, and to a lesser extent in buyout funds. This pattern
is consistent with Metrick and Yasuda (2010a), though our sample displays some variation
across buyout funds while theirs does not. Panel B of Table 2 shows summary statistics for
carried interest for the sample of liquidated funds, which are similar to those in Panel A.


                             C.3.   General Partner Ownership

   Finally, Panel A of Table 2 shows summary statistics for the capital commitments of
the general partners to their funds. The GP’s capital commitment determines its ownership
stake in the fund, and our data are based on the actual GP commitment.
   The median GP capital commitment is 1% of fund size, resulting in a 1% ownership
stake. 56% of VC funds and 35% of buyout funds have a GP ownership between 0.99%
and 1.01%. The average GP ownership is 1.78% for VC funds and a significantly higher

                                              10
2.38% for buyout funds. 26% (18%) of VC funds and 43% (23%) of buyout funds have GP
ownership stakes above 1.01% (below 0.99%). Though not reported in the table, the fact
that buyout funds are substantially larger than VC funds on average causes the difference
in GP ownership to be greatly amplified in dollar terms.
   Overall, these facts indicate that while it is in some sense standard for general partners
to post 1% of total committed capital, a significant fraction of GPs invest smaller or larger
stakes in their funds, particularly in buyout funds. Moreover, buyout GPs have higher
ownership, in both percentage and dollar terms, than VC GPs. For both types of funds,
there is considerably more variation in ownership stakes than in carried interest.


  III.      The Determinants of General Partner Compensation and
                                           Ownership

   In this section, we analyze the determinants of general partner management fees, carried
interest, and ownership terms. We relate these contractual terms to market conditions and
other observable fund characteristics at the time a fund is raised.
   Despite the oft-stated concerns about excessive fees in boom periods, no prior work ana-
lyzes how compensation terms vary over fundraising cycles. To this end, a key explanatory
variable in our analysis is “ln (Industry Flows)”, which measures the natural logarithm of the
total market-wide committed capital to the fund’s asset class (buyout or VC) in the fund’s
vintage year. In other words, “Industry Flows” is the total fundraising by all funds of the
same type and same vintage year as the focal fund. We construct this measure using data
from Venture Economics, and not our own sample funds, to capture market-wide fundraising
activity.
   We employ fund size and sequence number as additional explanatory variables. Gompers
and Lerner (1999), analyzing a sample of venture capital funds raised before 1992, find that
larger and older funds have higher carried interest and lower management fees, favoring a
learning model of GP compensation rather than a signaling one. Our contribution in this
regard to to consider whether these basic patterns continue to hold in more recent times,
which in important in view of the huge influx of capital in the industry since 1992, and


                                             11
whether the patterns extend to buyout funds as well as venture funds.
         These analyses are reported in Table 3. In each panel within the table, Columns (1)-(3)
consider buyout funds only, and Columns (4)-(6). Columns (3) and (6) include vintage year
fixed effects to emphasize cross-sectional variation holding market conditions fixed.


A.        Management Fees

         We begin with an analysis of management fees, reported in Panel A of Table 3. The
dependent variable is the present value of lifetime fees as a percentage of fund size. Several
patterns emerge.
         “PV Lifetime Fees” is strongly increasing in fundraising activity for both VC and buy-
out funds, consistent with greater GP bargaining power in booms. The coefficients on ‘ln
(Industry Flows)” imply that a doubling in industry-wide committed capital is associated
with a 41%-71% increase in the present value of lifetime fees. Moreover, we know that in
boom times fund sizes also increase.8 Thus, in boom times both fund size and fractional fees
increase, so there is a multiplicative, large positive effect on dollar fees.
         Larger funds, both buyout and venture, have significantly lower fractional fees in present
value terms. These results suggest that high-ability GPs face a fundamental tradeoff between
larger fund size and higher fractional fees.9 Gompers and Lerner (1999) find the same pattern
in their sample of VC funds. Not only do their findings hold in the more recent data and
extend to buyout funds, but the tradeoff is more pronounced for buyout funds, consistent
with scalability arguments advanced by Metrick and Yasuda (2010a). If the size of venture
funds is inherently more limited by the constraints of the investment technology, then venture
GPs have less scope to trade off fractional fees in exchange for larger funds.
         We also examine variation in the initial management fee percentage and whether the
fee basis or percentage changes at some point in the fund’s life. These analyses reveal that
during fundraising booms, fees become front-loaded early in a fund’s life. (For brevity, we
     8
     See for example Kaplan and Strömberg’s (2009) analysis of buyout funds. In untabulated results we
confirm this finding for both buyout and venture funds in our sample.
   9
     The fact that fund size and fees are jointly determined as a function of the GP’s ability does not confound
this interpretation. In the absence of any tradeoff, the direct effect of ability on both size and fees should be
positive, which by itself would induce a positive correlation between size and fees in the data. Thus, the fact
that we cannot observe and control for ability biases us away from finding the negative correlation (tradeoff)
that we do.


                                                       12
do not tabulate these analyses.) Thus, during fundraising booms, fees become front-loaded
and increase, even as a percentage of fund size. These results are certainly consistent with
skeptical views of GP compensation practices.


B.      Carried Interest

       Panel B of Table 3 analyzes carried interest. The Panel shows that carried interest is
positively related to fund size (and, for VC funds, fund sequence), for both buyout and
venture funds. This finding is consistent with Gompers and Lerner’s (1999) and Hochberg,
Ljungqvist, and Vissing-Jorgensen’s (2010) findings for VC funds, who show, respectively,
that larger venture groups and those with good past performance have higher carry.
       Controlling for fund size, carried interest does not move cyclically. Combined with the
evidence in Table 3, these results imply that GP compensation rises and shifts to fixed
components during fundraising booms, consistent with greater GP bargaining power during
booms and a preference for fixed compensation.10 Thus, the results suggest that because
talented GPs are in scarce supply, capital inflows to private equity result in more favorable
GP compensation, even as a fraction of fund size.
       The results in Panels A and B of Table 3 also suggest that compensation terms in VC
vary with other fund characteristics to a greater extent than is true in buyout funds. This is
consistent with scalability arguments whereby size alone can absorb differences in demand
for GP services to a greater extent in buyout than is possible in venture.


C.      General Partner Ownership

       Panel C of Table 3 analyzes GP ownership. Like carried interest, fundraising conditions
do not affect GP ownership stakes. There is some evidence that first-time buyout funds
(but not VC funds) signal their effort/ability with higher ownership, but the result becomes
just short of statistical significance when vintage year fixed effects are included. Thus, the
opposing forces that GP bargaining power increases in booms and as they gain experience
(which would allow them to negotiate lower ownership), and on the other hand agency
  10
     These conclusions are reinforced by the observation that absolute fund performance tends to be lower
following fundraising booms (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009), leading to lower carry dollars earned for a given
carry percentage.


                                                    13
concerns grow at the same time (suggesting LPs will prefer higher GP ownership), appear
to cancel out in the data.
       The the relation between GP ownership and size is positive and concave and buyout funds,
consistent with greater agency concerns in larger funds. On the other hand, the relation is
negative and convex for VC funds. One explanation consistent with these patterns is that
providing incentives through GP ownership is less important in venture than in buyout. This
explanation is also consistent with the other facts revealed by our analysis. First, carried
interest increases with fund size to a greater extent in VC than in buyout (Panel B of Table
3), so that carried interest incentives can more easily substitute for ownership incentives.
Second, and that GP ownership is much higher on average in buyout funds than in VC
(Table 2). Such considerations are supportive of signaling arguments in the spirit of Leland
and Pyle (1977), which suggest that, because projects that are more distinct from the market
have lower signaling costs, GP ownership will be higher in buyout funds because they have
less idiosyncratic risk.11


D.      Summary and Discussion

       Overall, the results in Table 3 provide novel evidence on the determinants of managerial
compensation and ownership in the private equity industry. Times of high fundraising ac-
tivity are associated with higher fixed management fees but are unrelated to carried interest
or GP ownership terms. Thus, during fundraising booms, GP compensation rises and shifts
to fixed components, a conclusion that is reinforced by the fact that absolute performance
tends to be lower following fundraising booms, leading to lower carry dollars even for a fixed
carry percentage. This in turn implies that the elasticities of GP compensation and wealth
to fund performance decline during boom times.
       The analysis also draws a clear picture of how compensation and incentives vary in the
cross-section of funds. Carried interest is higher in larger funds, while management fees are
lower. These findings imply that the elasticity of GP compensation to performance is higher
in larger funds. The results are consistent with the idea that higher-ability GPs raise larger
  11
    The cross-sectional variance of VC fund returns is substantially larger than that of buyout funds (Kaplan
and Schoar, 2005)



                                                     14
funds and require stronger incentives, and with a trade-off between size and management
fees. In buyout funds, ownership patterns reinforce this conclusion. In VC, lower ownership
among larger funds dampens the incentive effects of the higher carried interest.
     As discussed in the subsections above, all of these results are potentially consistent with
optimal contracting explanations. However, they are potentially consistent with criticisms of
private equity compensation and incentives as well. For instance, higher fixed compensation
in boom times may result in lower net performance to LPs if contracts are inefficient and
GPs are extracting too much. Or, if contracts are efficient, such compensation may simply
reflect a higher productivity of GP skills in those times, and the (at least partial) ability of
GPs to capture the associated returns, so net performance to LPs need not suffer.
     The acid test is therefore how compensation and ownership terms relate to the cash flow
performance of the funds. We take up this issue in the next section.


     IV.    Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow Performance

A.    Cash Flow Performance Measures

     To relate compensation and ownership terms to performance, we would ideally like to
form relative performance measures that account for fund-specific loadings on systematic
risk factors in returns. Unfortunately, even with cash flow data, obtaining reliable fund-level
estimates is extremely difficult in the private equity setting, due to the illiquidity of the funds
and the fact that purely objective measures of interim performance are not available (see
Korteweg and Sorensen, 2010, and Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou, 2012, for discussions of the
issues involved). Given these constraints, we construct three measures of performance, and
further explore the sensitivity of our conclusions to differences in systematic risk in section
IV. D. below.
     Our first performance measure is the public market equivalent (PME) pioneered by Ka-
plan and Schoar (2005). The PME is calculated by first discounting all cash distributions
and capital calls using the total return of the S&P 500 (from an arbitrary reference date) as
the discount rate. The PME is equal to the ratio of the sum of discounted distributions to
discounted calls, and measures the lifetime return (net of all fees and carried interest) of the


                                                15
fund relative to that of the S&P 500. By benchmarking returns to public markets, the PME
is a major improvement over the IRR, a purely absolute performance measure. At the same
time, it is unlikely to be a measure of the true risk-adjusted returns to private equity funds.
       Our second measure of performance is a “tailored PME” that is computed in the same
way as the regular PME, but using different benchmark indexes (not the S&P 500) depending
on the type of fund. For venture funds, we use the Nasdaq composite total return index.
For buyout funds, we group funds according to size terciles and use the corresponding Fama-
French size tercile portfolios as the benchmark.12 In this way, the tailored PMEs help get
a closer match compared to the regular PME on variation in systematic risk that is related
to the size of private equity portfolio companies, as well as variation that is due to the
technology focus of much venture investing.
       Our third measure is a “levered PME”, that uses a hypothetical levered S&P 500 index as
the discount rate in the PME calculation, with the levered index return equal to an assumed
β times the actual index return. The levered PMEs thus measure relative performance on
the assumption that the fund beta is that which is assumed in the levered index calculation.
While, as noted above, fund-level estimates of β are difficult, the literature has produced
industry-level estimates. We use a β of 1.3 for buyout funds and 2.5 for venture capital
funds, matching the estimates in Korteweg and Sorensen (2010). Robinson and Sensoy
(2011) provide details on the levered PME calculations and descriptive information on the
distribution of PME, tailored PME, and levered PME in the sample.
       All three of these measures of fund returns to LPs are net of all management fees and
carried interest. Capital calls include fee payments, and distributions are net of carry.


B.      The Cross-Section of Contract Terms and Cash Flow Performance

       Table 4 investigates the relations between these measures of net-of-fee performance and
compensation and ownership terms. If GPs with higher compensation are extracting too
much, then compensation should be negatively related to net-of-fee performance. Similarly,
if low GP ownership means that GPs are insufficiently invested in their performance, funds
  12
    These portfolios are constructed using NYSE size breakpoints at the 30th and 70th percentiles, and are
available on Ken French’s website. Our results are similar using instead the categorization in our data of
whether the fund is focused on small, middle, or large buyouts.


                                                   16
with low GP ownership should perform poorly.
   On the other hand, if compensation is efficient, then there are two possibilities. If GPs
with higher compensation generate higher gross returns and capture them through that
higher compensation, we would expect no relation between compensation terms and net per-
formance. If instead some excess returns are shared with LPs, perhaps because competition
among LPs is imperfect, then we would expect compensation to be positively related to
net performance. Also, if ownership terms are set efficiently, then low GP ownership funds
should not underperform. They may even outperform if high-ability managers prefer low
ownership stakes (for instance, for diversification of their personal portfolios) and are willing
to allow LPs to capture some excess returns in exchange for lower required stakes.
   Panel A of Table 4 uses the full sample of funds. For unliquidated funds, the final market
value of unrealized investments at the end of the sample period is treated as if it were a cash
flow distribution. This has the advantage of allowing us to include funds raised relatively
recently, in particular in the end of the buyout boom. The disadvantage is that stated
market values are potentially subjective. Accordingly, Panel B focuses on the subsample of
liquidated funds in which performance evaluations are based primarily on actual cash flows.
   In both Panels, the first two specifications use the PME as the performance measure,
the next two the tailored PME, and the final two the levered PME. Odd-numbered columns
focus on buyout funds, even-numbered on venture funds. All specifications include vintage
year fixed effects to focus on cross-sectional variation at a point in time, and standard errors
are clustered by vintage year. (We take up the issue of time-series variation in Section IV.
E below.)
   There is no evidence that funds with higher management fees have worse net of fee
performance, contrary to the inefficiency view. This finding holds across all specifications
and in both panels. These results are unlikely due to a lack of power, given the wide variation
in performance and lifetime fees, the large sample size, and the fact that significant results
do obtain for other variables.
   Turning to carried interest, in the full sample (Panel A) buyout fund performance is
significantly positively related to carried interest, the exact opposite of the inefficiency view.
This result holds for all three performance measures, and obtains despite the fact that


                                               17
buyout funds display only modest variation in carried interest (cf. Table 1). The analogous
coefficients in Panel B are just shy of statistical significance. This change is likely due to
the smaller sample size; the coefficient actually increases in magnitude compared to Panel
A, but the standard error grows.
       In the full sample of venture funds, despite the fact that venture funds display more
variation in carry than do buyout funds, there is no significant relation between carry and
any performance measure, contrary to the inefficiency view. However, in the liquidated
sample, VC carried interest is negatively associated with tailored PME and levered PME,
suggesting that carried interest in VC funds is sometimes excessive.
       Finally, turning to GP ownership, there is no evidence that buyout or venture funds with
GP ownership below the modal 1% underperform, contrary to concerns that low GP own-
ership translates into inadequate incentives to care about performance. Just the opposite is
true for buyout funds. The 23% of buyout funds with GP ownership less than 1% outperform
by all performance measures, with PMEs about 0.20-0.30 higher than their higher-ownership
counterparts. This magnitude is large relative to the sample average PME of 1.18 (Robinson
and Sensoy, 2011), and holds in both the full and liquidated samples.13
       Our conclusions from Table 4 are robust to a number of alternate specifications (unre-
ported for brevity), including by omitting controls for fund size and sequence, entering each
contract term individually, and pooling buyout and venture funds and adding an indicator
variable for fund type.
       Overall, the evidence in Table 4 offers little support for the view that variation in GP
compensation and ownership is inefficient. The exception is the specifications relating tai-
lored and levered PMEs to VC carried interest in the liquidated sample.
       Instead, the evidence is most consistent with a Berk and Green (2004)-type equilibrium
in which compensation and ownership terms reflect agency concerns and the productivity of
manager skills. In this view, GPs with higher fees earn their pay by generating higher gross
performance, leading to no or a positive relation between compensation and net performance.
Similarly, GPs with lower ownership do not underperform, and in the case of buyout funds
  13
    These analyses focus on indicator variables for whether GP ownership is above or below the modal 1%
because the ownership distribution is bounded below at 0%, and the resulting compressed distribution below
1% obscures these findings in linear specifications.


                                                   18
generate excess returns that are shared with LPs. These observations are consistent with the
view that GP services are the primary scarce resource in private equity (Kaplan and Schoar,
2005), while at the same time some excess returns are shared with LPs.


C.    Omitted Aspects of Management Contracts

     As noted in Section II, our data do not cover two potentially important aspects of GP
compensation structures. The first, applicable to buyout funds, is that funds sometimes
charge transaction and monitoring fees directly to the portfolio companies they own. The
second is that while we have information on the carried interest percentage, we do not know
the specific carried interest timing rules, which can make a given percentage more or less
valuable to the GP in present value terms (Metrick and Yasuda, 2010a).
     It is therefore important to consider whether these omissions are likely to bias the
fee/performance and carry/performance results in Table 4. First, neither issue induces any
error in our performance variables – the distributions we observe are the actual net distri-
butions that the LP earns, and therefore fully reflect these omitted terms. It cannot be
the case, therefore, that our performance measures miss important fees that would result in
some funds’ performance being worse than reported.
     The remaining concern is whether omitted contractual features are correlated with the
features we observe. Here, the direction of the correlation is important. If funds that charge
high management fees also charge high fees to portfolio companies, then the conclusions of
Table 4 would be unchanged, since it would continue to be the case that high fee funds earned
sufficiently higher gross returns that their net-of-fee returns were not lower than lower fee
funds. In this case, it would simply be that our measure of net-of-fee performance would
include some unobserved fees that were not included in our present value tabulations in
Table 2.
     For the fee/performance results of Table 4 to be overturned, it would have to be the
case that unobserved fees were sufficiently negatively correlated with observed management
fees that the rank ordering of funds according to fees were reversed, causing our observed
low-fee funds to be high-fee funds, and vice versa. In other words, a strong negative cor-
relation between management fees and portfolio company fees would be required for high

                                             19
gross performance to be associated with low fee funds. While we cannot test this directly,
our discussions with industry practitioners and experts suggests that this correlation is near
zero, and that most of the variation in unobserved portfolio company fees occurs at the
vintage-year level, not cross-sectionally within vintage years. Thus, the vintage year fixed
effects in Table 4 should absorb most of this variation.
     Similar logic applies with respect to omitted carry timing information and the relations
between carried interest and performance. To overturn the conclusions of Table 4 of no
relation (a positive relation for buyout funds) between carried interest and performance, it
must be the case that higher carried interest percentages are accompanied by sufficiently less
favorable (to the GP) carried interest timing rules. Here too, our discussions with industry
practitioners and experts suggests that most variation in carry timing occurs at the vintage-
year level, which is absorbed by the vintage year fixed effects in Table 4, and there is little
correlation between carry timing rules and percentages in the cross-section of funds.


D.    Contract Terms and Cash Flow Cyclicality

     It is possible that the analyses of the relations between contract terms and performance
miss important differences in the systematic riskiness of the funds that are related to contract
terms, despite the robustness of the results to tailored and levered PMEs that are designed
to partially address this concern. In particular, funds with higher compensation may have
higher betas, and this could potentially explain why these funds have higher gross returns
relative to public equity benchmarks. Presumably, LPs would prefer for higher compensation
and incentives to translate into more effort to add value (i.e., generate alpha), or be more
reflective of the ability to do so, as opposed to simply translating into greater systematic
risk-taking. These considerations are closely related to the general question in delegated
asset management settings of how managerial compensation and incentives impact effort to
generate alpha as opposed to loading up on beta.
     As noted above in Section IV.B, reliably estimating betas at the fund level is difficult,
and no method to do so exists in the literature. However, the behavior of cash flows to
and from limited partners allows us to offer some insights into these questions. Holding the
magnitude of calls and distributions constant, a fund that is more likely to call capital in

                                              20
bad times and distribute capital in good times will have a higher covariance of cash flow
returns with the market return compared to a fund whose call and distribution behavior is
unrelated to broader market conditions.14 Consequently, we can check whether funds with
higher compensation or lower ownership are likely to be taking on greater systematic risk
by asking whether the comovement of their net cash flows (distributions minus calls) with
public market conditions is a function of contractual terms.
       The analysis is presented in Table 5. The dependent variable is a fund’s quarterly net cash
flow (as a percentage of fund size). All specifications include fund age fixed effects (measured
in calendar quarters) to control for differing unconditional propensities to call and distribute
capital across funds of different age. Standard errors are clustered by calendar quarter, and
conclusions are robust to clustering by fund or by both fund and quarter. Panel A considers
buyout funds, while Panel B focuses on VC funds.
       The main explanatory variable of interest is “ln(P/D)”, the natural logarithm of the
Price/Dividend ratio on the S&P 500 (from Robert Shiller’s website), which captures public
market valuation levels. We also include the log of Baa-Aaa yield spread (from Datastream),
orthogonalized with respect to the log of P/D, to assess sensitivity to debt market conditions
unrelated to equity market valuations. We also control for the fund’s uncalled capital as a
percentage of its committed capital, a measure of a fund’s dry powder. All of these explana-
tory variables are lagged one quarter, so these are predictive regressions. See Robinson and
Sensoy (2011) for a discussion of the level coefficients on these variables.
       We are interested in how the loadings of net cash flows on these variables, particularly
P/D, vary with contract terms. To that end, the first specification in each panel interacts
the explanatory variables with the present value of lifetime management fees, the second
with the carried interest percentage, and the third with GP percentage ownership. We also
include the respective contract terms as explanatory variables themselves. This assures that
we account for any differences in the magnitude of cash flows that are associated with the
contract terms. In other words, the specifications hold the magnitude of cash flows fixed
  14
     Put differently, a systematic tendency to call capital in bad times when it is costly for LPs to provide
it, and to distribute capital in good times when it is less valuable because other investments are paying off
as well, suggests greater systematic riskiness from an LP’s perspective.




                                                     21
across the contract terms of interest.15
       The results are easy to summarize. There is no evidence that any contract term is
associated with the sensitivity of net cash flows to public equity market valuations (P/D).
In particular, there is no evidence that funds with high management fees or carry, or low
GP ownership, display greater cash flow co-movement with public equity markets. Nor is
there evidence that such funds have a higher co-movement of cash flows with favorable debt
market conditions (in fact for low-GP ownership buyout funds the opposite is true).
       Overall, then, the results suggest that it is unlikely that private equity funds with higher
compensation earn back their fees by taking more systematic risk. This is true even with
respect to the carried interest that one might worry would create systematic risk-taking (as
opposed to effort-providing) incentives. Instead, the evidence is more consistent with the
interpretation that managers of such funds add more value.


E.      Compensation, Ownership, and Performance Over Fundraising Cycles

       Concerns about excessive fees, misaligned incentives, and diseconomies of scale are es-
pecially acute in boom times, when fund sizes grow and compensation rises, shifts to fixed
components, and becomes more front loaded (cf. Table 3). In the face of large, certain, and
immediate fee income, critics suggest that performance incentives are inadequate. While the
cross-sectional tests in Table 4 show that high-compensation or low-ownership funds do not
underperform in the cross-section of funds raised at a point in time, those tests do not address
whether high-compensation or low-ownership funds raised in boom times underperform.
       Table 6 takes up this issue, with Panel A focusing on buyout funds and Panel B on venture
capital funds. In each panel, the performance measure used as the dependent variable is PME
in first three specifications, tailored PME in the next three, and levered PME in the final
three. The key explanatory variables are the interactions of contract terms with ln(Industry
Flows), which measures market-wide fundraising conditions when the fund is raised. Given
  15
     Our conclusions are unaffected by instead using indicator variables for whether management fee is above
the fund-type specific median, for whether the carry is less than, equal to, or greater than 20%, and for
whether GP ownership is less than 0.99%, greater than 1.01%, or in between. Further, while the specifications
in Table 5 include all cash flow observations, conclusions are unaffected by restricting the call specifications
to observations where the fund has some uncalled capital, and restricting the distribution specifications to
observations for which some capital has previously been called. Conclusions are also unaffected by examining
calls and distributions separately.


                                                      22
this focus, we do not include vintage year fixed effects. In specifications (1), (4), and (7),
the contract term is PV Lifetime Fees. In specifications (2), (5), and (8), it is the carried
interest percentage, and in specifications (3), (6), and (9), it is the GP ownership stake.16
       Panel A shows that high-management fee buyout funds raised in boom times actually
outperform, not underperform. The interaction coefficient of 0.01 indicates that a one per-
centage point increase in PV Lifetime Fees is associated with a one percent increase in PME
for every doubling of Industry Flows. This conclusion holds across all three performance
measures. At the same time, the levered PME results suggest that high-carry buyout funds
raised in boom times underperform, though the result is only marginally significant and not
robust to the PME and tailored PME specifications. There is no evidence of an association
between buyout performance and the interaction of GP ownership and fundraising cycles.
       Turning to venture capital funds in Panel B, there is no evidence of underperformance
among high-management fee or low-ownership VC funds raised in boom times. There is,
however, robust evidence that high-carry VC funds raised in boom times underperform.
These results add to the evidence in Table 4 suggesting the carried interest in VC funds is
sometimes excessive.


F.      Compensation, Ownership, and Performance in the Cross-Section of Fund Size

       Closely related to concerns about boom-time excesses are concerns about excesses in
large funds. Metrick and Yasuda (2010a) find that larger funds have proportionally fewer
managing partners tasked with deploying the capital, particularly in the buyout industry,
leading to concerns over a combination of misaligned incentives and diseconomies of scale.
As with the boom-time concerns discussed in the previous subsection, a common critique
leveled at large private equity funds is that large and certain fee income dilutes performance
incentives, especially considering that fee income per partner grows faster than fund size
(Metrick and Yasuda, 2010a).
  16
    In Table 6, we focus on the full sample of funds because many buyout funds from the most recent boom
have not yet liquidated by the end of the sample period. Results are similar in the liquidated sample. Also, in
Table 6, we include the contract terms as continuous (demeaned) variables. Results are similar using instead
indicator variables for whether the management fee is above the fund-type specific median, for whether the
carry is less than, equal to, or greater than 20%, and for whether GP ownership is less than 0.99%, greater
than 1.01%, or in between.


                                                      23
       Accordingly, Table 7 examines whether large funds, particularly large funds with high
compensation or low ownership, underperform. Table 7 is structured in the same way as
Table 6. Here the key interactions are with fund size rather than industry fundraising flows.17
       The results are easily summarized. First, as in previous tables, there is no statistically
reliable evidence that larger funds underperform. Nor is there any evidence that large funds
with high management fees or low GP ownership underperform.
       However, there is evidence that large, high carry funds underperform, for both buyout
and venture. At the same time, buyout funds with high carry outperform unconditionally,
with a one percentage point increase in carry percentage associated with a 0.05 improvement
in PME (representing an extra 5% return over the life of the fund). The interaction between
carry and fund size indicates that a doubling of fund size reduces this outperformance by 0.02
PME units. Thus, for buyout funds, these results indicate that unless they are extremely
large, high-carry buyout funds do not underperform per se. Rather, large, high-carry buyout
funds do not outperform by as much as their smaller, high-carry counterparts.
       For venture capital funds, on the other hand, the results are clearly supportive of the
message from previous tables that carried interest in venture funds is sometimes excessive.


G.      Summary and Discussion

       Overall, the evidence in Tables 4-7 provide only very limited support for the view that
management contracts in private equity are inefficient. The main evidence in favor of this
view is the fact that high-carry venture capital funds underperform. While this result is
weak in the overall cross-section, it grows stronger in fundraising booms and among large
VC funds.
       For the most part, however, GP compensation and ownership is unrelated to the funds’
cash flow performance, and most significant relations oppose the inefficiency view. High-carry
and low-GP ownership buyout funds outperform, the opposite of the inefficiency prediction.
Further, there is no evidence for the common critique that large, certain, and immediate
  17
     As in Table 6, Table 7 focuses on the full sample of funds and includes the contract terms as continuous
(demeaned) variables. As before, results are similar in the liquidated sample or when using instead indicator
variables for whether the management fee is above the fund-type specific median, for whether the carry is
less than, equal to, or greater than 20%, and for whether GP ownership is less than 0.99%, greater than
1.01%, or in between.


                                                     24
fee income reduces performance. High-management fee funds do not underperform in the
overall cross-section, nor in boom times, nor among large funds.
     The evidence is most consistent with the view that management contracts in private
equity are more or less efficient, whereby variation in compensation and ownership reflects
variation in GP skill, agency concerns, and the demand for GP services. The evidence is
broadly consistent with a Berk and Green (2004)-type equilibrium in which GPs largely
capture the excess returns they generate.


         V.    Compensation Incentives and Cash Flow Behavior

     The evidence thus far indicates that, on average, compensation practices in private equity
are not so distorted that LP returns are compromised. This does not mean, however, that
agency tensions between GPs and LPs cannot be observed in the data. Agency conflicts
exist largely because GPs possess private information about both the underlying quality of
their investments at a particular point in time, as well as their ability to exit the investments
over a given time-frame at a particular price. This information asymmetry allows GPs to
potentially game the timing of their exits to take advantage of contractual provisions that
alter the GP’s payoffs in a way that is designed to protect the LP’s return.
     In this section, we investigate two such issues that are frequently cited by practitioners
and in the popular press. We first examine the clustering of distributions around “water-
fall” dates for earning carried interest, and then turn to the question of “zombie funds”,
whereby funds with management fees based on net invested capital have incentives to delay
distributions on “living dead” investments to continue earning management fees on those
investments. As we will see, the evidence supports both of these concerns.


A.    Distribution Clustering around Carried Interest Waterfalls

     The first issue concerns the timing of distributions around the threshold for earning
carried interest. In general, GPs earn no carried interest until a certain basis (usually,
contributed capital to date) plus a preferred (hurdle) return is first distributed to LPs. While
it is clearly desirable for LPs that they receive “their money back” before GPs earn any profit-


                                               25
sharing, a potential, and less desirable, side-effect concerns the behavior of GPs once this
“waterfall” for earning carried interest is crossed. Specifically, practitioners emphasize the
incentive for the GP to time distributions so that they cluster at and just after the waterfall
date. By doing so, the GP earns immediate carried interest on those distributions, and
avoids the risk that the investments might later decline in value. The problem is that this
behavior will lead some investments to be harvested too early, when delaying would have
generated more value for LPs.18 One practitioner characterized these incentives to us as:
“Once you reach the waterfall, it’s time to turn on the vacuum cleaner”. Despite anecdotal
accounts, there exists no systematic evidence on whether GPs in fact behave this way.
       While we cannot observe the counterfactual of what would happen to performance if GPs
held investments for longer or shorter than they actually do, we can test for whether distri-
butions cluster around the waterfall date. Such clustering would be difficult to rationalize as
an innocuous response to changes in exit opportunities, because there is no reason – other
than the GP’s particular incentives – why the attractiveness of an exit would spike around
waterfall dates.
       As discussed in Section IV.C, we do not know the specific carry timing rules for our sample
funds. Therefore, we examine distribution behavior around waterfall dates implied by what
Metrick and Yasuda (2010a) report is, by a considerable margin, the most common carried
interest timing scheme. In this scheme, GPs begin to earn carried interest (the waterfall
occurs) once the LPs receive back, in the form of distributions from exited investments, all
of the capital they had previously contributed to the fund (including both capital contributed
for investments and management fees paid), plus a preferred return. In buyout, this preferred
return is almost always 8% annualized, while venture contracts rarely have a preferred return,
so the threshold is simply the return of contributed capital. To the extent that some sample
funds employ different carry timing rules, the resulting noise in our estimates of when the
waterfall occurs biases the tests against finding an effect.
       Table 8 presents the tests. The tests include only the 54% of buyout funds and 42% of
venture capital funds that actually cross the waterfall threshold at some point in the fund’s
  18
    These issues are related to the “grandstanding” incentives explored by Gompers (1996), by which GPs
have incentives to exit investments too early to aid in raising their next fund.



                                                  26
life. The dependent variable is a fund’s quarterly distributions (as a percentage of fund
size). The unit of observation is a fund-calendar quarter. Standard errors are clustered by
fund. Clustering by calendar quarter or by both fund and calendar quarter yields similar
results. Estimation is OLS for ease in interpreting the coefficients, but Tobit specifications
that account for left-censoring at zero yield similar results.
      The tests include only quarters in the [-4, +8] interval around the quarter in which the
waterfall threshold is crossed (inclusive), to focus cleanly on behavior around the waterfall
date. The key explanatory variables are indicator variables for whether the quarter in ques-
tion is the waterfall quarter, whether it is 1-4 (inclusive) quarters after the waterfall quarter,
and whether it is 5-8 (inclusive) quarters after the waterfall quarter. Thus, the omitted
category is whether the quarter in question is in the [-4, -1] interval before the waterfall
quarter.
      If funds cluster distributions around the waterfall, we expect a positive and significant
coefficient on the waterfall quarter indicator, indicating higher distributions in that quarter
relative to the four prior quarters. We also expect distributions to be higher compared
to the pre-waterfall period in the 1-4 quarters after the waterfall quarter, and for this to
decline subsequently (in the period 5-8 quarters after the waterfall). That is, we expect a
hump-shaped pattern of distributions, with a peak around the waterfall date.
      The evidence in Table 8 strongly supports agency concerns that funds cluster distributions
around the waterfall date. In column (1), we see that distributions in the waterfall quarter
are 47.72% of fund size higher on average than the average quarterly distribution in the four
pre-waterfall quarter.19 In the period 1-4 quarters after the waterfall is met, distributions
are on average 3.25% of fund size larger than the average for the four pre-waterfall quarters.
In the period 5-8 quarters after the waterfall is met, distributions are on average 2.97% of
fund size smaller than the average for the four pre-waterfall quarters.
      Of course, one concern is that the large distributions in the waterfall quarter may simply
be an artifact of the best-performing funds, whose distributions are larger on average. To
address this concern, Column (2) includes a control for the fund’s total distributions over
its life, and Column (3) includes fund fixed effects to focus purely on time-series variation
 19
      Unlike capital calls, distributions are not capped at 100% of fund size.


                                                       27
in distributions within a fund. The results are robust. Further, Columns (4)-(9) repeat the
analysis for buyout and venture capital funds separately. The general patterns hold for both
types of funds, though the coefficient on the period 1-4 quarters after the waterfall is not
significant (though still positive) for buyout funds.


B.     Zombie Funds and Living Dead Investments

      The second issue concerns the incentive for funds to delay liquidating poorly performing
“living dead” investments. This can result in so-called “zombie funds” who hold ongoing
investments with little hope of a profitable exit. These incentives arise when the fund’s
management fee basis changes to be based on net invested capital (total equity investments
minus the cost basis of realized, exited investments) at some point in the fund’s life. The
intent of such rules is for LPs to avoid paying GPs management fees on investments they
are no longer managing. Clearly, this is good from the LP’s perspective, and our data show
that lifetime management fees are indeed lower among such funds. At the same time, such
rules mean that exiting unprofitable investments and returning the modest proceeds to LPs
will reduce the base of capital on which the GPs earn management fees, giving them the
incentive to delay doing so. While this issue has received particular attention among private
equity critics20 , there is no systematic evidence on whether GPs actually behave this way.
      Because we do not have information on underlying portfolio companies, we do not know
whether any given distribution in the data is associated with a profitable or an unprofitable
investment. However, we can test whether funds that have this kind of management fee
basis shift do in fact tend to have distributions later in life compared to funds without such
management fee provisions. Such a finding would be consistent with “zombie fund” concerns.
      Table 9 presents tests. The dependent variable is a fund’s quarterly distribution as a
percentage of fund size (Panel A), or an indicator for whether the fund has a distribution
in a given quarter (Panel B). The unit of observation is a fund-calendar quarter. Standard
errors are clustered by fund. Clustering by calendar quarter or by both fund and quarter
yield similar results. Estimation is OLS for ease in interpreting the coefficients, but Tobit
(Panel A) and probit (Panel B) specifications yield similar conclusions. We include vintage
 20
      See for example “Private Equity Trapped in ‘Zombie Funds’”, The Financial Times, December 11, 2011.


                                                    28
year fixed effects to control for market-wide factors that might influence the size and timing
of distributions (for example, the existence of favorable IPO markets for exiting investments)
in the cross-section of funds.
   The key explanatory variable is an indicator for whether the fund in question has a fee
basis change that gives rise to “zombie fund” concerns, interacted with (the natural logarithm
of) the age of the fund, measured in calendar quarters. A positive coefficient on this variable
indicates that distributions occur later in life for funds with such a management fee basis
change, consistent with the concerns outlined above.
   Columns (1)-(3) of both panels of Table 9 focus on all funds pooled together. Column
(1) shows that the coefficient on the key interaction is indeed significantly positive. Col-
umn (2) addresses concerns that this result may be due to systematic differences in overall
fund performance across funds who do and do not have a fee basis change (despite the
fee/performance results in previous sections), by including controls for the fund’s final PME
and the fund’s total lifetime distributions as a percentage of fund size (Panel A) or the fund’s
total number of distributions over its life (Panel B). Column (3) further address such con-
cerns by including fund fixed effects to focus on time-series variation in distribution behavior
within a fund. The results are robust.
   Columns (4)-(6) and (7)-(9) repeat the analysis, focusing on buyout and venture capital
funds, respectively. These columns reveal that the overall results are largely driven by buyout
funds. While the key interaction coefficient is positive in all specifications for venture capital
funds, it is generally insignificant.


                                        VI.   Conclusion

   We use a large, proprietary database of private equity funds to study the links between
the terms of private equity management contracts and the subsequent cash flow behavior and
performance of the funds. The database is the largest and most recent source of private equity
compensation terms available to date, and is the first to provide information on manager
ownership and to include cash flow information along with the terms of management contract.
   We use these data to contrast two views of the state of managerial compensation practices


                                               29
in private equity. The first is that highly compensated GPs, or those with little skin in the
game, extract excessive rents and have inadequate incentives, which ultimately spells poor
returns for limited partners. The second view is that the management contracts we observe
reflect (potentially constrained) efficient bargaining outcomes between sophisticated parties,
and that management contracts reflect the productivity of GP skills and the agency problems
that LP’s face.
   The evidence in this paper supports the latter view. To be sure, during fundraising
booms, percentage management fees increase and GP’s compensation shifts toward the fixed
component, consistent with greater GP bargaining power and a preference for fixed compen-
sation. Moreover, GPs who receive fees on invested capital tend to exit investments (and
thus lower their fee basis) more slowly, while GPs tend to accelerate the pace of exit imme-
diately after they become eligible to receive carried interest. These findings indeed suggest
that the fundamental information asymmetry between GPs and LPs allows GPs to game
the contractual provisions that are partially in place to protect the LP’s return, and they
certainly illustrate that GP’s earn more in boom periods. However, we find no evidence that
high-fee funds underperform an on a net-of-fee basis. Management fees and carried interest
are generally unrelated to net-of-fee cash flow performance. This suggests that private equity
GPs that receive higher compensation earn it in the form of higher gross returns. When we
examine the relation between GP ownership and performance, our evidence flatly contradicts
the argument that GPs with low skin in the game demonstrate poor performance.
   Thus, even though the asymmetric information problem between LPs and GPs may
sometimes give rise to a misalignment of incentives between GPs and LPs in private equity,
the management contracts that facilitate investment in the private equity industry are not
so bad at providing incentives (or so confusing) that these conflicts lead LPs to suffer low
returns on average. The fact that GP compensation goes up in boom periods does not mean
that they capture an undue proportion of the rents from private equity investing; instead it
means that the overall rents on average increase during private equity booms. The fact that
contractual provisions designed to protect LP returns are subject to gaming by GPs does
not mean that LPs are any the worse for having them; it simply reflects the fact that, in
equilibrium, such contractual provisions come with costs as well as benefits.


                                             30
   Our results on the relation between fees and net-of-fee performance in private equity
stand in marked contrast to what is known about the mutual fund industry. There, net-of-
fee performance is strongly negatively correlated with management fees. Of course, limited
partners who invest in private equity are different from mutual fund investors in a number
of important respects. First, because they are typically large institutions committing large
sums of capital, they presumably are more sophisticated than most retail investors. But
perhaps more importantly, the inability to withdraw their commitments without incurring
substantial costs creates much stronger incentives to screen GPs ex ante and to guarantee
that management contracts optimally reflect their agency concerns. In this regard, private
equity investors also differ from investors in hedge funds, who are able to withdraw their
capital periodically, with advance notice given to the fund. Our results suggest that under-
standing how monitoring, oversight and the matching process between LPs and GPs affect
the equilibrium effort and performance of intermediated capital is an important question for
future research.




                                            31
                                        Appendix

   In this Appendix we describe the calculation of lifetime management fees and their present
value. For the 454 sample funds (60.1%) whose fee basis is committed capital and never
changes throughout the life the of the fund, these calculations are straightforward. Expected
dollar management fees for each year are obtained by applying the fee percentage in effect
for that year to the fund’s committed capital (in 257 of these 454 funds, the fee percentage
is constant over time as well).
   For the 8% of funds whose initial fee basis is not committed capital, and the 33% of funds
whose basis changes at some point, assumptions are needed to calculate expected fees for
years in which the basis is not committed capital. Following Metrick and Yasuda (2010a),
we assume that capital calls for investments are expected to be made over the first 5 years
of a fund’s life. For VC funds, the expected investment pace is 39%, 18%, 15%, 16%, and
12% in years one through five, respectively. For buyout funds, it is 22%, 22%, 20%, 19%,
and 17%. These expected investment paces are equal to the actual empirical size-weighted
average investment paces for our sample funds (based on our cash flow data) – Metrick and
Yasuda (2010a) use similar investment paces derived from a different sample of funds. Again
following Metrick and Yasuda (2010a), we assume that investments are exited following an
exponential distribution with parameter 0.2 (corresponding to an average five year holding
period).
   Using these assumptions, we forecast the expected invested capital (total equity capital
invested in portfolio companies to date) and net invested capital (invested capital minus the
cost basis of realized investments) for each year. Together with committed capital, these are
the most common fee bases. Further, the most common basis changes are from committed
capital to net invested capital or (less frequently) invested capital. In a few rare cases, the
initial or later fee basis is “net asset value” rather than committed capital, invested capital,
or net invested capital. In these cases we assume that investments are valued at cost, which
results in an effective basis of net invested capital. In a few other rare cases, the initial or
new fee basis is committed capital less the cost basis of realized investments. We forecast
this basis and compute expected fees in these cases using the same investment and exit


                                              32
assumptions laid out above.
   With these forecasts, we then obtain expected annual management fees by applying the
percentage fee for each year to the applicable forecasted fee basis for that year (reflecting
changes in fees and bases when they are scheduled to occur). Lifetime fees and their present
value then follow immediately. Metrick and Yasuda (2010a) provide further discussion and
numerical examples of calculating lifetime fees in this way.




                                             33
                                     References
 [1] Agrawal, Vikas, Naveen Daniel, and Narayan Naik, 2009. Role of Managerial Incentives
     and Discretion in Hedge Fund Performance. Journal of Finance 64:2221-2256.

 [2] Axelson, Ulf, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2009. Why are Buyouts Levered?
     The Financial Structure of Private Equity Firms. Journal of Finance 64:1549-1582.

 [3] Berk, Jonathan, and Richard Green, 2004. Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in
     Rational Markets. Journal of Political Economy 112:1269-1295.

 [4] Berk, Jonathan, and Jules van Binsbergen, 2011. Measuring Skill of Active Managers.
     Working Paper, Stanford University.

 [5] Busse, Jeffrey, A., Amit Goyal, and Sunil Wahal, 2010. Performance Persistence in
     Institutional Investment Management. Journal of Finance 65:765-790.

 [6] Carhart, Mark M., 1997. On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance. Journal of Fi-
     nance 52:57-82.

 [7] Cochrane, John, 2005. The Risk and Return of Venture Capital. Journal of Financial
     Economics 75:3-52.

 [8] DaRin, Marco, Thomas Hellmann, and Manju Puri, 2011. A Survey of Venture Capital
     Research. Handbook of the Economics of Finance, forthcoming.

 [9] Driessen, J., T.-C. Lin, and L. Phalippou, 2012. A New Method to Estimate Risk and
     Return of Non-Traded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case of Private Equity Funds.
     Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

[10] Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2010. Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section
     of Mutual Fund Returns. Journal of Finance 65:1915-1947.

[11] Gompers, Paul 1996. Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry. Journal of Fi-
     nancial Economics 42:133-156.

[12] Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, 1999. An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture
     Capital Partnership, Journal of Financial Economics 51:3-44.

[13] Hochberg, Yael, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2010. Informa-
     tional Hold-up and Performance Persistence in Venture Capital. Working Paper, New
     York University and Northwestern University.

[14] Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson and Rudiger Stucke, 2010. A White Paper on Private
     Equity Data and Research. UAI Foundation Consortium Working Paper.

[15] Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson and Steven N. Kaplan, 2011. Private Equity Perfor-
     mance: What do we Know? Working Paper.



                                           34
[16] Jensen, Michael and Kevin J. Murphy, 1990. Performance Pay and Top Management
     Incentives. Journal of Political Economy 98:225-264.

[17] Jones, Charles and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2003. The Price of Diversifiable Risk in
     Venture Capital and Private Equity. Working Paper, Columbia University.

[18] Kaplan, Steven N. and Antoinette Schoar, 2005. Private Equity Performance: Returns,
     Persistence, and Capital Flows, Journal of Finance 60:1791-1823.

[19] Kaplan, Steven N. and Per Strömberg, 2009. Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity.
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 23:121-46.

[20] Khorana, Ajay, Henri Servaes, and Lei Wedge, 2007. Portfolio Manager Ownership and
     Fund Performance. Journal of Financial Economics 85:179-204.

[21] Korteweg, Arthur and Morten Sorensen, 2010. Risk and Return Characteristics of Ven-
     ture Capital-Backed Entrepreneurial Companies. Review of Financial Studies.

[22] Leland, Hayne and David Pyle, 1977. Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure,
     and Financial Intermediation, 1977. Journal of Finance 32:371-387.

[23] Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar and Wan Wongsunwai, 2007. Smart Institutions, Fool-
     ish Choices? The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle. Journal of Finance 62:731-764.

[24] Litvak, Kate, 2009. Venture Capital Partnership Agreements: Understanding Compen-
     sation Arrangements. University of Chicago Law Review 76:161-218.

[25] Ljungqvist, Alexander, Matthew Richardson, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2007. The Invest-
     ment Behavior of Buyout Funds: Theory and Evidence. Working Paper, NYU Stern
     School of Business

[26] Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010a. The Economics of Private Equity Funds.
     Review of Financial Studies 23: 2303-2341.

[27] Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010b. Venture Capital and the Finance of Inno-
     vation. Wiley & Sons.

[28] Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2011. Venture Capital and other Private Equity:
     A Survey. European Financial Management, forthcoming.

[29] Phalippou, Ludovic, 2009. Beware of Venturing into Private Equity, Journal of Eco-
     nomic Perspectives 23:147-1666.

[30] Phalippou, Ludovic and Oliver Gottschalg, 2009. The Performance of Private Equity
     Funds, Review of Financial Studies 22:1747-1776.

[31] Robinson, David T. and Berk A. Sensoy, 2011. Cyclicality, Performance Measurement,
     and Cash Flow Liquidity in Private Equity, Working Paper, Duke University and Ohio
     State University.


                                          35
                                     Table 1: Sample Summary
This table presents summary statistics for the venture capital (VC) and buyout (BO) private equity funds
in our sample. Fraction of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd funds indicates the fraction of sample funds of that sequence
number (position in a partnership’s sequence of funds). Total Committed Capital is the aggregate amount
of capital committed to our sample funds (i.e. the sum of the sizes of all sample funds). Total LP Capital
and Total GP Capital indicate, respectively, the contributions of limited partners and general partners to
this total. The % of VE universe is the total committed capital of the sample funds of a given fund type
expressed as a percentage of the total committed capital to all funds of the same type reported on Venture
Economics over the entire 1984-2009 sample period. The % of VE U.S. universe includes only U.S. funds.
Fund Size is the committed capital of the fund. All dollar amounts are in millions of US dollars. Funds in
the liquidated sample are those that had vintage years prior to 2006 and were liquidated as of 6/30/2010.

                                          All Funds             Venture Capital             Buyout
     Full Sample:
     Number of Funds                         837                     295                     542
     Fraction of 1st Funds                   0.30                    0.25                    0.32
     Fraction of 2nd Funds                   0.24                    0.26                    0.23
     Fraction of 3rd Funds                   0.16                    0.15                    0.16

     Total Committed Capital               $596,843                 $61,358                $535,485
     Total LP Capital                      $585,745                 $60,469                $525,276
     Total GP Capital                      $11,088                   $879                   $10,209

     % of VE universe                       26.5%                    10.8%                  41.6%
     % of VE U.S. universe                  34.4%                    15.9%                  55.7%

     Mean Fund Size ($M)                    713.06                  207.96                   987.98
     Median Fund Size ($M)                 204.34                   106.12                   312.91
     St. Dev. Fund Size ($M)               1887.61                  276.26                  2291.21

     Liquidated Sample:
     Number of Funds                         560                     192                     368
     Fraction of 1st Funds                   0.33                    0.28                    0.35
     Fraction of 2nd Funds                   0.23                    0.23                    0.23
     Fraction of 3rd Funds                   0.16                    0.18                    0.15

     Total Committed Capital               $308,309                 $37,126                $271,183
     Total LP Capital                      $302,165                 $36,609                $265,556
     Total GP Capital                       $6,144                   $517                   $5,627

     Mean Fund Size ($M)                    550.55                  193.37                   736.91
     Median Fund Size ($M)                 172.90                    83.46                   266.72
     St. Dev. Fund Size ($M)               1228.38                  284.51                  1467.87




                                                     36
               Table 2: Summary Statistics on GP Compensation and Ownership
Panel A contains summary statistics on management fees, carried interest and GP ownership (capital com-
mitments) for the full sample of 837 funds. The initial fee percentage is the annual percent management fee
at the fund’s inception (i.e., the percentage fee for the first year of the fund’s life); the initial fee basis is the
basis to which this percentage is applied. Fee % Changes and Fee Basis Changes are indicator variables for
whether the initial fee percentage or basis ever change over the fund’s life. Lifetime fees is the total expected
management fees earned over the life of the fund (see Appendix for calculation details). PV Lifetime fee
is the present value of the lifetime fees discounted by the 10-year Treasury rate in effect at the end of the
fund’s vintage year. Management fee information is available for 755 of the 837 sample funds, and 491 of
the 560 liquidated funds. Carried interest is the GP’s profit participation. The GP ownership is the GP’s
commitment of its own capital to the fund, above and beyond the profit claim from carried interest. Panel
B contains the same information for the sample of liquidated funds.
Panel A: Full Sample                                                 All Funds      Venture Capital        Buyout
Management Fees:
Initial Fee (% per year):                               Mean             1.94              2.24              1.78
                                                      Median             2.00              2.50              2.00
                                                     St. Dev.            0.49              0.41              0.45
Lifetime Fees (% of fund size):                         Mean            16.54             20.37              14.49
                                                      Median            16.50             21.38              14.23
                                                     St. Dev.           5.60              4.46               5.05
PV Lifetime Fees (% of fund size):                      Mean            13.17             16.01              11.65
                                                      Median            13.53             16.69              11.52
                                                     St. Dev.            4.21             3.37               3.81
Fraction with:
                                     Initial Fee = 1.5%                  0.17              0.05              0.23
                                     Initial Fee = 2.0%                  0.37              0.26              0.43
                                     Initial Fee = 2.5%                  0.21              0.46              0.07
                Initial Fee Basis = Committed Capital                    0.92              0.94              0.92
                                        Fee % Changes                    0.45              0.53              0.40
                                     Fee Basis Changes                   0.33              0.14              0.43
                    Either Fee % or Fee Basis Changes                    0.59              0.61              0.59
                     Both Fee % and Fee Basis Change                     0.18              0.06              0.24
Carried Interest:
Mean Carry (%)                                                          20.13             20.44              19.96
Median Carry (%)                                                        20.00             20.00              20.00
St. Dev. Carry (%)                                                       1.49              1.70              1.33
Fraction with Carry = 20%                                                0.94              0.89              0.97
Fraction with Carry < 20%                                                0.02              0.01              0.02
Fraction with Carry > 20%                                                0.05              0.10              0.01
GP Ownership:
Mean GP Ownership (% of fund size)                                       2.17              1.78              2.38
Median GP Ownership (% of fund size)                                     1.00              1.00              1.00
St. Dev. GP Ownership (% of fund size)                                   5.51              5.09              5.73
Fraction with GP Ownership between 0.99% - 1.01%                         0.42              0.56              0.35
Fraction with GP Ownership < 0.99%                                       0.21              0.18              0.23
Fraction with GP Ownership > 1.01%                                       0.37              0.26              0.43
Panel B continued on next page

                                                        37
Panel B: Liquidated Sample                              All Funds   Venture Capital   Buyout
Management Fees:
Initial Fee (% per year):                      Mean       1.92           2.25          1.75
                                             Median       2.00           2.50          2.00
                                            St. Dev.      0.50           0.42          0.46
Lifetime Fees (% of fund size):                Mean       16.32          20.46        14.16
                                             Median       16.24          21.50        13.75
                                            St. Dev.      5.82           4.63         5.19
PV Lifetime Fees (% of fund size):             Mean       12.86          15.90        11.28
                                             Median       13.24          16.62        11.32
                                            St. Dev.       4.37          3.50         3.92
Fraction with:
                                   Initial Fee = 1.5%     0.19           0.05          0.26
                                   Initial Fee = 2.0%     0.35           0.26          0.40
                                   Initial Fee = 2.5%     0.20           0.46          0.07
              Initial Fee Basis = Committed Capital       0.91           0.93          0.90
                                      Fee % Changes       0.44           0.55          0.38
                                   Fee Basis Changes      0.31           0.12          0.41
                  Either Fee % or Fee Basis Changes       0.59           0.61          0.58
                   Both Fee % and Fee Basis Change        0.17           0.07          0.22

Carried Interest:
Mean Carry (%)                                            20.16          20.44        20.01
Median Carry (%)                                          20.00          20.00        20.00
St. Dev. Carry (%)                                         1.40           1.84        1.08
Fraction with Carry = 20%                                 0.94           0.88          0.97
Fraction with Carry < 20%                                 0.01           0.02          0.01
Fraction with Carry > 20%                                 0.05           0.10          0.02

GP Ownership:
Mean GP Ownership (% of fund size)                        2.15           1.62          2.43
Median GP Ownership (% of fund size)                      1.00           1.00          1.00
St. Dev. GP Ownership (% of fund size)                    5.47           2.61          6.47
Fraction with GP Ownership between 0.99% - 1.01%          0.44           0.57          0.37
Fraction with GP Ownership < 0.99%                        0.21           0.18          0.23
Fraction with GP Ownership > 1.01%                        0.35           0.24          0.40




                                              38
   Table 3: The Determinants of Management Fees, Carried Interest, and GP Ownership
This table presents cross-sectional fund-level OLS estimates of the relations between general partner man-
agement fees (Panel A), carried interest (Panel B), GP ownership (Panel C), and other fund characteristics.
In Panel A, the dependent variable is the present value of the lifetime management fees for the fund, ex-
pressed as a percentage of fund size (committed capital). In Panel B, the dependent variables is the carried
interest percentage. In Panel C, the dependent variable is the GP’s ownership in the fund, expressed as a
fraction of fund size. These dependent variables are defined and summary statistics are provided in Table 2.
Industry Flows is total capital committed to all funds of the same type (venture capital or buyout) raised
in the fund’s vintage year (data from Venture Economics). Fund Size is the fund’s committed capital (in $
M). Fund No. is the fund’s sequence number (its position in a partnership’s sequence of funds). Vintage
year (i.e., year of fund start) fixed effects are included in Columns (3) and (6). Estimation is OLS in Panels
A and B, and fractional logit in Panel C. A constant is estimated in each specification but not reported.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the partnership level. *,
**, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


               Panel A: Dependent Variable is Present Value of Lifetime Fees (% of fund size)
                             (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)                (6)
   ln(Industry Flows)      0.44***       0.71***                     0.41***       0.58***
                            (0.15)        (0.16)                      (0.15)        (0.18)
   ln(Fund Size)                        -1.15***       -1.12***                   -0.85***            -0.69**
                                          (0.15)        (0.16)                      (0.31)             (0.29)
   ln(Fund No.)                            0.22          0.34                       0.87*              0.70*
                                          (0.33)        (0.33)                      (0.47)             (0.41)

   Sample                      BO             BO            BO            VC            VC             VC
   Vintage Year FE?             No             No           Yes            No            No            Yes
   Observations                491            491           491           264           264            264
   R-squared                   0.03           0.18          0.22          0.04          0.08           0.17

                             Panel B: Dependent Variable is Carried Interest (%)
                                (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
   ln(Industry Flows)          0.02        0.02                       0.16***            0.02
                              (0.04)      (0.03)                       (0.05)           (0.05)
   ln(Fund Size)                           0.07         0.13*                          0.35***        0.32***
                                          (0.06)        (0.08)                          (0.12)         (0.12)
   ln(Fund No.)                            -0.16         -0.18                         0.58***        0.63***
                                          (0.15)        (0.16)                          (0.20)         (0.22)

   Sample                      BO             BO            BO            VC            VC             VC
   Vintage Year FE?             No             No           Yes            No            No            Yes
   Observations                542            542           542           295           295            295
   R-squared                   0.00           0.01          0.08          0.03          0.17           0.20

                  Panel C: Dependent Variable is GP Ownership as a Fraction of Fund Size
                               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)                 (6)
   ln(Industry Flows)         -0.01                                  0.17
                             (0.07)                                 (0.16)
   ln(Fund Size)              -0.01       -0.05        0.74*        -0.60*        -0.66*             -3.23** *
                             (0.05)      (0.06)        (0.30)       (0.35)        (0.37)               (1.35)
   ln(Fund Size)2                                     -0.07**                                         0.28**
                                                       (0.03)                                          (0.12)
   First Fund Indicator     0.42**         0.28         0.27         -0.66         -0.77                -0.84
                             (0.21)      (0.18)        (0.18)       (0.46)        (0.52)               (0.53)

   Sample                       BO            BO            BO             VC            VC             VC
   Vintage Year FE?             No            Yes           Yes            No            Yes            Yes
   Observations                 542           542           542            295           295            295

                                                     39
                Table 4: Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow Performance
This table presents cross-sectional fund-level OLS estimates of the relations between final fund performance,
net of all management fees and carried interest, and the terms of the fund management contract. In spec-
ifications (1)-(2), the dependent variable is the fund’s final PME with respect to the S&P 500 (“PME”).
In specifications (3)-(4), the dependent variable is the fund’s final PME with respect to its tailored index
(“Tailored PME”). The tailored index is the Nasdaq for VC funds, and the Fama-French small, medium,
and large size-tercile portfolios for small, medium, and large buyout funds, respectively. In specifications
(5)-(6), the dependent variables is the fund’s “levered PME”, as defined in Robinson and Sensoy (2011).
The levered PME adjusts the PME calculation to allow for a beta not equal to one. We use a beta of 1.3 for
buyout funds and 2.5 for VC funds, consistent with recent estimates in the literature. “GP Ownership High”
and “GP Ownership Low” are indicator variables for whether the GP commitment is greater than 1.01% of
fund size or less than 0.99% of fund size, respectively. All other variables are defined in previous tables. PV
Lifetime Fees is dummied out for funds without management fee information or without pre-specified fees.
The dummy variable is insignificant and not reported. Panel A uses the full sample, while Panel B uses only
the sample of liquidated funds. All specifications include vintage year fixed effects. A constant is estimated
in each specification but not reported. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustered at the partnership level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                                             Panel A: Full Sample
Dependent Variable:                   PME                      Tailored PME                 Levered PME
                                (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
PV Lifetime Fees              -0.01           0.02         -0.01          0.01           -0.01         0.02
                             (0.01)         (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.01)        (0.02)
Carried Interest (%)         0.04**          -0.01      0.04***           -0.04         0.03**        -0.04*
                             (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)
GP Ownership High              0.10          -0.22        0.10*           -0.21         0.10*          -0.22
                             (0.06)         (0.14)        (0.06)         (0.14)         (0.06)        (0.14)
GP Ownership Low            0.20***          -0.15       0.22**           -0.04        0.20***         -0.10
                             (0.07)         (0.16)        (0.09)         (0.20)         (0.07)        (0.20)
ln(Fund Size)                 -0.02          -0.02         -0.01          -0.00          -0.03         -0.03
                             (0.02)         (0.07)        (0.02)         (0.07)         (0.02)        (0.08)
ln(Fund No.)                   0.02           0.01          0.03           0.03          0.02           0.00
                             (0.05)         (0.11)        (0.06)         (0.12)         (0.05)        (0.12)

Sample                        BO            VC             BO            VC             BO             VC
Vintage Year FE?              Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                  542           295            542           295            542            295
R-squared                     0.08          0.13           0.06          0.10           0.10           0.14

                                      Panel B: Liquidated Sample
Dependent Variable:                 PME                   Tailored PME                      Levered PME
                                (1)       (2)           (3)            (4)                (5)           (6)
PV Lifetime Fees              -0.01      0.02          -0.01          0.02               -0.01         0.03
                             (0.01)     (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.02)             (0.01)        (0.02)
Carried Interest (%)           0.05      -0.02        0.05*         -0.05**               0.04       -0.04**
                             (0.03)     (0.02)        (0.03)         (0.02)             (0.03)        (0.02)
GP Ownership High              0.10      -0.08          0.11          -0.05               0.10         -0.10
                             (0.07)     (0.14)        (0.07)         (0.14)             (0.06)        (0.13)
GP Ownership Low            0.24***       0.06       0.30**           0.22             0.23***          0.20
                             (0.09)     (0.19)        (0.12)         (0.25)             (0.09)        (0.24)
ln(Fund Size)                  0.01      -0.02         0.02           -0.01              0.01          -0.05
                             (0.03)     (0.09)        (0.03)         (0.09)             (0.03)        (0.09)
ln(Fund No.)                  -0.00      0.11          -0.00           0.15              -0.01          0.09
                             (0.05)     (0.12)        (0.07)         (0.13)             (0.05)        (0.12)

Sample                        BO            VC             BO            VC             BO             VC
Vintage Year FE?              Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                  368           192            368           192            368            192
R-squared                     0.11          0.22
                                                      40   0.08          0.16           0.14           0.23
                Table 5: Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow Comovement
This table presents estimates of the sensitivities of fund-level net cash flows to broader market conditions,
as a function of the fund’s compensation and ownership terms. The dependent variable is a fund’s net cash
flows (capital distributions minus calls) in a calendar quarter, as a percentage of fund size. The unit of
observation is a fund-calendar quarter. Cash flows are between the funds and their limited partners, and
are net of all management fees and carried interest. P/D is the price/dividend ratio of the S&P 500, Yield
Spread is the Baa-Aaa yield spread, and % Uncalled is the percentage of the fund’s committed capital
that has not been called, all measured at the end of the preceding calendar quarter. ln(Yield Spread) is
orthogonalized with respect to ln(P/D). In specification (1), the contract term analyzed is the present
value of lifetime fees (as a percentage of fund size). In specification (2), the contract term is the carried
interest percentage, and in specification (3), the contract term is the GP’s ownership percentage. All of
these variables are demeaned in each specification. Panel A uses only the sample of buyout funds; Panel B
uses only the sample of venture capital funds. Estimation is OLS. All specifications include fixed effects
for fund age (measured in quarters). Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustered by calendar quarter. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

      Dependent Variable:                            Net Cash Flows (% of Fund Size)
      Contract Term:                    PV Lifetime Fee             Carry                    Ownership
                                         Panel A: Buyout Funds
                                              (1)                    (2)                         (3)
      Contract Term ×:
        ln(P/D)                               0.03                        -0.20                   0.12
                                             (0.10)                      (0.31)                  (0.08)
         ln(Yield Spread)                     -0.02                      -0.20*                 -0.05**
                                             (0.03)                      (0.11)                  (0.02)
         ln(% Uncalled)                      0.03**                       -0.01                   -0.00
                                             (0.02)                      (0.05)                  (0.01)
      Contract Term                           -0.24                       1.13                   -0.47*
                                             (0.38)                      (1.23)                  (0.28)
      ln(P/D)                                 0.71                       0.99**                  1.05**
                                             (0.43)                      (0.45)                  (0.45)
      ln(Yield Spread)                      -0.52***                    -0.61***               -0.59***
                                             (0.11)                      (0.11)                  (0.11)
      ln(% Uncalled)                        -1.05***                    -1.15***               -1.12***
                                             (0.17)                      (0.16)                  (0.16)
                                                All specifications include fund age fixed effects
      Observations                           19,484                      21,684                  21,684
      R-squared                                0.09                        0.09                   0.09

                                      Panel B: Venture Capital Funds
                                              (1)                    (2)                         (3)
      Contract Term ×:
        ln(P/D)                                0.09                         0.24                    0.86
                                              (0.13)                       (0.47)                 (0.67)
         ln(Yield Spread)                      0.01                         0.02                   -0.06
                                              (0.03)                       (0.09)                 (0.05)
         ln(% Uncalled)                        -0.00                        -0.01                  -0.17
                                              (0.02)                       (0.07)                 (0.13)
      Contract Term                            -0.37                        -1.00                  -3.00
                                              (0.50)                       (1.78)                 (2.35)
      ln(P/D)                                4.29**                        3.94**                 3.90**
                                              (1.83)                       (1.65)                 (1.63)
      ln(Yield Spread)                       -0.74**                      -0.69**                -0.72**
                                              (0.32)                       (0.30)                 (0.30)
      ln(% Uncalled)                        -1.75***                     -1.52***               -1.56***
                                              (0.47)                       (0.38)                 (0.39)
                                                 All specifications include fund age fixed effects
      Observations                           11,727                        13,029                 13,029
      R-squared                                 0.06                        0.06                   0.06
                                                     41
             Table 6: Compensation, Ownership, and Performance Over Fundraising Cycles
This table presents estimates of the relations between management fees, carry, and GP ownership terms and fund
performance, as a function of private equity fundraising flows. In Columns (1)-(3), the dependent variable is a fund’s
final PME; in columns (4)-(6), it is the fund’s final Tailored PME; in columns (7)-(9), it is the fund’s final Levered PME.
In specifications (1), (4), and (7), the contract term analyzed is the present value of lifetime fees (as a percentage of
fund size). In specifications (2), (5), and (8), the contract term is the carried interest percentage. In specifications (3),
(6), and (9), the contract term is the GP’s ownership percentage. All the contract term variables, and the ln(Industry
Flows) variable, are demeaned in each specification. Definitions for all other variables are provided in the captions to
prior tables. Panel A uses only the sample of buyout funds; Panel B uses only the sample of venture capital funds.
Estimation is OLS. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by calendar quarter.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

 Dependent Variable:                  PME                            Tailored PME                       Levered PME
 Contract Term:           PV LF      Carry     GP Own.      PV LF       Carry   GP Own.       PV LF       Carry   GP Own.

                                                  Panel A: Buyout Funds
                            (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)            (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)
 Contract Term ×
   ln(Industry Flows)     0.01**      -0.01       -0.00     0.01**      -0.01       -0.00     0.01**      -0.01*      -0.00
                          (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.00)
 Contract Term             -0.00    0.05***       -0.00      -0.00    0.05***       -0.00       -0.00    0.05***      -0.00
                          (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.01)
 ln(Industry Flows)        0.03       0.02         0.02      -0.02      -0.02       -0.02     0.06***    0.06***    0.06***
                          (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
 ln(Fund Size)             -0.03      -0.03       -0.03      -0.01      -0.01       -0.01       -0.03      -0.04      -0.03
                          (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
 ln(Fund No.)              0.02       0.03         0.02       0.03       0.03        0.02        0.02      0.03        0.02
                          (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)

 Observations               542       542         542        542        542         542        542         542        542
 R-squared                  0.02      0.01        0.01       0.02       0.01        0.00       0.04        0.03       0.03

                                              Panel B: Venture Capital Funds
                            (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)
 Contract Term ×
   ln(Industry Flows)       -0.00   -0.04**       -0.01      -0.00    -0.04**       -0.01       0.00     -0.04**      -0.00
                           (0.01)    (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.01)
 Contract Term              0.02       0.02       0.02       0.02       -0.01        0.01      0.03        -0.01       0.00
                           (0.02)    (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.01)
 ln(Industry Flows)         -0.03     -0.03       -0.02      -0.01      -0.00        0.01      0.11*      0.12**    0.13**
                           (0.05)    (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.05)
 ln(Fund Size)              -0.08     -0.08      -0.10*      -0.06      -0.06     -0.09**     -0.09*     -0.09**    -0.13**
                           (0.06)    (0.06)      (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.04)     (0.05)
 ln(Fund No.)               0.04       0.04        0.05       0.04      0.05         0.05      0.02         0.03      0.03
                           (0.12)    (0.13)      (0.13)     (0.12)     (0.14)      (0.13)     (0.11)      (0.14)     (0.13)

 Observations               295       295         295        295        295         295        295         295        295
 R-squared                  0.01      0.01        0.01       0.01       0.01        0.01       0.04        0.03       0.03




                                                             42
        Table 7: Compensation, Ownership, and Performance in the Cross-Section of Fund Size
This table presents estimates of the relations between management fees, carry, and GP ownership terms and fund
performance, as a function of fund size. In Columns (1)-(3), the dependent variable is a fund’s final PME; in columns
(4)-(6), it is the fund’s final Tailored PME; in columns (7)-(9), it is the fund’s final Levered PME. In specifications
(1), (4), and (7), the contract term analyzed is the present value of lifetime fees (as a percentage of fund size). In
specifications (2), (5), and (8), the contract term is the carried interest percentage. In specifications (3), (6), and (9),
the contract term is the GP’s ownership percentage. All the contract term variables, and the ln(Fund Size) variable,
are demeaned in each specification. Definitions for all other variables are provided in the captions to prior tables. Panel
A uses only the sample of buyout funds; Panel B uses only the sample of venture capital funds. Estimation is OLS. All
specifications include vintage year fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustered by calendar quarter. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

 Dependent Variable:                 PME                            Tailored PME                        Levered PME
 Contract Term:          PV LF      Carry     GP Own.      PV LF       Carry   GP Own.       PV LF        Carry   GP Own.

                                                 Panel A: Buyout Funds
                           (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)     (5)             (6)         (7)         (8)      (9)
 Contract Term ×
   ln(Fund Size)           -0.00   -0.02**       -0.01      -0.01    -0.01**       -0.00      -0.00      -0.02**   -0.01*
                          (0.00)    (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.01)   (0.00)
 Contract Term             -0.01   0.05***       -0.00      -0.01    0.05***       -0.00      -0.01      0.04***    -0.00
                          (0.01)    (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.01)       (0.01)   (0.00)
 ln(Fund Size)             -0.02     -0.02       -0.01      -0.00      -0.01       -0.00      -0.02        -0.02    -0.02
                          (0.02)    (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.02)   (0.03)
 ln(Fund No.)                        0.02         0.01                 0.02        0.02                    0.02      0.01
                                    (0.04)      (0.04)                (0.06)      (0.06)                  (0.04)   (0.04)

                                                All specifications include vintage year fixed effects
 Observations              542       542         542         542        542        542         542        542       542
 R-squared                 0.06      0.07       0.06         0.04      0.05        0.04       0.09        0.09      0.08

                                             Panel B: Venture Capital Funds
                           (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)            (6)         (7)         (8)      (9)
 Contract Term ×
   ln(Fund Size)           -0.01    -0.05*        0.01       0.00     -0.05*       -0.00      -0.00       -0.05*    -0.00
                          (0.01)    (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.03)   (0.01)
 Contract Term             0.02       0.04        0.02      0.02       0.01        -0.00      0.02         0.00     -0.01
                          (0.02)    (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.02)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.02)       (0.04)   (0.03)
 ln(Fund Size)             -0.03     -0.03       -0.03      -0.03      -0.02       -0.02     -0.08*        -0.04    -0.06
                          (0.05)    (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.04)   (0.05)
 ln(Fund No.)                        0.02         0.02                 0.04         0.03                   0.01     -0.00
                                    (0.13)      (0.13)                (0.14)      (0.13)                  (0.13)   (0.13)

                                                All specifications include vintage year fixed effects
 Observations              295       295         295         295        295        295         295        295       295
 R-squared                 0.13      0.13       0.12         0.10      0.10        0.09       0.14        0.13      0.13




                                                            43
                       Table 8: Do Funds Cluster Distributions Around the Carry Threshold?
This table presents estimates of whether funds cluster distributions to occur just after the threshold for earning carried interest
has been crossed (the “waterfall”). The threshold is calculated using the rule that all called capital, plus a hurdle rate of return,
must be returned to LPs before carry is earned. For buyout, the hurdle rate is 8%. For venture capital, there is no hurdle
return. Metrick and Yasuda (2010a) document that this is by a considerable margin the most common carried interest scheme
employed by private equity funds in practice. The dependent variable is a fund’s quarterly distribution to LPs, as a percentage
of fund size (committed capital). The unit of observation is a fund-calendar quarter. The independent variables are indicator
variables for (i) whether the fund-quarter in question is the quarter in which the waterfall is achieved (“Waterfall Quarter”), (ii)
whether the fund-quarter in question lies in the four quarters after the waterfall is achieved (“1-4 Quarters After Waterfall”),
and (iii) whether the fund-quarter lies in the four quarters after that (“5-8 Quarters After Waterfall”). “Total Dists” is the total
amount of distributions (as a percentage of fund size) made by the fund over its life. Regressions are run only for funds that
achieve the waterfall at some point in their lives, and only for fund-quarters beginning four quarters before the waterfall quarter
and ending eight quarters after the waterfall quarter (the interval [-4,+8] quarters around the waterfall quarter). Thus, the
coefficients on the indicator variables measure the difference between average distributions in each corresponding time period
and average distributions in the four quarters prior to the waterfall quarter (the omitted category). The omitted category
estimate is the fund fixed effect in specifications in which they are included, and the constant term in specifications that do not
include fund fixed effects. These variables are estimated but not reported for brevity. Estimation is OLS for ease in interpreting
coefficients. Tobit results accounting for left-censoring at zero are similar. Specifications (1)-(3) include all funds, specifications
(4)-(6) include only buyout funds, and specifications (7)-(9) include only venture capital funds. Specifications (3), (6), and (9)
include fund fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by fund. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.



 Dependent Variable:                                  Quarterly Distributions (% of Fund Size)
                                  (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)     (8)    (9)
 Waterfall Quarter             47.72*** 47.73*** 47.72*** 39.39*** 39.40*** 39.39*** 62.90*** 62.91*** 62.90***
                                 (4.60)  (4.60)   (4.81)    (3.73)      (3.73)   (3.91)    (10.96) (10.97) (11.45)
 1-4 Quarters After Waterfall  3.25*** 2.61*** 3.11***        1.12       0.54     1.29    7.09*** 6.29*** 6.43***
                                 (1.02)  (0.98)   (1.08)    (0.99)      (0.92)   (1.07)     (2.18)  (2.11)  (2.26)
 5-8 Quarters After Waterfall -2.97*** -3.94*** -3.35*** -3.65*** -4.54*** -3.49*** -1.59* -2.78*** -2.88***
                                 (0.54)  (0.55)   (0.66)    (0.67)      (0.68)   (0.85)     (0.92)  (0.89)  (1.03)
 Total Dists. (% of Fund Size)          0.06***                        0.06***                     0.06***
                                         (0.01)                         (0.01)                      (0.01)
 Buyout Fund Indicator          -2.93**   0.16
                                 (1.38)  (0.62)
 Sample                           All      All      All       BO         BO       BO         VC      VC      VC
 Fund FE?                          No      No      Yes         No         No      Yes         No      No     Yes
 Observations                    4,106   4,106    4,106      2,617      2,617    2,617      1,489   1,489   1,489
 R-squared                        0.16    0.22     0.26       0.19       0.26     0.30       0.15    0.22    0.24




                                                                  44
          Table 9: Do Funds with Fees based on Companies Under Management Delay Distributions?
This table presents estimates of whether distributions occur later in life among funds whose management fee basis shifts to
net invested capital (cost basis of all investments less cost basis of realized investments) during the fund’s life (usually after
4-5 years). It is frequently alleged that such fee structures give GPs an incentive to hold on to “living dead” or “zombie”
investments rather than liquidate them and distribute the (modest) proceeds, so that they continue to earn management fees on
the capital invested. “Fee Basis Changes” is an indicator variable equal to one if the fund’s fee basis changes from committed
capital to net invested capital after the investment period (4-5 years of life), and zero otherwise. “ln (Fund Age)” is the natural
logarithm of the fund’s age in calendar quarters. “Total Dists.” is the total distributions to LPs made by the fund over the
course of its life (as a percentage of fund size). “PME” is the fund’s final PME at the end of its life. “Number Dists.” is the
total number of calendar quarters in which the fund made a distribution over its life. The unit of observation is a fund-calendar
quarter. In Panel A, the dependent variable is a fund’s quarterly distribution to LPs, as a percentage of fund size (committed
capital). In Panel B, the dependent variable is an indicator variable for whether the fund made a distribution to LPs in the
focal calendar quarter. Estimation is OLS for ease in interpreting the coefficients. Tobit (Panel A) and probit (Panel B)
estimation yields similar results. Specifications (1)-(3) include all funds, specifications (4)-(6) include only buyout funds, and
specifications (7)-(9) include only venture capital funds. Specifications (3), (6), and (9) include fund fixed effects. A constant
is estimated in each specification but not reported for brevity. All specifications include vintage year fixed effects. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by fund. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                           Panel A: Dependent Variable is Quarterly Distributions (% of Fund Size)
                                    (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)                (8)       (9)
 Fee Basis Changes ×
   ln(Fund Age)                   0.58***     0.48***     0.69***      0.44**    0.31*         0.51**    0.38*       0.32     0.23
                                   (0.17)       (0.15)     (0.19)      (0.20)    (0.18)        (0.23)    (0.21)     (0.24)   (0.26)
 ln(Fund Age)                     0.58***     0.53***     0.78***     0.93***   0.90***       1.18***     0.07       0.02     0.21
                                   (0.09)       (0.08)     (0.10)      (0.10)    (0.10)        (0.11)    (0.15)     (0.14)   (0.16)
 Fee Basis Changes                -1.51***    -1.22***               -1.17***     -0.71                   -1.15      -0.89
                                   (0.41)       (0.41)                 (0.45)    (0.47)                  (0.72)     (0.68)
 Total Dists. (% of Fund Size)                 0.02***                          0.02***                            0.02***
                                                (0.00)                           (0.00)                             (0.00)
 PME                                           0.55***                           0.48**                               0.48
                                                (0.18)                           (0.22)                             (0.30)
 Buyout Fund Indicator               0.07      0.24***
                                    (0.25)      (0.08)
                                                         All specifications include vintage   year fixed effects
 Sample                             All         All         All         BO         BO          BO         VC        VC        VC
 Fund FE?                            No          No         Yes          No         No         Yes         No        No       Yes
 Observations                      34,719      34,719     34,719       21,687    21,687       21,687     13,032    13,032    13,032
 R-squared                          0.01        0.03        0.04        0.01       0.03        0.04       0.01      0.04      0.04

                           Panel B: Dependent Variable is whether a Quarterly Distribution is Made
                                    (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)                 (8)       (9)
 Fee Basis Changes ×
   ln(Fund Age)                    0.04***     0.03**     0.04***    0.04***     0.02*        0.04***     0.02       0.02      0.02
                                    (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)        (0.01)    (0.02)     (0.01)    (0.01)
 ln(Fund Age)                      0.06***    0.05***     0.07***    0.07***    0.06***       0.08***   0.05***    0.04***   0.05***
                                    (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.01)        (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)
 Fee Basis Changes                  -0.05*     -0.04*                  -0.05      -0.04                   -0.05      -0.06
                                    (0.03)     (0.03)                 (0.03)     (0.03)                  (0.04)     (0.04)
 Number Dists.                                0.02***                           0.02***                            0.02***
                                               (0.00)                            (0.00)                             (0.00)
 Buyout Fund Indicator               0.07     0.24***
                                    (0.25)     (0.08)
                                                         All specifications include vintage   year fixed effects
 Sample                             All         All         All         BO         BO          BO         VC        VC        VC
 Fund FE?                            No          No         Yes          No         No         Yes         No        No       Yes
 Observations                      34,719      34,719     34,719       21,687    21,687       21,687     13,032    13,032    13,032
 R-squared                          0.04        0.13        0.16        0.03       0.13        0.16       0.02      0.09      0.11
                                                                45
