                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INVESTMENT BUSTS, REPUTATION, AND THE TEMPTATION TO BLEND IN
                            WITH THE CROWD

                                            Steven Grenadier
                                            Andrey Malenko
                                           Ilya A. Strebulaev

                                         Working Paper 17945
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17945


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2012




We thank Robert Gibbons, Deborah Lucas, Nadya Malenko, Kelly Shue, Youchang Wu (ASU WFC
discussant), seminar participants at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, New Economic School,
Ohio State University, Stanford University, University of Rochester, University of Virginia, and Washington
University in St. Louis, and participants at the 2012 ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference for
their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Steven Grenadier, Andrey Malenko, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investment Busts, Reputation, and the Temptation to Blend in with the Crowd
Steven Grenadier, Andrey Malenko, and Ilya A. Strebulaev
NBER Working Paper No. 17945
March 2012
JEL No. G01,G24,G31,G32,G33

                                            ABSTRACT

We provide a dynamic model of an industry in which agents strategically time liquidation decisions
in an effort to protect their reputations. As in traditional models, agents delay liquidation attempting
to signal their quality. However, when the industry faces a common shock that indiscriminately forces
liquidation of a subset of projects, agents with bad enough projects choose to liquidate even if their
projects are unaffected by the shock. Such "blending in with the crowd" creates an additional incentive
to delay liquidation, further amplifying the shock. As a result, even minuscule common shocks can
be evidenced by massive liquidations. As agents await common shocks, the industry accumulates "living
dead" projects. Surprisingly, the potential for moderate negative common shocks often improves agents
values.


Steven Grenadier                                   Ilya A. Strebulaev
Graduate School of Business                        Graduate School of Business
Stanford University                                Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305                                 655 Knight Way
sgren@stanford.edu                                 Stanford, CA 94305
                                                   and NBER
Andrey Malenko                                     istrebulaev@stanford.edu
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street
Cambridge, MA 02142
amalenko@mit.edu
1         Introduction
None love the messenger who brings bad news. Love can be even harder to find if the bad
news speaks ill of the messenger’s abilities. When decision makers face the unappealing task
of revealing unsuccessful outcomes that impact their reputations, delay may be their first
instinct.1 Delay becomes even more enticing if they can wait for industry-wide downturns
in order to hide individual failings and instead “blend in with the crowd,” by liquidating
their projects strategically when many other projects have to be terminated. In this paper
we argue that real investment decisions can be substantially affected by such a blend-in-
with-the-crowd mechanism. More importantly, this may have far-reaching repercussions for
the dynamics of whole industries and conceivably for the economy at large and provide
an explanation for industry-wide investment busts. Our results can be applied to various
contexts - the decision maker could be a corporate manager, a fund manager, a bank loan
officer, or an entrepreneur. For clarity, in what follows we use the latter term.
    The economic mechanism works as follows. If liquidation of a project is perceived as a
negative signal of the entrepreneur’s intrinsic ability, she has incentives to delay the aban-
donment decision. If, in addition, informativeness of liquidation varies over time, the en-
trepreneur has incentives to time liquidation strategically when informativeness of the liqui-
dation is the lowest. This is the case when an industry is hit by a negative common shock,
and some good projects are forced to be liquidated for an exogenous reason. In an attempt to
fool outsiders into believing that their projects got hit by the shock, entrepreneurs managing
bad enough projects “blend in with the crowd” and choose to liquidate their projects even
if they are unaffected by the shock. In a dynamic model, expectations of a common shock
in the future create incentives for entrepreneurs of lower quality to further delay liquidation
in hope of blending in with forced liquidations of good projects at the time of the shock.
Importantly, this also leads high quality entrepreneurs to delay their liquidation decisions
in an effort to separate themselves from lower types. This delay creates a large number of
“living dead” projects outstanding when the common shock arrives, thereby amplifying its
effect even more. As a result, even small common shocks can lead to massive liquidations.
Taken together, this mechanism gives rise to a disproportionately low rate of liquidations in
normal times and, when an industry is hit by a negative common shock, a disproportionately
high rate of liquidations, far exceeding the size of the shock itself.
    To see the intuition, consider an example from the venture capital industry. Entrepreneurs
    1
        See, e.g., Miller (2002) and Kothari, Shu, and Wysocki (2009).



                                                        2
care not just about the payoffs on current projects, but also about their reputations, which
are critical in attracting future funding sources. Thus, perception of one’s ability by outsiders
links the payoff on a current project with future payoffs. Now suppose an entrepreneur real-
izes that a project is unlikely to pay off, and thus should be scrapped. As liquidation reveals
negative information about her ability, she may reconsider the decision to scrap the project.
First, she may delay her liquidation decision simply hoping for unexpected resurrection of
the project’s fortunes. Second, and more importantly, by delaying she may hope to time her
decision so that it would be more difficult for the market to judge her low ability correctly.
She may strategically attempt to blend in with the crowd at a time when higher-ability
entrepreneurs have to liquidate their projects as well, either during a recession or a nega-
tive industry-wide shock. In such a case she can successfully hide the negative information,
avoiding truthful revelation altogether.
    This intuition is not constrained to entrepreneurial firms. General partners of private
equity funds typically receive approximately the same amount of compensation from running
future funds as they do in direct compensation from current performance (Chung et al., 2011).
If they realize that their current fund is not performing well, they may want to time the
liquidation of their unsuccessful investments when liquidation is the least informative signal
of the general partners’ poor abilities, i.e., when many funds have to liquidate due to a
common shock. Similarly, bank loan officers may have substantial private information about
the performance of the loans they authorized and their fear of tarnishing their reputations
may lead them to delay foreclosing on bad loans until a recession hits, when the loans’
poor performance could be attributed to systematic factors rather than their screening and
monitoring abilities.
    Strategic attempts to blend in with the crowd by individual entrepreneurs may have
far-reaching consequences for their industries. In particular, even relatively small common
shocks could launch an avalanche of liquidations and lead to investment busts. The standard
intuition for many liquidations in recessions is the severity of a downturn. However, such an
avalanche may also be accounted for by strategic timing of project liquidations. This effect is
exaggerated by accumulation of “living dead” projects that entrepreneurs delay terminating
in expectations of the shock. Thus, this economic mechanism can potentially explain the
magnitude of investment activity cyclicality observed in many industries in which reputation
plays an important role, such as venture capital. Consistent with our results, recent work of
Agarwal and Kolev (2012) provides evidence of clustering in corporate layoffs in public firms
during recessions.


                                               3
     In order to explore this economic mechanism in detail, we build a continuous-time dy-
namic signaling model that formalizes the blending-in-with-the-crowd intuition and inves-
tigate the impact of relatively small common shocks that trigger forced liquidations of a
fraction of projects. Because our goal is to understand the efficiency of investment liquida-
tion, our starting point is the cross-section of projects that have already been funded and
are up and running. We assume that projects are either successful (with a random arrival of
payoff) or unsuccessful (payoff never arrives). Neither the entrepreneur nor outside investors
initially know whether the project can succeed. As they observe whether the project pays
off or not, they update their beliefs about the success of the project in a Bayesian manner.
However, entrepreneurs have some private information about their project quality, which is
correlated with entrepreneurs’ intrinsic abilities. Outsiders are initially aware only about the
distribution of ability in the total pool of projects and subsequently either observe ability at
the time of the project’s successful payoff or learn about it by observing liquidation decisions
(or lack thereof). We assume that by operating projects entrepreneurs incur publicly-known
running costs. As a result, other things equal, an entrepreneur with more favorable private
information liquidates the project later. Consequently, when outsiders observe that a project
is liquidated, they update their beliefs about the entrepreneur’s ability downward.
     Consider the trade-off faced by an entrepreneur whose project has not paid off for a
long time. Suppose, first, that there are no common shocks. By liquidating the project
the entrepreneur saves on the running costs. But at the same time outsiders will perceive
liquidation as a signal of the poor intrinsic quality of the project, which will adversely
impact the entrepreneur’s reputation and thus future returns. This trade-off naturally leads
to a separating equilibrium in which entrepreneurs strategically delay liquidation, but in
equilibrium are unable to hide their true ability from the market upon liquidation. In
equilibrium, liquidation reveals negative information about the entrepreneur.2
     Now consider what happens in the presence of negative common shocks that indiscrimi-
nately cause a liquidation of a small fraction of all projects, irrespective of their character-
istics. For example, in the context of entrepreneurial projects, a common shock can be a
technology shock that negatively affects some, but not all projects in the sector or a shock
to the provision of financing in the economy that hits investors financing some entrepreneurs
but not the others. Because the common shock forces liquidation of some good projects,
liquidation at the time of a shock is not as informative about the entrepreneur’s quality
  2
     The idea that liquidation reveals negative information about the agent and makes agent reluctant to
liquidate is standard in the literature. It was proposed first by Boot (1992).



                                                   4
as is liquidation during normal times. Indeed, although outsiders observe liquidation, they
do not know if it occurs because the entrepreneur is forced to liquidate her good project
or because the entrepreneur voluntarily liquidates a bad project strategically. Because of
the former possibility, an entrepreneur with bad enough projects has an incentive to time
her liquidation decisions to the arrival of the common shock: she hides her true quality by
liquidating at the same time as other entrepreneurs and blaming the common shock.
    We find that the presence of common shocks has two effects on industry dynamics. First,
at the time of the common shock, the liquidation rate can be disproportionately large relative
to the magnitude of the shock. We characterize the “blending in” multiplier, the ratio of all
liquidations at the time of the common shock (i.e., both strategic and non-strategic) to
liquidations due to exposure to the shock (i.e., only non-strategic), and show that it can
take very high values. For example, for a reasonable parameter range, a common shock
that forces termination of only 1% of outstanding projects leads to a liquidation of 10% of
projects at the time of the shock. In other words, for every entrepreneur who is exposed
to the shock there are nine entrepreneurs who time their liquidation decisions strategically
to blend in with the crowd. We find that the multiplier is higher when a common shock is
smaller and when the entrepreneurs care more about outsiders’ perception of their abilities.
    The mechanism we consider can explain commonly observed dynamics in such different
industries as venture capital, real estate, and banking. Over a long period of time, the
incidence of negative outcomes and “news” can be unusually low. This quiet period is then
followed by an investment bust with a very high rate of mortality among projects. A standard
ex-post rationalization of this phenomenon involves either markets’ unreasonable optimism
(say, about the prospects of a particular industry or technology), followed by the participants
“waking up” to more sorrow prospects, or the availability of “cheap” credit that feeds bad
projects until a macroeconomic downturn limits the availability of capital dramatically. The
mechanism in this paper can explain such a phenomenon when the markets are rational,
provision of financing is relatively stable, and when the common shocks are relatively small.
An important implication of our results is that the temptation of individual entrepreneurs to
blend in aggregates to have a pronounced effect on industry- and economy-wide movements.
    Surprisingly, although the presence of common shocks leads to a considerable clustering
of liquidations, common shocks are not necessarily detrimental to an industry. Without a
common shock, liquidation decisions are excessively delayed. The effect of a common shock is
thus twofold. On the one hand, a common shock’s arrival in the future provides an additional
incentive for the entrepreneur to delay liquidation today. On the other hand, at the time of


                                              5
the shock’s arrival some entrepreneurs, who would otherwise delay their liquidation decisions,
liquidate their projects. The former effect decreases economic efficiency and the latter can
increase it. Although the combined effect is ambiguous, we show that for a reasonable range
of parameters, negative common shocks may be value-increasing as they play an important
“cleaning” role in the economy.
    Our paper relates to several strands of literature. Psychological research has demon-
strated that people tend to overinvest suboptimally in loss-making situations, a trait called
escalation of commitment or sunk cost fallacy (Arkes and Blumer, 1985; Staw and Hoang,
1995). Escalation of commitment has been shown to be particularly pervasive in scenarios
when additional investment can lead to the return of the original investment (known as “gam-
ble for resurrection”). Our mechanism provides a rational interpretation of the escalation
of commitment when entrepreneurs find it optimal to overinvest by attempting to blend in
with the crowd later on.
    A number of papers study inefficient delay and/or clustering of decisions due to various
informational effects. Among them, the most closely related models are Rajan (1994) and
Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011). Rajan (1994) studies coordination between two
banks in the recognition of bad loans in a model in which bank managers care about their
reputations. As reputation is less important in the adverse state of the economy, bank
managers coordinate on recognizing bad loans if the state is adverse, but not if the state is
normal.3 We build on Rajan’s insight that information effects on reputation vary over time,
but we study the dynamic properties of liquidation decisions. In particular, a crucial feature
of our mechanism is that expectations of a future common shock cause additional delay in
liquidations today, which leads to accumulation of the “living dead” projects and amplifies
the common shock, when it arrives.
    In a dynamic disclosure model, Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011) examine the
strategic timing of information revelation and show that bad (but not good) market news
triggers immediate disclosure of information by firms. While their model also features delay
and clustering, the economic mechanism in their paper is very different. Specifically, as in
standard disclosure models, disclosure is assumed to be truthful, so the idea that agents
not exposed to the shock liquidate at the shock to hide their information is not present in
Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011). Clustering is also present in the equity issuance
models of Lucas and McDonald (1990), which is based on time-varying market under/over-
   3
     Agarwal and Kolev (2012) present a modification of Rajan’s model to study clustering of corporate
layoffs.



                                                  6
valuation, and Korajczyk, Lucas, and McDonald (1992), which is based on time-varying
firm-level adverse selection. Clustering of decisions also arises in models of herding due to
limited information of each agent (Banerjee, 1992; Welch, 1992). Empirically, clustering was
found recently in earnings warnings (Tse and Tucker, 2010), disclosure of hedge fund returns
(Aragon and Nanda, 2011), and corporate layoffs (Agarwal and Kolev, 2012).
    Boot (1992) presents a model in which corporate managers who care about reputations
may be reluctant to divest their past projects. This effect is similar to the delay of liquidations
in normal times in our paper.4 However, our paper is focused on the role of common shocks,
which are not present in Boot (1992). Blending in with the crowd at the common shock is
related to the idea of trading when there is a lot of liquidity in the market. Thus, the paper
is also related to a recent literature on repeated lemons markets (Eisfeldt, 2004; Daley and
Green, 2011; Kurlat, 2011). Finally, the paper is related to other models in which the timing
of option exercise is a costly signaling device of the decision-maker’s private information
(Bustamante, 2011; Grenadier and Malenko, 2011; Morellec and Schürhoff, 2011).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the setup of
the model and solves the benchmark case of symmetric information. Section 3 provides the
solution for the main case of asymmetric information. Section 4 discusses implications of the
model. Finally, Section 5 concludes.


2       Model Setup
In this section, we discuss the main ingredients of the model and the economic rationale
behind our setup. Our goal is to explore the economic mechanism of “blending in” by
building a simple model that intuitively relates to a number of features observed in the real
world.
    Consider a risk-neutral entrepreneur (or manager) operating an investment project and
deciding when to scrap it. The project can be successful or unsuccessful. If the project
is successful, it provides a payoff of θ > 0 at a Poisson event which arrives with intensity
λ > 0. If the project is unsuccessful, it never pays off. At any point in time t, prior to
the occurrence of the payoff, both the entrepreneur and outsiders assess the likelihood that
the project is successful by p (t), which is updated in a Bayesian fashion as shown below.
    4
    Other models with delay due to information reasons include Gennotte and Trueman (1996), in which
management delays disclosure of negative news until the end of trading hours, and Milbradt (2011), in which
an institution delays realizing losses due to fair value accounting and the balance sheet constraint.



                                                    7
The initial prior that the project is successful is p (0) = p0 . We define the potential project
payoff θ to be the quality of the project and assume that it is the private information of the
entrepreneur. Outsiders do not know θ except for its prior distribution, which is common
                                                                               
knowledge. It is given by p.d.f. f (θ) and c.d.f. F (θ) with full support on θ, θ̄ , θ̄ > θ > 0.
In practice, the quality of the project is likely to be positively but imperfectly correlated
with the entrepreneur’s ability. For simplicity, we assume that θ coincides with the ability
of the entrepreneur. Keeping the project afloat requires a cash outflow of c per unit time.
The discount rate is equal to r > 0.5
    The model of an individual entrepreneurial project thus contains four main ingredients:
quality of the project θ, initial success probability p0 , payoff intensity λ, and cost c. All
these ingredients have close equivalents in the business world. As an example, consider
entrepreneurial start-ups. As an entrepreneur typically knows more about the potential of
her project and the potential of a project is driven in large part by the quality of start-up
teams,6 we assume that the project’s payoff θ is private information of the entrepreneur.7
At the same time, most start-ups fail, often for reasons unrelated to entrepreneurial ability.
The likelihood of success or failure becomes apparent over time to both entrepreneurs and
financiers. Start-ups also incur (frequently substantial) costs while waiting for the resolution
of uncertainty.
    The project may be liquidated at any time for either of two reasons. First, the project
may be liquidated because the entrepreneur chooses to do so. Liquidating the project allows
the entrepreneur to stop paying out the flow of c at the cost of foregoing the potential payoff
θ. Second, the project may be liquidated exogenously because it gets exposed to an industry-
wide common shock that impacts many projects at once. In such an event, the entrepreneur
has no choice but to liquidate. The common shock arrives as a Poisson event with intensity
µ > 0 and is publicly observable. For simplicity, we assume that there can be only one
common shock. A project is exposed to the common shock with probability q. Whether
the project is in fact exposed to the shock or not is learned by the entrepreneur, but not by
   5
      An alternative way of modeling private information is to assume that the quality of the project positively
affects the probability of the project being successful. The alternative model has similar intuition and results
but features a more involved solution. The main driver of our results is that liquidation of a project reveals
negative information about the quality of the project to outsiders.
    6
      There is substantial literature on venture capital and entrepreneurial firms showing that quality of
management teams determines in large part the outcome of a project and that VC and angel investors pay
a great deal of attention to the characteristics of founders. E.g., see Zacharakis and Meyer (2000), Sudek
(2006), Maxwell, Jeffrey, and Lévesque (2011), Petty and Gruber (2011).
    7
      It is relatively easy to extend the model by allowing part of the project’s payoff to be unrelated to the
entrepreneur’s ability. This addition does not alter any of the important results of our model.


                                                       8
outsiders, upon the arrival of the shock. Liquidation of a project is publicly observed and
irreversible.
    Intuitively, a common shock can be a technology shock or a liquidity shock to the en-
trepreneur or her investors, as in Lerner and Schoar (2004). To illustrate it, consider the
example of the solar energy industry. Although the physical outcome, electricity generation,
is common across myriad solar energy projects, technologies differ widely, and often virtu-
ally undetectable changes in technologies can produce large variations in payoff structure. A
substantial reduction in the production cost of new solar panels – a negative common shock
for existing producers – pushes some producers out of business. The propensity to fail often
depends on subtle variation in technology that is difficult for outsiders to decipher. The
entrepreneurs are thus better equipped to learn whether such a shock negatively affects their
technology.
    Assume that the entrepreneur cares about her reputation in the eyes of outsiders. When
a successful project pays off, all parties observe payoff θ. For simplicity, we assume that the
reputation payoff upon the project payoff is γθ, where γ > 0 measures the importance of
reputation. However, in the event of liquidation, outsiders do not observe θ, because the
project payoff is not realized. Instead, at any time t prior to the payoff on the investment or
liquidation, outsiders hold the conditional expectation E [θ|It ], where It is the past history
that outsiders know at time t. The reputation payoff upon liquidation at any time τ is
therefore γE [θ|Iτ ].
    The reputation payoff is the reduced-form specification of the entrepreneur’s interaction
with outsiders after the project. For example, entrepreneurs interact repeatedly with in-
vestors and, once their low ability is established, are less likely to get new funding or have
access to top VC firms. Of course, more sophisticated specifications of reputation-building
incentives are also possible, but the simple specification we employ succinctly captures the
main idea behind the importance of reputation.
    We assume that it is optimal to begin operating all projects. Specifically, even the worst
project should be operated for at least an instant. A necessary and sufficient condition for
this is:
                                                      
                                        1        c
                                     λ>            + rγ .                                  (1)
                                        p0       θ




                                              9
2.1    Learning about Success of the Project
As the success of the project is uncertain, an important state variable is the belief that the
project is successful. Let p (t) denote the posterior probability that the project is successful,
given that the project has not paid off for time t since inception. Over a short period between
t and t+dt, the project pays off with probability λdt, conditional on being successful. Hence,
the posterior probability p (t + dt) conditional on not getting a payoff during [t, t + dt] is
equal to:
                                               (1 − λdt) p (t)
                             p (t + dt) =                             .                      (2)
                                          (1 − λdt) p (t) + 1 − p (t)
Rewriting (2) and taking the limit dt → 0, we obtain the following differential equation:

                                 dp (t) = −λp (t) (1 − p (t)) dt,                            (3)

with the boundary condition
                                             p (0) = p0 .                                    (4)

The solution to (3) – (4) is:
                                                    p0
                                   p (t) =                      .                            (5)
                                             (1 − p0 ) eλt + p0
The dynamics of the belief process are intuitive. As long as the project does not pay off,
the belief that the project is successful continuously decreases over time. The speed of
adjustment is proportional to λ, the intensity with which the successful project pays off.
Once the project pays off, the belief that the project is successful jumps up to one. Note
that because the private information of the entrepreneur does not enter the belief evolution
process (5), the entrepreneur and outsiders always share the same belief about the success
of the project.
    Equation (5) implies that there is a one-to-one mapping between p (t) and the time passed
since inception of the project t. One can invert (5) to get the time since inception of the
project given posterior p:                                
                                          1       p0 1 − p
                                t (p) = ln                   .                            (6)
                                          λ     1 − p0 p
Thus, either the belief about the success probability of the project p or the time passed since
inception of the project t can be used as a state variable. In what follows, we use t as a
more intuitive economically state variable, but all valuation equations can be equivalently
re-written in terms of p.


                                                 10
2.2    Benchmark Case
As a benchmark, consider the case of symmetric information in which outsiders also know θ.
We break up the value function into two regions depending on whether or not the common
shock has yet occurred. Let Vb∗ (t, θ) and Va∗ (t, θ) denote the value to the entrepreneur before
and after the arrival of the common shock, respectively, conditional on the project not paying
off for time t since inception. Working backwards in time, consider first the liquidation
problem after the common shock has occurred. By Itô’s lemma for jump processes (see, e.g.,
Shreve, 2004), in the range prior to liquidation the evolution of Va∗ (t) is given by:

                                      ∂Va∗ (t, θ)
                    dVa∗ (t, θ) =                 dt + (θ + γθ − Va∗ (t, θ)) dN (t) ,          (7)
                                         ∂t

where N (t) is a point process describing the arrival of the project payoff. In (7), the first
component reflects the change in the value due to learning about potential success of the
project, and the last component reflects the change in the expected value if the project pays
off (the entrepreneur receives the project payoff θ, the reputation payoff γθ, and foregoes
Va∗ (t, θ)). Because the entrepreneur believes that the project is successful with probability
p (t), Et [dN (t)] = p (t) λdt. Dividing (7) by dt and taking the expectation:

                           dVa∗ (t, θ)     ∂Va∗ (t, θ)
                                      
                  Et                     =             + λ (θ + γθ − Va∗ (t, θ)) p (t) .       (8)
                               dt             ∂t

As keeping the project afloat requires a cash outflow of c per unit time, Et [dVa∗ (t, θ)] − cdt
must be equal rVa∗ (t, θ) dt. This yields the following differential equation:

                                                       ∂Va∗ (t, θ)
                   (r + λp (t)) Va∗ (t, θ) = −c +                  + λ (1 + γ) θp (t) .        (9)
                                                          ∂t

Let τa∗ (θ) denote the time since inception of the project at which the entrepreneur optimally
liquidates her project, if it has not paid off yet. Equation (9) is solved subject to the following
boundary conditions:

                                          Va∗ (τa∗ (θ) , θ) = γθ,                             (10)
                                         ∂Va∗ (τa∗ (θ) , θ)
                                                            = 0.                              (11)
                                                ∂t

The first equation is the value-matching condition. It reflects the fact that upon liquida-
tion, the value to the entrepreneur equals her reputation payoff. The second equation is


                                                     11
the smooth-pasting condition. It ensures that the liquidation trigger maximizes the en-
trepreneur’s value (see, e.g., Dumas, 1991).
    Evaluating (9) at τa∗ (θ) yields:

                                                        λθp0
                                  rγθ + c =                              ,                      (12)
                                                (1 − p0 ) eλτa∗ (θ) + p0

which implies the following liquidation threshold:
                                                                     
                                      1           p0            λθ
                           τa∗   (θ) = ln                            −1   .                     (13)
                                      λ         1 − p0       c + rγθ

Condition (1) ensures that immediate liquidation at time 0 is not optimal: τa∗ (θ) > 0 for
any θ. The comparative statics of the liquidation threshold are intuitive: liquidation occurs
earlier if the waiting cost c is higher, the success intensity λ of the project is lower, the
discount rate r is higher, and reputation γ is more important.
    Next, consider the problem of optimal liquidation before the arrival of the common shock.
The evolution of Vb∗ (t, θ) is given by:

                         ∂Vb∗ (t, θ)
         dVb∗ (t, θ) =               dt + (θ + γθ − Vb∗ (t, θ)) dN (t)                          (14)
                             ∂t
                         + [q (γθ − Vb∗ (t, θ)) + (1 − q) (Va∗ (t, θ) − Vb∗ (t, θ))] dM (t) ,

where M (t) is a point process describing the arrival of the common shock. Compared to
(7), equation (14) includes an additional term reflecting the effect of a potential arrival of
the common shock. Upon its arrival, one of the two scenarios takes place. With probability
q, the project is exposed to the shock, in which case forced liquidation takes place and the
entrepreneur gets the reputation payoff γθ. With probability 1−q, the project is not exposed
to the shock, in which case the entrepreneur gets the after-shock expected value Va∗ (t, θ).
Dividing (14) by dt, taking the expectation, and equating it with c + rVb∗ (t, θ), we obtain
the following differential equation:

                                                      ∂Vb∗ (t, θ)
                 (r + λp (t) + µ) Vb∗ (t, θ) = −c +               + λ (1 + γ) θp (t)            (15)
                                                          ∂t
                                              + µ (qγθ + (1 − q) Va∗ (t, θ)) .

Analogous to τa∗ (θ), let τb∗ (θ) denote the time since inception at which the entrepreneur opti-
mally liquidates her project, if it has not paid off yet. By analogy with (10) – (11), equation


                                                    12
(15) is solved subject to boundary conditions Vb∗ (τb∗ (θ) , θ) = γθ and ∂Vb∗ (τb∗ (θ) , θ) /∂t = 0.
Evaluating (15) at τb∗ (θ) and rearranging the terms gives us:

                                   λθp0
               rγθ + c =              λτb∗ (θ)
                                                    + µ (1 − q) (Va∗ (τb∗ (θ) , θ) − γθ) .     (16)
                           (1 − p0 ) e         + p0

    It is easy to see that τb∗ (θ) = τa∗ (θ) satisfies (16). It is also the unique solution, because
the right-hand side of (16) is decreasing in τb∗ (θ). Thus, the liquidation strategy of the
entrepreneur is identical both before and after the arrival of the common shock. We denote
this full-information trigger by τ ∗ (θ) = τa∗ (θ) = τb∗ (θ). In the absence of information
frictions between the entrepreneur and outsiders, the only consequence of the common shock
is to introduce noise in the liquidation process by forcing the entrepreneur to liquidate the
project preliminary if it gets exposed to the shock.
    Although the liquidation thresholds are the same before and after the arrival of the
shock, the value functions are not. Because the common shock may trigger liquidation at a
suboptimal time, Vb∗ (t, θ) < Va∗ (t, θ) for any t < τ ∗ (θ).
    The optimal liquidation strategy in the benchmark case is summarized in Proposition 1:

    Proposition 1. Suppose that θ is known to both the entrepreneur and outsiders. Then,
the optimal strategy of the entrepreneur is to liquidate the project if it has not paid out for
time τ ∗ (θ). When the common shock arrives, the project is liquidated if and only if it is
exposed to the shock.

   Let us see how τ ∗ (θ) depends on θ:

                             d ∗                1            c
                                τ (θ) =                        2 > 0,                        (17)
                             dθ               λθ
                                                    −1  (rγθ + c)
                                            rγθ+c


because τ ∗ (θ) > 0. The liquidation decision under symmetric information satisfies three
properties. First, the equilibrium liquidation strategy is optimal in the sense that there
is no other liquidation strategy that yields a higher expected payoff to the entrepreneur.
Second, better projects are liquidated later. Intuitively, if the potential payoff from the
project is higher, then the entrepreneur optimally waits longer before scrapping it. Finally,
the common shock affects liquidation if and only if the project is exposed to the shock.




                                                    13
3       Private Information Case
In this section, we provide the solution for the main case, in which there is asymmetric
information between the entrepreneur and outsiders. Even though there is no revelation
of θ when the project is liquidated, outsiders try to infer θ from observing the timing of
liquidation. In turn, the entrepreneur will attempt to manipulate her liquidation decision in
order to shape the belief of outsiders. If there were no common shock, this would lead to a
separating equilibrium as in Grenadier and Malenko (2011): each type delays the liquidation
decision in the hope of fooling outsiders into believing that her project is better, but in
equilibrium outsiders learn θ with certainty. However, with a common shock, the equilibrium
is more interesting: the entrepreneur may choose to time the liquidation decision upon the
arrival of the common shock. By doing this, she blends in with entrepreneurs managing good
projects that are forced to be liquidated due to their exposure to the shock.
    Because we assume only one common shock, we solve the model by backward induction.
First, we consider the timing of liquidation after the common shock has already arrived at
time s in the past. In this case, no future common shock arrival is possible, so the solution
is quite standard. Second, we move a step back and consider the problem of liquidating the
project at the time of the common shock. Finally, we consider the problem of liquidating
the project prior to the arrival of the common shock.
    In the first and third stages of the problem, our focus is on the separating Bayesian-
Nash equilibrium. Note that there can also be pooling or semi-pooling equilibria. In these
equilibria, several types liquidate the project at the same instant even without the common
shock due to self-fulfilling beliefs. There are two reasons for our focus on the separating
equilibrium. First, because we are mostly interested in how common shocks trigger waves of
strategic liquidations, it is natural to abstract from possible waves of liquidations in other
periods. Second, even though pooling and semi-pooling equilibria exist, they typically do
not survive the D1 equilibrium refinement.8 In this respect, focusing on separating equilibria
is without loss of generality. We provide a heuristic analysis in this section and offer formal
proofs in the appendix. In the appendix, we also provide the off-the-equilibrium-path beliefs
that support the equilibrium and satisfy the D1 refinement.
    8
    See Cho and Sobel (1990) and Ramey (1996) for the proof of this result for signaling models with discrete
types and a continuum of types, respectively.




                                                     14
3.1      Liquidation Decision After the Arrival of the Shock
Consider the decision of type θ to liquidate the project after the common shock has already
occurred at time s in the past. Conjecture that the distribution of types right after the
common shock is truncated at some type θ̂ from below. This conjecture is verified later.
Then,
h i right after the common        shock
                                       at time s, outsiders believe that θ is distributed over
 θ̂, θ̄ with p.d.f. f (θ) / 1 − F θ̂ . We first solve for the entrepreneur’s liquidation
strategy for a given belief function of outsiders, and then apply the rational expectations
condition that the liquidation strategy and the belief function of outsiders must be consistent
with each other.
     Specifically, suppose that outsiders believe that type θ liquidates the project once it has
not paid off for time τa (θ), which is a monotonic and differentiable function of θ. Thus, if the
entrepreneur
               liquidates
                          the project at time τ , outsiders infer that the type is θ̃ (τ ) = τa−1 (τ ).
Let Va t, θ̃, θ, τ denote the value to the entrepreneur, conditional on the project not paying
off for time t, for a fixed belief of outsiders upon liquidation θ̃, where t ∈ [s, τ ] is the time
since inception of the project,
                                 θis the true type, and τ is the liquidation time. In the region
prior to liquidation, Va t, θ̃, θ, τ satisfies a differential equation identical to (9):

                                                       ∂Va
                          (r + λp (t)) Va = −c +           + λ (1 + γ) θp (t) .                     (18)
                                                        ∂t
Upon liquidation of the project, the entrepreneur gets the reputation payoff of γ θ̃. It implies
the following boundary condition:
                                                         
                                            Va τ, θ̃, θ, τ = γ θ̃.                                  (19)

Solving (18) subject to boundary condition (19) yields the value to the entrepreneur for a
given liquidation threshold and the belief of outsiders:
                         
                                 (r+λ)t
                                                          c  λ c         
            Va t, θ̃, θ, τ = e            p (t) U θ̃, θ, τ − +      + θ + γθ p (t) ,                (20)
                                                            r r+λ r

where:
                                                                                              
                       1 − p0 −rτ  c                                 c − λ (1 + γ) θ
            U θ̃, θ, τ =       e        + γ θ̃ + e−(r+λ)τ                                + γ θ̃ .   (21)
                           p0         r                                      r+λ

Given the hypothesized inference function τa (θ), we can substitute θ̃ (τ ) = τa−1 (τ ) for θ̃ in


                                                     15
(20) – (21) and take the first-order condition with respect to τ :
                                                             
                   − c − rγ θ̃ (τ ) + λp (τ ) θ + γ θ − θ̃ (τ ) + γ θ̃0 (τ ) = 0.             (22)

Equation (22) reflects the costs and benefits of postponing the liquidation. The first two
terms reflect the costs of waiting an additional instant dt: paying a cost cdt and delaying the
reputation payoff. The third term reflects the benefits of waiting an additional instant: the
possibility that the project will pay off. The probability of the project paying off over the   
next instant is λp (τ ) dt, and the payoff exceeds the liquidation payoff by θ + γ θ − θ̃ (τ ) .
Finally, the last term reflects the effect of waiting an instant on the outsiders’ inference of the
entrepreneur’s type: liquidating the project an instant later changes the reputation payoff
by γ θ̃0 (τ ) dt.
    Applying the rational expectations condition that in equilibrium outsiders’ beliefs must be
consistent with the entrepreneur’s liquidation strategy (θ̃ (τa (θ)) = θ), we get the equilibrium
differential equation:

                           dτa             γ                 h i
                               =                        , θ ∈ θ̂, θ̄ .                        (23)
                           dθ    c + rγθ − λθp (τa (θ))
   This equation is solved subject to the standard initial value condition that the lowest
type in the post-shock history, θ̂, liquidates at the symmetric information threshold:
                                           n   o
                                  τa θ̂ = max τ ∗ θ̂ , s ,                                    (24)

where τ ∗ (·) is given by (13). Intuitively, if the lowest type did not liquidate at the symmetric
information threshold, she would find it optimal to deviate to it. This deviation not only
would improve the direct payoff from exercise, but also could improve      the reputation payoff,
                                                                   ∗
since the current belief is already as bad as possible. If τ θ̂ ≥ s, then liquidation at
                                                          
τ ∗ θ̂ is feasible. If τ ∗ θ̂ < s, then liquidation at τ ∗ θ̂ is not feasible. In this case, the
most preferred liquidation
                         timing of type θ̂ is immediately after the common shock.
    By verifying that U θ̃, θ, τ satisfies the regularity conditions in Mailath (1987), Propo-
sition 2 shows that this argument indeed yields a unique (up to the off-equilibrium beliefs)
separating equilibrium threshold τa (θ).

   Proposition 2. Let τa (θ) be the increasing function that solves differential equation (23)
subject to the initial value condition (24). Then, τa (θ) is the liquidation threshold of type θ

                                                16
in the unique (up to the off-equilibrium beliefs) separating equilibrium.

   It immediately follows that the equilibrium liquidation threshold after the arrival of the
shock depends on the lowest type in this region, θ̂, and the arrival time       shock s. Thus,
                                                                           of the
we denote the after-shock equilibrium liquidation threshold by τa θ, θ̂, s . We denote the
                                                                     
equilibrium value function, Va t, θ, θ, τa θ, θ̂, s   , by V a t, θ, θ̂, s .


3.2    Liquidation Decision Upon the Arrival of the Shock
Consider the decision of type θ to liquidate the project upon the arrival of the common shock.
Analogously to the previous section, conjecture that the entrepreneur’s timing of liquidation
before the arrival of the common shock is given by threshold τb (θ), which is increasing in θ.
Conjecture also that τb (θ) ≥ τ ∗ (θ) for any θ, i.e., the entrepreneur delays liquidation of her
project compared to the benchmark case. Both conjectures are verified in Section 3.3. Given
these conjectures, the posterior belief of outsiders upon the arrival of the common shock at
time s is that θ is distributed over θ̌, θ̄ with p.d.f. f (θ) / 1 − F θ̌ , where θ̌ = τb−1 (s).
                                                                       

   When the common shock arrives, the project may be exposed to it (with probability
q) or not exposed to it (with probability 1 − q). In the former case, the entrepreneur has
no choice but to liquidate the project. In the latter case, the entrepreneur may liquidate
the project strategically together with the exposed projects or postpone the liquidation. If
the entrepreneur liquidates the project immediately, she gets a reputation payoff that is
independent of her true type. If the entrepreneur postpones the liquidation, her expected
                                                                        
payoff is increasing in her true type. Hence, there exists type θ̂ ∈ θ̌, θ̄ such that the non-
exposed project is liquidated if θ < θ̂ and not liquidated if θ > θ̂. Provided that θ̂ < θ̄,
there can be two scenarios depending on the liquidation strategy of the type θ̂ + ε that is
marginally higher than θ̂:

   Scenario 1: Type θ̂ + ε liquidates the project immediately after the common shock.
This happens if and only if:
                                                                 
                                                         s ≥ τ ∗ θ̂ ,                       (25)
                         ´ θ̂               ´ θ̄
                              θf (θ) dθ + q      θf (θ) dθ
                       γ θ̌               θ̂         = γ θ̂.                         (26)
                        F θ̂ − F θ̌ + q 1 − F θ̂



                                               17
Condition (25) states that the optimal liquidation time of type θ̂ is upon the arrival of the
common shock or immediately after. Condition (26) states that type θ̂ is exactly indifferent
between blending in and liquidating at the time of the common shock (the payoff of this
strategy is the left-hand side of (26)) and separating and liquidating a second after the
common shock.
                                                                                      
   Scenario 2: Type θ̂ + ε liquidates at the symmetric information threshold τ ∗ θ̂ + ε .
This happens if and only if:
                                                                        
                                                                           ∗
                                                                 s < τ θ̂ ,                                (27)
                           ´ θ̂              ´ θ̄
                            θ̌
                                θf (θ) dθ + q θ̂ θf (θ) dθ        ∗
                                                                     
                         γ                            = V a   s, θ̂ ,                               (28)
                          F θ̂ − F θ̌ + q 1 − F θ̂

                                 
where   Va∗ s, θ̂ = V a s, θ̂, θ̂, s is the value to type θ in the symmetric information frame-
                                                                                    
work, when time s has passed since the inception of the project. Note that Va∗ s, θ̂ is the
value in the world of full-information, and thus its solution is simple to calculate. Condition
                                                                                        
(27) states that the optimal liquidation time of type θ̂ is given by threshold τ ∗ θ̂ . Con-
dition (28) states that type θ̂ is indifferent between liquidating at the time of the common
shock
     and
         postponing liquidation
                                 until her optimal separating threshold. Note that because
  ∗                          ∗
Va t, θ̂ = γ θ̂ for all t ≥ τ θ̂ , condition (26) is a special case of condition (28).9
    Scenarios 1 and 2 imply that the equilibrium can have one of two forms. In the first
scenario, liquidation happens continuously with positive probability, while in the second
scenario a wave of liquidations triggered by the common shock is followed by a period of
no liquidation. The next proposition shows that there exists a unique indifferent type θ̂ in
equilibrium, and it is always strictly between θ̌ and θ̄:

    Proposition 3. At the moment the common shock hits, types θ < θ̂ that are not impacted
by the shock voluntarily liquidate in order to pool with those that are impacted by the shock.
           
θ̂ ∈ θ̌, θ̄ is unique,
                     and
                        computed in the following       Let θ̂m denote the unique solution
                                                     way.
to (26). If s ≥ τ ∗ θ̂m , then θ̂ = θ̂m . If s < τ ∗ θ̂m , then θ̂ is determined as the unique
solution to (28). Since θ̂ depends on s and θ̌, we denote the equilibrium indifference type by
   9
    Conditions (28) and (26) implicitly assume that θ̌ < θ̂ < θ̄. If θ̂ = θ̌ or θ̂ = θ̄, then (28) and (26) may
hold as strict inequalities. In the proof of Proposition 3, we establish that θ̂ ∈ θ̌, θ̄ indeed.


                                                      18
                    Figure 1: Equilibrium Structure upon the Arrival of the Shock.

        
θ̂ θ̌, s .

    The equilibrium structure is illustrated on Figure 1. Prior to the arrival of the shock,
as time goes by, low types liquidate their projects: type θ liquidates her project at time
τb (θ), where τb (θ) is to be determined in the next section. This truncates the distribution
of existing types from below. When the common shock arrives at date s, the posterior
distribution of types is θ̌ (s) , θ̄ , where θ̌ (s) = τb−1 (s). Upon arrival of the shock, fraction
                                   
                         
q of all types θ̌ (s) , θ̄ are hit by the shock and forced to liquidate their projects.
                                                                                h          On top ofi
                                                                                                    
this, there exists an intermediate type θ̂ θ̌ (s) , s , such that each type in θ̌ (s) , θ̂ θ̌ (s) , s
liquidates her project even if it is not exposed to the shock.
    The results of this section have two interesting implications. First, because θ̂ > θ̌, the
common shock leads to liquidation of more projects than are affected by the shock directly.
The difference between θ̂ and θ̌ measures the extent of strategic blending in by low-ability
entrepreneurs. We explore the economic implications of this finding in Section 4.
    Second, depending on whether the equilibrium belongs to scenario 1 or scenario 2, there
can be different time-series properties of liquidation decisions. In the former case, the com-
mon shock triggers a wave of liquidations, but after the shock is over the liquidation rate is
comparable to normal times. By contrast, in the latter case, the common shock triggers a
wave of liquidations, which is followed by a quiet period of no liquidations. We also discuss
these implications in more detail in Section 4.
                     
    Let V cs s, θ, θ̌ denote the value to type θ when the common shock arrives and before
the entrepreneur learns if her project is exposed to the shock. Then,
                                                      n                              o
             V cs   s, θ, θ̌ = qγ θ̂ θ̌, s + (1 − q) max γ θ̂ θ̌, s , V a s, θ, θ̂ θ̌, s , s .   (29)




                                                     19
3.3    Liquidation Decision Before the Arrival of the Shock
To complete the solution of the model, consider the decision of type θ to liquidate the project
before the arrival of the common shock. Similar to Section 3.1, we solve for the separating
equilibrium in two steps. First, we solve for the entrepreneur’s liquidation strategy for a
given inference function of outsiders. Second, we apply the rational expectations condition
that the inference function of outsiders must be consistent with the liquidation strategy of
the entrepreneur.
    Suppose that outsiders believe that type θ liquidates the project if it has not paid for time
τb (θ) since inception, where τb (θ) is an increasing and differentiable function of θ. Hence,
if the entrepreneur liquidates the project at time    τ , outsiders
                                                                    update their belief about the
                                    −1
entrepreneur’s type to θ̃ (τ ) = τb (τ ). Let Vb t, θ̃, θ, τ denote the value to the entrepreneur
in the range prior to the arrival of the shock, conditional on project not paying off for time
t, for a fixed belief of outsiders θ̃, where t ≤ τ is the time since inception of the project, θ is
the true type, and τ is the liquidation
                                           timing. Using the standard argument, in the region
prior to liquidation, Vb t, θ̃, θ, τ satisfies the following differential equation:

                                        ∂Vb                                       
             (r + λp (t) + µ) Vb = −c +     + λ (1 + γ) θp (t) + µV cs t, θ, θ̃ (t) .         (30)
                                        ∂t

Compared to (18), equation (30) includes an additional term that reflects the possibility
that a common     shock arrives over the next instant. In this case, the value function jumps
to V cs t, θ, θ̃ (t) , given by (29).
   Upon liquidation of the project at τ , the payoff to the entrepreneur is γ θ̃, implying the
boundary condition:                             
                                   Vb τ, θ̃, θ, τ = γ θ̃.                                 (31)

If we set θ̃ = θ̃ (τ ) in (31), equations (30) – (31) yield the value to the entrepreneur for
a given liquidation timing τ and outsiders’ inference function θ̃ (τ ). For a given outsiders’
inference function, the optimal liquidation timing τ must be such that the entrepreneur’s
payoff at the liquidation point satisfies the smooth-pasting condition:

                                        ∂Vb
                                                    = γ θ̃0 (τ ) .                            (32)
                                        ∂t    t→τ


Plugging (31) and (32) into (30) yields the following equation for the entrepreneur’s liqui-



                                                    20
dation timing for a given outsiders’ inference function:
                                                            
                   −c − rγ θ̃ (τ ) + λp (τ ) θ + γ θ − θ̃ (τ ) + γ θ̃0 (τ )                  (33)
                                                                        
                                          +µ V cs τ, θ, θ̃ (τ ) − γ θ̃ (τ ) = 0.

Equation (33) is similar to the analogous equation (22) in Section 3.1. It reflects the costs and
benefits of postponing the liquidation for an additional instant. The first two terms reflect
the costs and the next two terms reflect the benefits. In addition, equation (33) includes
an additional term that reflects potential arrival of the common shock. If the entrepreneur
delays liquidation for an additional instant dt, the common shock will arrive over this instant
with probability µdt. Uponthe arrival     of the common shock, the value of the project to the
entrepreneur jumps to V cs τ, θ, θ̃ (τ ) .
    Next, we can apply the rational expectations condition that the entrepreneur’s liquidation
strategy must be consistent with outsiders’ inference function. This condition implies that
at the entrepreneur’s chosen liquidation timing τ , θ̃ (τ ) = θ. Hence, we can substitute
τ = τb (θ), θ̃ (τ ) = θ, and θ̃0 (τ ) = 1/τb0 (θ) in (33) and get the equilibrium equation for the
liquidation timing τb (θ):

                                                 γ                                
              − c − rγθ + λθp (τb (θ)) +             + µ V cs (τb (θ) , θ, θ) − γθ = 0.      (34)
                                           τb0   (θ)
Note that V cs (τb (θ),θ,θ) is the value that type θ gets at the arrival of the common shock,
                                                                                       
if she is the lowest type remaining at the time of the shock. Because θ̂ θ̌, τb θ̌ > θ̌,
as established in Section 3.2, type θ always chooses to liquidate the project in this case,
even if the project is not exposed to the shock. Therefore, V cs (τb (θ),θ,θ) = γ θ̂ (θ, τb (θ)).
Consequently, equation (34) reduces to:

               dτb                          γ                               
                   =                                                , θ ∈ θ, θ̄ .          (35)
               dθ    c + rγθ − λθp (τb (θ)) − µγ θ̂ (θ, τb (θ)) − θ

                                                                                               
Compared to (23), the denominator of (35) includes an additional term −µγ θ̂ (θ, τb (θ)) − θ .
It reflects an additional incentive to delay liquidation due to the potential arrival of the com-
mon shock, which allows the entrepreneur to blend in with higher types.
    Equation (35) is solved subject to the appropriate initial value condition. Analogous to
Section 3.1, the appropriate initial value condition is that the lowest type θ liquidates the


                                                   21
project as if her liquidation decision did not reveal information to outsiders:
                                                                          
                         1  p0                  λθ
              τb (θ) =     ln                                       − 1 .              (36)
                         λ    1 − p0 c + rγθ − µγ θ̂ (θ, τ (θ)) − θ
                                                          b


Note that the right-hand side of (36) is the most preferred threshold of type θ in the sym-
metric information framework, taking payoff upon arrival of the common shock as given.
The intuition behind (36) is simple. If the lowest type did not liquidate at this threshold,
she would find it optimal to deviate to it. Such deviation not only would increase the direct
payoff from liquidation but also could increase the reputation payoff, because the current
outsiders’ inference is already as low as possible. Equations (35) – (36) yield the separat-
ing equilibrium liquidation timing τb (θ). We denote the corresponding equilibrium value
function by V b (t, θ).
   By verifying that the solution to (30) – (31) satisfies the regularity conditions in Mailath
(1987), Proposition 4 shows that the argument above indeed yields the unique separating
equilibrium threshold τb (θ). The proof appears in the appendix.

    Proposition 4. Let τb (θ) be the increasing function that solves differential equation (35)
subject to the initial value condition (36). Then, τb (θ) is the liquidation threshold of type θ
in the unique (up to the off-equilibrium beliefs) separating equilibrium in the range prior to
the arrival of the common shock.

    Taken together, Propositions 2 – 4 imply that there exists a unique equilibrium, in which
different types separate via different liquidation strategies. At most times the common shock
does not arrive, so different types liquidate projects at different instances: worse (lower θ)
projects are liquidated earlier, and better (higher θ) projects are liquidated later. However,
on rare occasions when a common shock triggers liquidation of some projects for an exogenous
reason, a wave of liquidations occurs. Importantly, the wave exceeds the fraction of projects
exposed to the shock: entrepreneurs with bad enough projects choose to blend in with the
crowd and liquidate their projects together with projects exposed to the shock, even though
their projects are not affected by the shock directly.




                                              22
4     Model Implications
In this section we analyze the economic implications of the model. We first show that even
relatively small shocks cause many entrepreneurs to time their liquidation decisions to peri-
ods of common industry shocks. Then, we show that expectations of a common shock arrival
in the future lead entrepreneurs to delay liquidation decisions today. Interestingly, although
only low types benefit from blending in, common shocks considerably delay liquidation deci-
sions of all types through the separation effect. This implies that industries can accumulate
over time a significant number of the “living dead” projects. We quantify the delay caused
by common shocks and by signaling and show that the two sources of delay affect mostly
different projects. Finally, we show that small negative common shocks can actually improve
the aggregate present value of all projects in an industry, even though they create additional
frictions in liquidation.


4.1     How Significant is “Blending In”?
First, we quantify the magnitude of the “blending in” effect. Suppose that a fraction q of
projects
   is exposed    to the shock. Out of firms that are not exposed to the shock, fraction
                           
 F θ̂ − F θ̌ / 1 − F θ̌ liquidates voluntarily, where the lowest quality project that
did not liquidate by the time of the shock, θ̌, and the higher quality project that strategically
blends in, θ̂, are defined in Section 3.2. To study the importance of strategic liquidation, we
introduce two measures:

    1. The fraction of projects that blend in out of those not exposed to the shock:
                                                      
                                      F θ̂ τb−1 (s) , s − F τb−1 (s)
                                                                     
                              φ (s) =                                  .                    (37)
                                              1 − F τb−1 (s)
                                                            


       By construction, φ ∈ [0, 1]. If the “blending in” effect is absent, then φ = 0 as only
       projects that are exposed to the shock are liquidated upon its arrival. If the “blending
       in” effect is present, then φ > 0.

    2. The magnification multiplier, defined as the ratio of all projects liquidated at the time
       of the common shock to projects that are liquidated because they are exposed to the




                                               23
                                              Fraction of Projects that Blend in                                                     Magnification Multiplier
                                 0.35                                                                                          11


                                                                                                                               10
                                  0.3
                                                                                                                               9




                                                                                              Magnification Multiplier, M(s)
 Fraction that Blends in, φ(s)




                                 0.25                                                                                          8


                                                                                                                               7
                                  0.2

                                                                                                                               6

                                 0.15
                                                                                                                               5


                                  0.1                                                                                          4


                                                                                                                               3
                                 0.05
                                                                                                                               2


                                   0                                                                                           1
                                    0                5                 10          15                                           0     5                     10     15
                                                 Arrival Time of the Shock, s                                                       Arrival Time of the Shock, s




Figure 2: The “Blending in” Effect. The left panel plots the fraction of firms that blend in
out of those not exposed to the shock, φ (s), as a function of the arrival time of the shock
s. The right panel plots the magnification multiplier, M (s), as a function of the arrival
time of the shock. Both φ (s) and M (s) are plotted for four different values of q: 0.01 (the
solid line), 0.05 (the dashed line), 0.1 (the dotted line), and 0.25 (the dash-dotted line). The
distribution of θ is uniform. The other parameters are r = 0.05, c = 0.05, λ = 0.2, µ = 0.2,
γ = 0.5, p0 = 0.5, θ = 1, θ̄ = 2.

                                        shock:
                                                                                                                            
                                                           q 1 − F τb−1 (s)             + (1 − q) F θ̂ τb−1 (s) , s − F τb−1 (s)
                                                                                   
                                            M (s) =                                                                                                                 (38)
                                                                                           q 1 − F τb−1 (s)
                                                                                                            

                                                                  1−q
                                                         =1+          φ (s) .
                                                                   q

                                        By construction, M ≥ 1. If the “blending in” effect is absent, then the magnification
                                        multiplier is equal to one: only projects that are exposed to the common shock are
                                        liquidated upon its arrival. If the “blending” in effect is present, then the magnification
                                        multiplier exceeds one.

Figure 2 quantifies the “blending in” effect for four different values of the fraction of firms
exposed to the shock, q, for the case of uniform distribution of types. The left panel plots the
fraction of projects that blend in out of those not exposed to the shock, φ (s). The right panel
plots the corresponding magnification multiplier, M (s). The “blending in” effect appears

                                                                                             24
                                         18


                                         16


                                         14


                                         12
                   Liquidation Time, τ


                                         10


                                         8


                                         6


                                         4


                                         2


                                         0
                                          1   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4    1.5     1.6   1.7   1.8   1.9   2
                                                                      Type θ



Figure 3: Comparison of Liquidation Triggers. The figure plots three triggers: τ ∗ (θ), liqui-
dation timing in the frictionless world (the solid line); τa (θ, θ, 0), liquidation timing under
asymmetric information in the world without common shocks (the dashed line); τb (θ), liqui-
dation timing under asymmetric information in the world with common shocks (the dotted
line). The baseline case has q = 0.05. The distribution of θ is uniform. The other parameters
are r = 0.05, c = 0.05, λ = 0.2, µ = 0.2, γ = 0.5, p0 = 0.5, θ = 1, θ̄ = 2.

to be quite significant. For example, when the common shock affects 5% of outstanding
projects, 17.5% of projects that are not exposed to the shock liquidate strategically at the
same time. This implies the magnification multiplier of 4.5: every project that got hit by
the shock leads to 4.5 projects being liquidated. As the common shock becomes bigger (q is
higher), the fraction of projects that are liquidated strategically also increases. For example,
a large shock affecting every fourth project triggers liquidation of almost 60% of outstanding
projects. At the same time, larger shocks are associated with lower magnification multipliers.
Interestingly, even very small shocks can lead to large waves of liquidations. For example,
if the common shock hits the project with only 1% probability, the magnification multiplier
is 10, meaning that 10% of the projects are liquidated at the shock: 1% are forced and the
other 9% do so strategically.




                                                                      25
4.2    Delay due to “Blending In” and the “Living Dead”
Possible arrival of the common shock in the future creates incentives for the entrepreneur
to delay the liquidation decision today. This is evident from Section 3.3: the equilibrium
liquidation timing τb (θ) increases in the shock arrival intensity, µ. Intuitively, bad types have
incentives to delay their liquidation decisions in an effort to pool with better types when
the common shock hits. What is more surprising is that liquidation decisions of all projects
are delayed, even projects with very high quality θ. This might seem counter-intuitive,
because entrepreneurs managing projects with very high θ have little incentive to wait for
the common shock and pool. Intuitively, these entrepreneurs delay liquidation decisions of
their projects because the timing liquidation is a signaling device about quality. Because
lower types delay their liquidations, higher types are forced to delay their liquidations even
more in order to separate from lower types. Hence, higher µ delays liquidation decisions of
all types.
    Figure 3 plots three liquidation triggers: the trigger in the world of symmetric informa-
tion, τ ∗ (θ), the trigger in the world of asymmetric information when there are no common
shocks, τ a (θ, θ, 0), and the trigger in the world of asymmetric information when there is a
possibility of a common shock in the future, τ b (θ). Figure 3 illustrates two sources of delay
compared to the case of symmetric information. The first source of delay is costly signaling:
higher types delay liquidation decisions of their projects in order to separate from earlier
liquidations by lower types and thereby get a higher reputation payoff. This effect drives
the change of liquidation trigger from τ ∗ (θ) to τ a (θ, θ, 0). The second source of delay is
“blending in.” Lower types have incentives to wait for the common shock in expectation of
pooling with higher types exposed to the shock. This allows lower types to get a higher
reputation payoff at the expense of higher types and leads to an additional delay compared
to τ a (θ, θ, 0).
    These effects are illustrated in more detail on Figure 4. The figure shows the extent
of delay caused by each of the two mechanisms. Signaling incentives lead to a delay in
liquidation ranging from no delay (for the lowest type) to 160% (for the highest type) relative
to the first-best liquidation timing. The additional effect of “blending in” is more uniform
for all types. For the case of q = 0.01, “blending in” leads to a delay in liquidation timing
ranging from 40% (for the lowest type) to 20% (for the highest type). As the magnitude
of the shock increases, the extent of delay caused by “blending in” increases as well. For
example, if q = 0.05, a typical project is delayed by 60% due to “blending in.”
    An interesting consequence of delaying behavior is that many projects are kept alive even

                                               26
                                            1.8                                                                                     1.8                                                                                    1.8


                                            1.6                                                                                     1.6                                                                                    1.6
 Relative Increase in Liquidation Trigger




                                                                                         Relative Increase in Liquidation Trigger




                                                                                                                                                                                Relative Increase in Liquidation Trigger
                                            1.4                                                                                     1.4                                                                                    1.4


                                            1.2                                                                                     1.2                                                                                    1.2


                                             1                                                                                       1                                                                                      1


                                            0.8                                                                                     0.8                                                                                    0.8


                                            0.6                                                                                     0.6                                                                                    0.6


                                            0.4                                                                                     0.4                                                                                    0.4


                                            0.2                                                                                     0.2                                                                                    0.2


                                             0                                                                                       0                                                                                      0
                                              1   1.2   1.4            1.6   1.8   2                                                  1   1.2    1.4            1.6   1.8   2                                                1   1.2   1.4            1.6   1.8    2
                                                              Type θ                                                                                   Type θ                                                                                Type θ




Figure 4: Delay caused by Signaling vs. “Blending In.” The figure plots the relative delay
caused by signaling (the solid line), (τ a (θ, θ, 0) − τ ∗ (θ)) /τ ∗ (θ), and caused by “blending in”
(the dashed line), τ b (θ) − τ a (θ, θ, 0) /τ ∗ (θ), for different θ. The left panel plots the case
of q = 0.01. The central panel plots the case of q = 0.05. The right panel plots the case of
q = 0.25. The distribution of θ is uniform. The other parameters are r = 0.05, c = 0.05,
λ = 0.2, µ = 0.2, γ = 0.5, p0 = 0.5, θ = 1, θ̄ = 2.

though in the first-best world they would have been liquidated long time ago. To study this
phenomenon, we measure the fraction of these firms and refer to them as the “living dead.”
In the first-best setting, the entrepreneur managing a type θ project will choose to liquidate
it if it has not paid off for time τ ∗ (θ), determined in Section 2. Let θ∗ (τ ) equal the inverse
of τ ∗ (θ). Then, all projects whose types are less than θ∗ (t) will be liquidated by time t.
Similarly, in the private information setting prior to the arrival of the common shock, the
entrepreneur managing a type θ project will choose to liquidate it if it has not paid off for
time τb (θ). Let θb (τ ) equal the inverse of τb (θ). All projects whose types are less than θb (t)
will be liquidated by time t. Let LD(t) denote the fraction of outstanding projects at time
t that are among the living dead. We can write this as:

                                                                                                                                          F [θ∗ (t)] − F [θb (t)]
                                                                                       LD (t) =                                                                   .                                                                                         (39)
                                                                                                                                              1 − F [θb (t)]

    In Figure 5 we see that for the first 2.5 years there are no living dead because the likelihood
of success is high enough to make liquidation suboptimal even in the first-best case. However,
beyond that point entrepreneurs managing bad enough projects begin liquidating them in
the first-best case, while a substantially smaller number of projects are liquidated in the
private information case. After about 5 years, given the small posterior likelihood of success,


                                                                                                                                                27
                                                         1

                                                        0.9




                   Fraction of the Living Dead, LD(t)
                                                        0.8

                                                        0.7

                                                        0.6

                                                        0.5

                                                        0.4

                                                        0.3

                                                        0.2

                                                        0.1

                                                         0
                                                          0   5                    10    15
                                                              Time since Liquidation t



Figure 5: The “Living Dead.” The figure plots the fraction of outstanding projects at time t
that are among the living dead, LD (t). The distribution of θ is uniform. The parameters
are q = 0.05, r = 0.05, c = 0.05, λ = 0.2, µ = 0.2, γ = 0.5, p0 = 0.5, θ = 1, θ̄ = 2.

all types will have liquidated in the first-best case. This implies that all of the non-liquidated
projects in the private information setting are among the living dead.
    The significance of this result should not be understated. What it implies is that in
many industries negative NPV projects are likely to be the norm rather than an exception,
especially after a long streak of good times, during which the industry has not experienced
negative shocks and accumulated “bad cholesterol” projects. It also explains at an intuitive
level why small shocks can lead to the avalanche of industry liquidations. By the time the
shock hits it is not unlikely that most outstanding projects have negative NPV. Thus, when
we observe what appear to be major recessions in which large numbers of firms exit an
industry, we may actually be seeing the public exit of firms that were essentially dead for
some time; they were simply waiting for an opportune time to leave in unison.


4.3    The Value of Common Shocks
Although one might think that entrepreneurs of all types would find the possibility of being
hit by an industry-wide shock harmful, we find that virtually all types benefit from the exis-

                                                                       28
                                 Expected Value of the Average Type                                              Optimal Shock Intensity µ
                      0.796                                                                            0.7


                      0.794
                                                                                                       0.6


                      0.792
                                                                                                       0.5
Value at Date 0, Vb




                                                                                   Shock Intensity µ
                       0.79
                                                                                                       0.4

                      0.788

                                                                                                       0.3
                      0.786

                                                                                                       0.2
                      0.784


                                                                                                       0.1
                      0.782


                       0.78                                                                             0
                           0        0.5           1            1.5        2                                  1   1.25       1.5       1.75   2
                               Intensity of the Common Shock Arrival, µ                                                   Type θ




Figure 6: The Effect of the Common Shock on Expected Value. The left panel plots the
expected value at date 0, V b (0, θ), for the average type θ = 1.5, as a function of intensity of
the common shock arrival, µ. The right panel plots the intensity of the common shock that
maximizes the expected value at date 0 for five different types θ: 1, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, and 2.

tence of such shocks. Consider the competing impacts of market shocks for different quality
types. For a lower quality entrepreneur, having the possibility of a market shock provides the
real opportunity for blending in, and thus avoiding recognition of its low type. On the other
hand, if the likelihood of a market shock becomes too high, then the entrepreneur faces the
detrimental event of having a potentially good project exogenously eliminated. We should
thus expect lower quality types to prefer moderate likelihoods of market shocks, at the point
at which these trade-offs are equated. For a higher quality entrepreneur, there is still some
moderate benefit from having a possibility of a market shock. While the ability to blend in
is rather unimportant for a good type, the possibility of the shock reducing the number of
firms means that the cost of signaling its high type is lower, and it can liquidate at closer to
the first-best time. This moderate benefit is traded off against the cost of being hit by the
shock and losing a potentially valuable project. We should thus expect higher quality types
to prefer low, but positive likelihoods of market shocks.
    Figure 6 illustrates this argument. The left panel of the figure shows how the expected
value of the average entrepreneur changes with the intensity of the shock arrival, µ. It
suggests that the average entrepreneur benefits the most from negative common shocks of


                                                                              29
moderate size. Under this set of parameter values, she would prefer that the shock have an
expected arrival time of around 2 years (µ = 0.51). The figure showing the average expected
value of entrepreneurs as a function of the intensity of the shock arrival is similar. The right
panel of Figure 6 shows the value-maximizing intensity of the common shock for several
different types, ranging from the lowest to the highest. For the lowest type, the optimal
expected arrival time of a shock is the quickest, at around 1.5 years (µ = 0.68), given that
they benefit most from the opportunity to blend in. Higher types usually prefer less frequent
common shocks. In the extreme case, we see that for the highest type, the costs of the shock
outweigh any of the benefits, and they prefer no possibility of a shock occurring.


4.4    Empirical Implications
In our model, a key driver of the incentive to blend in is the magnitude of the reputation
component. Higher levels of γ correspond to greater importance of reputation. As γ in-
creases, entrepreneurs of all types have greater incentives to delay liquidation: low quality
types have added incentives to protect their reputations by blending in, and high quality
types have added incentives to signal their quality. This effect of higher γ leading to greater
delay in liquidations will imply that higher γ will lead to more projects being liquidated at
the time of the shock. As the reputation component increases, the act of delaying liquida-
tion will lead to more projects being alive at the time of the shock. Thus there will be more
projects alive that are actually hit by the shock, as well as a great proportion of surviving
projects that are voluntarily liquidated.
    Figure 7 displays the impact of reputation on the expected proportion of projects that
are liquidated upon the arrival of the shock. In this figure, we assume that 5% of projects
alive at the time of the shock will experience forced liquidation. As a baseline, we see that
for the case of full-information, a small percentage of projects are expected to be liquidated
at the time of the shock. This is depicted in the solid line. Since with full information higher
γ leads to earlier liquidation, we see that increasing γ leads to a smaller fraction of projects
remain alive at the time a shock hits. For γ = 0.1, under full information 3.8% of projects
are expected to be liquidated at the time of the shock, while the corresponding value for
γ = 0.8 is less than 2%. Thus, with full information and no incentive to signal or pool,
higher reputation concerns lead to diminishing chances of witnessing clusters of liquidations.
    The dotted and dash-dotted curves on Figure 7 shows the expected fraction of projects
that are hit by the shock and are liquidated voluntarily, respectively, in the model’s private


                                              30
                                                  0.25




                                                                Total Liquidations
                                                   0.2            at the Shock
                 Expectred fraction of projects
                  liquidated at the shock


                                                  0.15

                                                                                                   Strategic Liquidations
                                                                                                       at the Shock

                                                   0.1
                                                                                        Non−Strategic Liquidations
                                                                                               at the Shock


                                                  0.05


                                                           Full−Information
                                                            Equilibrium
                                                    0
                                                    0.1   0.2        0.3         0.4         0.5         0.6         0.7    0.8
                                                                                 Reputation γ




Figure 7: The Effect of Reputation on Liquidations at the Common Shock. The figure
plots the expected fraction of projects liquidated at the arrival of the shock, as of date 0,
as a function of the reputation parameter γ. The solid line shows this fraction under the
full-information equilibrium of Section 2.2. The dashed line shows this fraction under the
asymmetric-information equilibrium of Section 3. It equals the sum of the expected fraction
of projects liquidated at the arrival of the shock because they are exposed to the shock (the
dotted line) and because they are not exposed to the shock but choose to blend in (the
dash-dotted line). The distribution of θ is uniform. The parameters are q = 0.05, r = 0.05,
c = 0.05, λ = 0.2, µ = 0.2, γ = 0.5, p0 = 0.5, θ = 1, θ̄ = 2.

information equilibrium. Their sum, the dashed curve, shows the total expected fraction of
projects liquidated at the time of the shock in the model with private information. Now,
when we look at the results for the equilibrium with asymmetric information and blending
in, we find that the strength of the reputation effect greatly impacts the fraction of projects
that are expected to be liquidated at the moment of a shock. For example, if γ = 0.10, as
of time zero we expect 10% of the industry’s projects to be liquidated at the time of the
shock. This means that for a low level of the reputation effect, the shock results in roughly
the same number of projects that are voluntarily liquidated as the number of projects that
are actually hit by the shock. More precisely, 4.2% of projects are liquidated because they
are hit by the shock, while 5.8% blend in. As we increase γ to 0.6, we find that we expect


                                                                                       31
around 20% of the industry to liquidate at the time of the shock. This means that roughly
three times as many projects are voluntarily liquidated as are actually hit by the shock.
More specifically, 4.5% of projects will be hit by the shock, while 15% will blend in.
    Agarwal and Kolev (2012) examine the impact of reputation on the strategic timing of
layoffs. They use two measures to identify the strength of a CEO’s reputational concerns:
the CEO’s tenure with the firm, and the proportion of CEO compensation obtained through
equity-linked instruments. They posit that CEOs with shorter tenures and more equity-
linked compensation should have greater reputational concerns, similar to representing higher
γ in our model. Consistent with the implications of our model, they find that CEOs with
tenures of four years or less are more likely to engage in layoffs during recession months.
They find similar results for CEOs with greater equity-linked compensation schemes.
    An important implication of our model is that what on the surface appears to have been a
large market shock was in fact a relatively small shock combined with voluntary blending in.
Thus, it would be important to see how one could empirically distinguish between a standard
large industry shock (large q), and a small industry shock (small q) combined with blending
in. The fact that it is likely that projects differ in their reputation-building incentives (i.e.,
γ), may allow us to identify the true size of q. For example, suppose that there are two groups
of projects. Group 1 contains firms with γ = 0.50. Group 2 contains firms with γ = 0. Thus,
no firm in Group 2 has an incentive to blend, so that by looking at what fraction of Group
2 liquidated in a cluster, we can identify q. Then, from observing what fraction of Group
1 liquidated in the cluster we can identify the amplification multiple. Similarly, if firms (or
industries) differ in the likelihoods of shock arrivals (i.e., µ), one could compare how different
the firms are in delaying liquidations (i.e., τb (θ)) to estimate the degree of “blending in.”
    Empirical estimates of cross-sectional variation in reputational concerns may be helpful
in this regard. Chung et al. (2011) provide an interesting empirical approach to measuring
the strength of reputational concerns in the private equity industry. While private equity
agreements typically provide direct compensation in the form of a management fee and
earned interest, there is also an important reputational component of compensation. General
partner lifetime incomes depend on their ability to raise capital in the future. Chung et al.
find that the indirect pay for performance from future fund-raising is of the same order
of magnitude as direct pay for performance. Importantly, they find that this reputational
measure is heterogeneous across the industry. In particular, it is stronger for buyout funds
than for venture capital funds. Similarly, as previously mentioned, Agarwal and Kolev (2012)
identify CEO tenure and equity-linked compensation as measures of reputational concerns.


                                               32
Continuing the example from the preceding paragraph, one might obtain and estimate of q
from the layoff decisions of long-tenured CEOs with low pay-for-performance compensation.
Then, one could estimate the amplification multiple due to blending in from the layoff
decisions of short-tenured CEOs with high pay-for-performance compensation.


5    Conclusion
Real investment decisions can be substantially affected by the temptation of entrepreneurs
to blend in with the crowd and delay liquidation of unsuccessful projects. As we show, this
could have a far-reaching repercussions for the dynamics of whole industries and conceivably
for the economy at large. The underlying mechanism is the link between reputation based
on the available information about the current project outcome and managerial payoffs from
attracting future funding recourses and future project cash flows. If liquidation of a current
project reveals negative information about ability, the entrepreneur will optimally delay
abandonment decisions to make it more difficult for the market to judge ability correctly.
In a dynamic model, we show how this simple intuition can lead to amplification of modest
negative shocks and explain such phenomenon as industry-specific investment busts.
    Several extensions of the model might be interesting. First, the model could allow for
multiple common shocks arriving sequentially. This setting would likely lead to an even
greater importance of common shocks. Second, the model could allow for positive liquidation
values that also depend on whether liquidation occurs at the time of the shock or in a “normal”
period. This would bring the model closer to the literature on fire sales (e.g., Shleifer and
Vishny, 1992). Finally, one could allow the probability of exposure to the shock depend on
type θ. These extensions would add realism to the model and allow for richer implications.




                                              33
Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 2
We prove theproposition
                           by applying Theorems 1 - 3 from Mailath (1987). To do this, we
show that U θ̃, θ, τ satisfies regularity conditions from Mailath (1987).
                                                   h i2
                                                 2
    Condition 1 (Smoothness): U θ̃, θ, τ is C on θ̂, θ̄ × [s, ∞). It is straightforward to
see that this condition is satisfied.             
    Condition 2 (Belief monotonicity): Uθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ never equals zero, and so is either positive
or negative. Differentiating (21) with respect to θ̃,
                                     1−p
                                           0 −rτ
                         Uθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ =     e γ + e−(r+λ)τ γ > 0.                          (40)
                                        p0

Hence, the belief monotonicity condition is satisfied.
                                                  
   Condition 3 (Type monotonicity): Uθτ θ̃, θ, τ never equals zero, and so is either positive
or negative. Differentiating (21) with respect to θ,
                                                           λ (1 + γ)
                               Uθ θ̃, θ, τ = −e−(r+λ)τ                 .                   (41)
                                                               r+λ

Differentiating (41) with respect to τ ,
                                        
                             Uθτ θ̃, θ, τ = λ (1 + γ) e−(r+λ)τ > 0.                        (42)

Hence, the type monotonicity condition is satisfied.
                                                     
   Condition 4 (“Strict” quasiconcavity): Uτ θ̃, θ, τ = 0 has a unique solution in τ , which
                                      
maximizes U θ̃, θ, τ , and Uτ τ θ̃, θ, p̂ < 0 at this solution. Consider the derivative of (21)
with respect to τ when θ̃ = θ:

                                   1 − p0 −rτ
               Uτ (θ, θ, τ ) = −         e (c + rγθ) − e−(r+λ)τ (c + rγθ − λθ) .           (43)
                                     p0

Equation Uτ (θ, θ, τ ) = 0 has a unique solution in τ , given by τ ∗ (θ), determined in Section
2.2. The second derivative is

                                                 1 − p0 −rτ ∗ (θ)
                      Uτ τ (θ, θ, τ ∗ (θ)) = −         e          λ (c + rγθ) < 0.         (44)
                                                   p0


                                                    34
Hence, the “strict” quasiconcavity condition is satisfied.                    h i
    Condition 5 (Boundedness): There exists δ > 0 such that for all (θ, τ ) ∈ θ̂, θ̄ × [s, ∞)
Uτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) ≥ 0 implies |Uτ (θ, θ, τ )| > δ. To ensure that the boundedness condition is
satisfied, we restrict the set of potential liquidation times to be bounded by k from above,
where k can be arbitrarily large. We will later show that extending the set of times to
τ ∈ [s, ∞) neither destroys the separating equilibrium nor creates additional separating
equilibria. Differentiating Uτ (θ, θ, τ ) with respect to τ ,

                                1 − p0 −rτ
            Uτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) =         e r (c + rγθ) + e−(r+λ)τ (r + λ) (c + rγθ − λθ) .                    (45)
                                  p0

             Uτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) ≥ 0 is equivalent to τ ≥ τ ∗ (θ) +   1            λ
                                                                                   
Condition
h i                                                               λ
                                                                      ln 1 +   r
                                                                                       . Hence, for any (τ, θ) ∈
 θ̂, θ̄ ∈ [s, ∞),

                                    1 − p0
             |Uτ (θ, θ, τ )| = e−rτ        (c + rγθ) − e−λτ (λθ − c − rγθ)
                                      p0
                                    1 − p0               r −λτ ∗ (θ)
                            ≥ e−rτ         (c + rγθ) −       e        (λθ − c − rγθ)                       (46)
                                      p0               r+λ
                                   1 − p0 λ (c + rγθ)        1 − p0 λ (c + rγθ)
                            = e−rτ                    ≥ e−rk                    > 0.
                                     p0      r+λ               p0      r+λ

for any arbitrarily large k. Thus, the boundedness condition is satisfied.
    By Theorems 1 and 2 from Mailath (1987), any separating equilibrium liquidation thresh-
old τa (θ) is continuous, differentiable, satisfies equation (23), and dτa (θ) /dθ has the same
sign as Uθτ . Because Uθτ > 0, the liquidation threshold τa (θ) is increasing in θ. To ensure
that the increasing solution to equation (23) subject to the initial value condition (24) is
indeed the unique separating equilibrium,
                                           we check the
                                                         single-crossing condition:
    Single-crossing condition: Uτ θ̃, θ, τ /Uθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ is a strictly monotonic function of θ.
The ratio of the two derivatives is equal to
                                                                              
                                                           −λτ
                       Uτ θ̃, θ, τ       c + rγ θ̃   p 0 e     λ   γ θ̃ − θ − γθ
                                    =−           −                               .                       (47)
                       Uθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ         γ           γ (p0 e−λτ + 1 − p0 )




                                                   35
                                                 
Consider the derivative of Uτ θ̃, θ, τ /Uθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ with respect to θ:

                                     p0 e−λτ λ (1 + γ)
                                                         > 0.                               (48)
                                   γ (p0 e−λτ + 1 − p0 )

Hence, the single-crossing condition is verified. By Theorem 3 in Mailath (1987), the unique
solution to (23) - (24), τa (θ), is indeed the separating equilibrium.
    Finally, it remains to prove that considering the set of liquidation times bounded by k is
not restrictive. First, let us prove that τa (θ) is a separating equilibrium in a problem with
τ ∈ [s, ∞). Note that the single-crossing condition holds for all τ ∈ [s, ∞). Thus, local
incentive compatibility guarantees global incentive compatibility for all τ ∈ [s, ∞). Hence,
τa (θ) is also a separating equilibrium in a problem with τ ∈ [s, ∞). Second, let us prove
that no other separating equilibrium exists in a problem with τ ∈ [s, ∞). By contradiction,
suppose that there is an additional separating equilibrium τa2 (θ), other than τa (θ). Then,
τa2 (θ) must be infinite for some θ: otherwise, it would be a separating equilibrium in a
problem with τ ∈ [s, k]hfor high
                             i      enough k. However, an infinite liquidation threshold cannot
be optimal for any θ ∈ θ̂, θ̄ : over infinite time, p (t) approaches zero, so it would be optimal
for this type to deviate to any finite and high enough threshold at which no type liquidates.
Thus, there is no other separating equilibrium in a problem with τ ∈ [s, ∞).


Proof of Proposition 3
                                                                 h i
Let φ θ̂ denote the left-hand side of (26) and (28). Note that φ θ̂ , θ̃, θ̄ is a continuous
                              h i
function that takes values in θ̃, θ̄ . Hence, by Brower fixed point theorem, it has a fixed
                                   
point. Taking the derivative of f θ̂ ,

                                                ´              ´            
       (1 − q) f θ̂ θ̂ q + (1 − q) F θ̂ − F θ̃ − θ̃θ̂ θf (θ) dθ − q θ̂θ̄ θf (θ) dθ
   φ0 θ̂ =                                               2                       .
                                     q + (1 − q) F θ̂ − F θ̃
                                                                               (49)
         0                                                              0
Hence, φ θ̂ has the same sign as θ̂ − φ θ̂ . Thus, at any fixed point, φ θ̂ = 0. The
                                                       
fixed point is unique, because any point at which φ0 θ̂ = 0 must be a local minimum.
                                                                      
                                                       0
To see this, note that according to (49) we can write φ θ̂ = ψ θ̂ θ̂ − φ θ̂     for some




                                               36
                                                
strictly positive and differentiable function ψ θ̂ . Hence,

                                                   
                           00    0                         0
                         φ θ̂ = ψ θ̂ θ̂ − φ θ̂ + ψ θ̂ 1 − φ θ̂ .                                   (50)

                                                                         
Around point θ̂ : φ0 θ̂ = 0, φ00 θ̂ = ψ θ̂ > 0. Hence, any point φ0 θ̂ = 0 must be a
local minimum. Therefore, the fixed point is unique. In particular, this result    implies that
equation (25) has a unique solution in θ̂, which is also a point at which φ θ̂ reaches its
minimum.                                                     
     Next, consider any p. It must be the case that γ1 Va p, θ̂ ≥ θ̂ with the strict equality
                                                                
                       ∗
if and only if p ≤ p θ̂ . To the left of θ̂m : φ θ̂m = 0, φ θ̂ is a decreasing function
                      
of θ̂. Because Va p, θ̂ is a strictly increasing function in θ for any p taking values from
                                                                            h     i
Va p, θ̃ to Va p, θ̂m ≥ θ̂m , equation (28) has a unique solution on θ̂ ∈ θ̃, θ̂m , provided
                                                                           
                                  ∗                                         ∗
that Va p, θ̃ ≤ Eθ̃ [θ]. If p > p θ̂m , this solution is θ̂ < θ̂m . If p ≤ p θ̂m , this solution
                            
is θ̂ = θ̂m . The case Va p, θ̃ > Eθ̃ [θ] corresponds to the case when no type wants to blend
in with the crowd, because the option to wait is too valuable to liquidate immediately even
for the most optimistic belief possible.                                                 i
     Finally, it remains to show that equation (28) has no root in the range θ̂ ∈ θ̂m , θ̄ . Note
                                                                                    
that because φ0 θ̂ > 0 for any θ̂ > θ̂m , θ̂ > φ θ̂ for any θ̂ > θ̂m . However, γ1 Va p, θ̂ ≥ θ̂
                                                                                          i
by definition of the option. Hence, equation (28) has no root in the range θ̂ ∈ θ̂m , θ̄ .


Proof of Proposition 4
The general solution to (30) is

                                      e(r+µ+λ)t
                                                                                              
                                                        c         λp (t)       c
         Vb       t, θ̃, θ, τ = C                    −        +                       + θ + γθ
                                  (1 − p0 ) eλt + p0 r + µ r + λ + µ r + µ
                                                    ˆ t
                                     e(r+µ+λ)t          (1 − p0 ) eλx + p0                 
                              −µ                                           V cs x, θ, θ̃ (x) dx.   (51)
                                 (1 − p0 ) eλt + p0 0       e(r+µ+λ)x




                                                     37
To pin down constant C, we use boundary condition (31). This gives us the following value
to the entrepreneur for a given liquidation timing and outsiders’ inference:
                                  e(r+µ+λ)t                 
         Vb t, θ̃, θ, τ       =                    Û θ̃, θ, τ
                                (1 − p0 ) eλt + p0
                                                                           
                                    c          λp (t)         c
                                −        +                         + θ + γθ                                   (52)
                                  r+µ r+λ+µ r+µ
                                                        ˆ t
                                        e(r+µ+λ)t           (1 − p0 ) eλx + p0                    
                                −µ                                             V cs   x, θ, θ̃ (x)   dx,
                                   (1 − p0 ) eλt + p0 0          e(r+µ+λ)x

where
                                                                                            
                                       c
                                    −(r+µ)τ                 −(r+µ+λ)τ   c − λ (1 + γ) θ
    Û θ̃, θ, τ = (1 − p0 ) e                 + γ θ̃ + p0 e                             + γ θ̃
                                       r+µ                                r+λ+µ
                    ˆ τ
                        (1 − p0 ) eλx + p0                 
                +µ                         V cs x, θ, θ̃ (x) dx.                                 (53)
                     0       e(r+µ+λ)x
                                                                     
Function Û θ̃, θ, τ          is analogous to function U θ̃, θ, τ           in the post-shock case, but includes
an additional term. In (53), θ̃ (x) is the inference function of outsiders and is taken as given,
                                   
while θ̃ is a particular point in θ, θ̄ , which is given by the argument of the function.
   Similar to Proposition 2, we prove this proposition    by applying Theorems 1 – 3 from
Mailath (1987). For this purpose, we show that Û θ̃, θ, τ satisfies regularity conditions
from Mailath (1987).                                  2
   Condition 1 (Smoothness): Û θ̃, θ, τ is C 2 on θ, θ̄ ×[0, ∞). The condition is satisfied
provided that the last term of (53) is smooth.      
   Condition 2 (Belief monotonicity): Ûθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ never equals zero, and so is either positive
                                        
or negative. Differentiating Û θ̃, θ, τ with respect to θ̃:

                                      
                          Ûθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ = (1 − p0 ) e−(r+µ)τ γ + p0 e−(r+µ+λ)τ γ > 0.                         (54)

Hence, the belief monotonicity condition is satisfied.
                                                  
   Condition 3 (Type monotonicity): Ûθτ θ̃, θ, τ never equals zero, and so is either positive
or negative. Differentiating (53) with respect to θ,
                                                         ˆ    τ
               
                              −(r+µ+λ)τ   λ (1 + γ)               (1 − p0 ) eλx + p0                    
  Ûθ θ̃, θ, τ = −p0 e                              +µ                               V csθ  x, θ, θ̃ (x)   dx. (55)
                                          r+λ+µ           0           e(r+µ+λ)x



                                                         38
Differentiating (55) with respect to τ and noting that θ̃ (τ ) = θ̃ by construction,
                              h                                                 i
      Ûθτ θ̃, θ, τ = e−(r+λ+µ)τ p0 λ (1 + γ) + µ (1 − p0 ) eλτ + p0 V csθ τ, θ, θ̃ .
                                                                    
                                                                                                                      (56)

                                                                     
Because V cs τ, θ, θ̃ is non-decreasing in θ, Ûθτ θ̃, θ, τ > 0. Hence, the type monotonicity
condition is satisfied.
   Condition 4 (“Strict” quasiconcavity): Ûτ (θ, θ, τ ) = 0 has a unique solution in τ , which
maximizes Û (θ, θ, τ ), and Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) < 0 at this solution. Consider the derivative of (53)
with respect to τ when θ̃ = θ:

                    Ûτ (θ, θ, τ ) = − (1 − p0 ) e−(r+µ)τ + p0 e−(r+λ+µ)τ
                                                                          
                                                                                                                      (57)
                                                                              
                                   × c + rγθ − µ V cs (τ, θ, θ) − γθ − λθp (τ ) .

Note that V cs (τ, θ, θ) is weakly decreasing in τ . Therefore, the term on the lower line of
(57) is strictly increasing in τ . Hence, equation Uτ (θ, θ, τ ) = 0 has the unique solution in
τ . Because V cs (τ, θ, θ) − γθ ≥ 0, the solution of Uτ (θ, θ, τ ) = 0 must weakly exceed τ ∗ (θ).
However, at any point (τ, θ, θ) such that τ ≥ τ ∗ (θ): V cs (τ, θ, θ) = γ θ̂ (θ). Thus, the unique
solution to Uτ (θ, θ, τ ) = 0 in τ , defined by τ̂ ∗ (θ), satisfies
                                                  
                            c + rγθ − µγ θ̂ (θ) − θ − λθp (τ̂ ∗ (θ)) = 0,                                             (58)

which gives                                                                                
                                1  p0                λθ
                   τ̂ ∗ (θ) =     ln                                − 1 .                                         (59)
                                λ    1 − p0 c + rγθ − µγ θ̂ (θ) − θ

The second derivative of Û (θ, θ, τ ) with respect to τ at τ ∗ (θ) is given by

                                                               ∗ (θ)                      ∗ (θ)
              Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ̂ ∗ (θ)) = − (1 − p0 ) e−(r+µ)τ̂           + p0 e−(r+λ+µ)τ̂
                                                                                                  

                                                                                                      ∗ (θ)
                                                                                                                  !
                                                                          λ2 θp0 (1 − p0 ) eλτ̂
                                  ×    −µV csτ (τ̂ ∗ (θ) , θ, θ) +                                            2       (60)
                                                                         ((1 − p0 ) eλτ̂ ∗ (θ) + p0 )
                                  < 0,

because V cs (τ, θ, θ) is weakly decreasing in τ . Hence, the “strict” quasiconcavity condition
is satisfied.
                                                                                  
    Condition 5 (Boundedness): There exists δ > 0 such that for all (θ, τ ) ∈ θ, θ̄ × [0, ∞)

                                                     39
Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) ≥ 0 implies Ûτ (θ, θ, τ ) > δ. To ensure that the boundedness condition is
satisfied, we restrict the set of potential liquidation times to be bounded by k from above,
where k can be arbitrarily large. We will later show that extending the set of times to
τ ∈ [0, ∞) neither destroys the separating equilibrium nor creates additional separating
equilibria. Differentiating (57) with respect to τ :

Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) = ((1 − p0 ) (r + µ) + p0 (r + λ + µ)) e−(r+µ)τ c + rγθ − µ V cs (τ, θ, θ) − γθ − λθp (τ )
                                                                                                           

                                                                       λ2 θp0 (1 − p0 ) eλτ
                                                                                            
                                  −λτ
                                       −(r+µ)τ
                 − 1 − p0 + p0 e       e          −µV csτ (τ, θ, θ) +                          .  (61)
                                                                      ((1 − p0 ) eλτ + p0 )2

Consider any τ ≤ τ̂ ∗ (θ). The top line of (61) is non-positive by monotonicity of the term in
the last brackets. The bottom line of (61) is negative, because V cs (τ, θ, θ) is non-increasing
in τ . Therefore, Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) < 0 for any τ ≤ τ̂ ∗ (θ). By continuity of Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) at
τ̂ ∗ (θ), Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) ≥ 0 is only possible if τ > τ̂ ∗ (θ) + ε for some ε > 0. Hence, ∀ (θ, τ ) ∈
 
  θ, θ̄ × [0, ∞) : Ûτ τ (θ, θ, τ ) ≥ 0:

     Ûτ (θ, θ, τ ) = e−(r+µ)τ 1 − p0 + p0 e−λτ c + rγθ − µ V cs (τ, θ, θ) − γθ − λθp (τ )
                                                                                        
                                                                                  
                    > e−(r+µ)k (1 − p0 ) c + rγθ − µγ θ̂ (θ) − θ − λθp (τ̂ ∗ (θ) + ε)       (62)

                  ≥ δ,

where
                                         n                                     o
        δ ≡ e−(r+µ)k (1 − p0 ) × min c + rγθ − µγ θ̂ (θ) − θ − λθp (τ̂ ∗ (θ) + ε) .              (63)
                                θ∈[θ,θ̄]


Note that δ > 0, because ε > 0 and δ = 0 if ε = 0. Thus, the boundedness condition is
satisfied.
    By Theorems 1 and 2 from Mailath (1987), any separating equilibrium liquidation thresh-
old τb (θ) is continuous, differentiable, satisfies equation (35), and dτb (θ) /dθ has the same
sign as Ûθτ . Because Ûθτ > 0, the liquidation threshold τb (θ) is increasing in θ. To ensure
that the increasing solution to equation (35) subject to the initial value condition (36) is
indeed the unique separating equilibrium,
                                           we check the single-crossing condition:
    Single-crossing condition: Ûτ θ̃, θ, τ /Ûθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ is a strictly monotonic function of θ.




                                                 40
The ratio of the two derivatives is equal to
                                                                                 
      Ûτ θ̃, θ, τ       c + rγ θ̃ − µ V cs τ, θ, θ̃ − γ θ̃     p0 e−λτ λ γ θ̃ − θ − γθ
                    =−                                      −                           .   (64)
      Ûθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ                      γ                        γ (p0 e−λτ + 1 − p0 )

                                                      
Consider the derivative of Ûτ θ̃, θ, τ /Ûθ̃ θ̃, θ, τ       with respect to θ:

                           µ                  p0 e−λτ λ (1 + γ)
                             V csθ τ, θ, θ̃ +                       > 0,                      (65)
                           γ                  γ (p0 e−λτ + 1 − p0 )
                    
because V cs τ, θ, θ̃ is non-decreasing in θ. Hence, the single-crossing condition is verified.
By Theorem 3 in Mailath (1987), the unique solution to (35) - (36), τb (θ), is indeed the
separating equilibrium.
    Finally, it remains to prove that considering the set of liquidation times bounded by k
is not restrictive. First, we prove that τb (θ) is a separating equilibrium in a problem with
τ ∈ [0, ∞). The single-crossing condition holds for all τ ∈ [0, ∞). Hence, local incentive
compatibility guarantees global incentive compatibility for all τ ∈ [0, ∞). Consequently,
τb (θ) is also a separating equilibrium in a problem with τ ∈ [0, ∞). Second, we prove that
no other separating equilibrium exists in a problem with τ ∈ [0, ∞). By contradiction,
suppose that there is an additional separating equilibrium τb2 (θ), other than τb (θ). Then,
τb2 (θ) must be infinite for some θ: otherwise, it would be a separating equilibrium in a
problem with τ ∈ [0, k] for high enough k. However, an infinite liquidation threshold cannot
                          
be optimal for any θ ∈ θ, θ̄ : over infinite time, p (t) approaches zero, so it would be optimal
for this type to deviate to any finite and high enough threshold at which no type liquidates.
Thus, there is no other separating equilibrium in a problem with τ ∈ [0, ∞).


Off-The-Equilibrium-Path Beliefs
There are many off-the-equilibrium path beliefs that support the equilibrium of Section 3.
Below, we provide the beliefs that satisfy the D1 refinement:

   • Prior to the arrival of the shock case. If liquidation occurs before τb (θ), then outsiders
     believe that the entrepreneur’s type is the worst possible, i.e., θ. If liquidation occurs
                
     after τb θ̄ , then outsiders believe that the entrepreneur’s type is θ̄. The differen-
     tial equation ensures that no type wants to deviate to a liquidation strategy that is


                                                  41
  marginally different from the equilibrium one. The single-crossing condition further
                                                                                      
  ensures that no type wants to deviate to any threshold in the interval τb (θ) , τb θ̄ .
  The off-equilibrium-path beliefs ensure that no type wants to deviate to any threshold
                                       
  that does not belong to τb (θ) , τb θ̄ .

• After the arrival of the common shock case. Suppose the common shock arrives at date
  s, and the lowest type in the post-shock
                                           history (according to outsiders’ beliefs) is θ̂.
  If liquidation occurs before τa θ̂, θ̂, s , then outsiders believe that the entrepreneur’s
  type is θ̂,
           i.e., the
                     worst possible type in the post-shock history. If liquidation occurs
  after τa θ̄, θ̂, s , then outsiders believe that the entrepreneur’s type is θ̄. The differ-
  ential equation and the single-crossing
                                       h  condition
                                                      ensure
                                                             that no type wants to deviate
                                                              i
  to any threshold in the interval τa θ̂, θ̂, s , τa θ̄, θ̂, s . The off-equilibrium-path
  beliefs
     h ensurethatno type     i wants to deviate to any threshold that does not belong
  to τa θ̂, θ̂, s , τa θ̄, θ̂, s . In addition, no type finds it optimal to wait until the
  common shock and then deviate in the prior to the arrival of the shock case.




                                           42
References

Acharya, Viral V., Peter M. DeMarzo, and Ilan Kremer, 2011, Endogenous
information flows and the clustering of announcements, American Economic Review 101,
2955–2979.

Agarwal, Ruchir, and Julian Kolev, 2012, Strategic corporate layoffs, Working Paper,
Harvard University.

Aragon, George O., and Vikram Nanda, 2011, Strategic delays and clustering in
hedge fund reported returns, Working Paper, Arizona State University.

Arkes, Hal R., and Catherine Blumer, 1985, The psychology of sunk cost, Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes 35, 124–140.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., 1992, A simple model of herd behavior, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107, 797–817.

Boot, Arnoud W. A., 1992, Why hang on to losers? Divestitures and takeovers, Journal
of Finance 47, 1401–1423.

Bustamante, M. Cecilia, 2011, The dynamics of going public, Review of Finance, forth-
coming.

Cho, In-Koo, and Joel Sobel, 1990, Strategic stability and uniqueness in signaling
games, Journal of Economic Theory 50, 381–413.

Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Lea H. Stern, and Michael S. Weisbach,
2011, Pay for performance from future fund flows: the case of private equity, Review of
Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Daley, Brendan, and Brett Green, 2011, Waiting for news in the market for lemons,
Econometrica, forthcoming.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Robert S. Pindyck, 1994, Investment under Uncertainty
(Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ).

Dumas, Bernard, 1991, Super contact and related optimality conditions, Journal of Eco-
nomic Dynamics and Control 15, 675–685.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., 2004, Endogenous liquidity in asset markets, Journal of Finance


                                          43
59, 1–30.

Gennotte, Gerard, and Brett Trueman, 1996, The strategic timing of corporate
disclosures, Review of Financial Studies 9, 665–690.

Grenadier, Steven R., and Andrey Malenko, 2011, Real options signaling games
with applications to corporate finance, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3993–4036.

Korajczyk, Robert A., Deborah J. Lucas, and Robert L. McDonald, 1992,
Equity issues with time-varying asymmetric information, Journal of Financial and Quanti-
tative Analysis 27, 397–417.

Kothari, S. P., Susan Shu, and Peter D. Wysocki, 2009, Do managers withhold bad
news?, Journal of Accounting Research 47, 241–276.

Kurlat, Pablo, 2011, Lemons markets and the transmission of aggregate shocks, Working
Paper, Stanford University.

Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, 2004, The illiquidity puzzle: theory and evi-
dence from private equity, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 3–40.

Lucas, Deborah J., and Robert L. McDonald, 1990, Equity issues and stock price
dynamics, Journal of Finance 45, 1019–1043.

Mailath, George J., 1987, Incentive compatibility in signaling games with a continuum
of types, Econometrica 55, 1349–1365.

Maxwell, Andrew L., Scott A. Jeffrey, and Moren Lévesque, 2011, Business
angel early stage decision making, Journal of Business Venturing 26, 212–225.

Milbradt, Konstantin, 2011, Level 3 assets: booking profits, concealing losses, Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Miller, Gregory S., 2002, Earnings performance and discretionary disclosure, Journal of
Accounting Research 40, 173–204.

Morellec, Erwan, and Norman Schürhoff, 2011, Corporate investment and financ-
ing under asymmetric information, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 262–288.

Petty, Jeffrey S., and Marc Gruber, 2011, “In pursuit of the real deal”: a longitudi-
nal study of VC decision making, Journal of Business Venturing 26, 172–188.



                                          44
Rajan, Raghuram G., 1994, Why bank credit policies fluctuate: a theory and some evi-
dence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 399–441.

Ramey, Garey, 1996, D1 signaling equilibria with multiple signals and a continuum of
types, Journal of Economic Theory 69, 508–531.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt ca-
pacity: a market equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343–1366.

Shreve, Steven E., 2004, Stochastic Calculus for Finance II: Continuous-Time Models
(Springer-Verlag: New York, NY).

Staw, Barry M., and Ha Hoang, 1995, Sunk costs in the NBA: why draft order af-
fects playing time and survival in professional basketball, Administrative Science Quarterly
40, 474–494.

Sudek, Richard, 2006, Angel investment criteria, Journal of Small Business Strategy 17,
89–103.

Tse, Senyo, and Jennifer Wu Tucker, 2010, Within-industry timing of earnings warn-
ings: do managers herd?, Review of Accounting Studies 15, 879–914.

Welch, Ivo, 1992, Sequential sales, learning, and cascades, Journal of Finance 47, 695–732

Zacharakis, Andrew L., and G. Dale Meyer, 2000, The potential of actuarial decision
models: Can they improve the venture capital investment decision?, Journal of Business
Venturing 15, 323–346.




                                            45
