                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SALIENCE AND CONSUMER CHOICE

                                           Pedro Bordalo
                                          Nicola Gennaioli
                                          Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 17947
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17947


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012




We are grateful to David Bell, Tom Cunningham, Matt Gentzkow, Bengt Holmstrom, Daniel Kahneman,
Drazen Prelec, Jan Rivkin, Josh Schwartzstein, Jesse Shapiro, Itamar Simonson, Dmitry Taubinski
and Richard Thaler for extremely helpful comments. Gennaioli thanks the Barcelona GSE Research
Network and the Generalitat de Catalunya for financial support. Shleifer thanks the Kauffman Foundation
for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Pedro Bordalo, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Salience and Consumer Choice
Pedro Bordalo, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 17947
March 2012
JEL No. D03,D11

                                             ABSTRACT

We present a theory of context-dependent choice in which a consumer's attention is drawn to salient
attributes of goods, such as quality or price. An attribute is salient for a good when it stands out among
the good's characteristics, in the precise sense of being furthest away in that good from its average
level in the choice set (or more generally, an evoked set). A local thinker chooses among goods by
attaching disproportionately high weights to their salient attributes. When goods are characterized
by only one quality attribute and price, salience tilts choices toward goods with higher ratios of quality
to price. We use the model to account for a variety of disparate bits of evidence, including decoy effects
in consumer choice, context-dependent willingness to pay, balance of qualities in desirable goods,
and shifts in demand toward low quality goods when all prices in a category rise. We then apply the
model to study discounts and sales, and to explain demand for low deductible insurance.


Pedro Bordalo                                       Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Royal Holloway                                      Harvard University
University of London                                Littauer Center M-9
Egham Hill, Egham, TW20 0EX                         Cambridge, MA 02138
United Kingdom                                      and NBER
pedro.bordalo@rhul.ac.uk                            ashleifer@harvard.edu

Nicola Gennaioli
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
08005 Barcelona (Spain)
ngennaioli@crei.cat
1     Introduction
Imagine yourself in a wine store, choosing a red wine. You are considering a French syrah
from the Rhone Valley, selling for $20 a bottle, and an Australian Shiraz, made from the
same grape, selling for $10. You know and like French syrah better, you think it is perhaps
50% better. Yet it sells for twice as much. After some thought, you decide the Australian
shiraz is a better bargain and buy a bottle.
    A few weeks later, you are at a restaurant, and you see the same two wines on the wine
list. Yet both of them are marked up by $40, with the French syrah selling for $60 a bottle,
and the Australian shiraz for $50. Now, you think the French wine is 50% better, but only
20% percent more expensive. At the restaurant, it is a better deal. You splurge and order
the French wine.
    This example illustrates what perhaps has happened to many of us, namely thinking in
context and figuring out which of several choices represents a better deal in light of the options
we face. In this paper, we try to formalize the intuition behind such thinking. The intuition
generalizes what we believe goes through a consumer’s mind in the wine example: at the
store, the price difference between the cheaper and the more expensive wine is more salient
than the quality difference, encouraging the consumer to opt for the cheaper option, whereas
at the restaurant, after the markups, the quality difference is more salient, encouraging the
consumer to splurge. We argue that this kind of thinking can help account for and unify a
broad range of disparate thought experiments, field experiments, and even field data that
have been difficult to account for in standard models, and certainly in one model.
    Consider a few examples. A car buyer would prefer to pay $17, 500 for a car equipped
with a radio to paying $17, 000 for a car without a radio, but at the same time would not
buy a radio separately for $500 after agreeing to buy a car for $17, 000 (Savage 1954). In a
related vein, experimental subjects thinking of buying a calculator for $15 and a jacket for
$125 are more likely to agree to travel for 10 minutes to save $5 on the calculator than to
travel the same 10 minutes to save $5 on the jacket (Kahneman and Tversky 1984).
    When faced with a choice between a good toaster for $20, and a somewhat better one for
$30, most experimental subjects choose the cheaper toaster. But when a marginally superior
toaster is added to the choice set for $50, many consumers switch to the middle toaster,
violating the axiom of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (Tversky and Simonson 1993).
   Imagine sunbathing with a friend on a beach in Mexico. It is hot, and your friend offers
to get you an ice-cold Corona from the nearest place, which is a hundred yards away. He asks
for your reservation price. In the first treatment, the nearest place to buy the beer is a beach
resort. In the second treatment, the nearest place is a corner store. Many people would pay
more for a beer from a resort than for one from the store, contradicting the fundamental
assumption that willingness to pay for a good is independent of context (Thaler 1985, 1999).
   When gasoline prices rise, many people switch from higher to lower grade gasoline (Hast-
ings and Shapiro 2011).
   Stores often post extremely high regular prices for goods, but then immediately put them
on sale at substantial discounts. The original prices and percentage discounts are displayed
prominently for consumers. In some department stores, more than half the revenues come
from sales (Ortmeyer, Quelch and Salmon 1991).
   Consumers opt for insurance policies with small deductibles even though the implied claim
probabilities (by comparison with high deductible policies) are implausibly high (Sydnor
2010, Barseghyan, Molinari, O’Donoghue and Teitelbaum, 2011).
   In this paper, we suggest that these and several other phenomena can be explained in
a unified way using a model of salience in decision making. As described by psychologists
Taylor and Thompson (1982), “salience refers to the phenomenon that when one’s atten-
tion is differentially directed to one portion on the environment rather than to others, the
information contained in that portion will receive disproportionate weighing in subsequent
judgments”. Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012, hereafter BGS 2012) apply this idea
to understanding decisions under risk, and present a model in which decision makers over-
weigh salient lottery states. They find that many anomalies in choice under risk, such as
frequent risk-seeking behavior, Allais paradoxes, and preference reversals obtain naturally
when salience influences decision weights. We follow BGS (2012) in stressing the interplay
of attention and choice, and extend the concept of salience to riskless choice among goods
with different attributes, which may include various aspects of quality, but also prices. We
then describe decision making by a consumer who overweighs in his choices the most salient


                                               2
attributes of each good he considers, and show that many of the phenomena just described,
as well as several others, obtain naturally in such a model.1
       In our model, a good’s salient attributes are those that stand out in the sense of being
furthest from their average value in the choice context. Following Kahneman and Miller’s
(1986) Norm Theory, we capture the choice context by the “evoked set,” which is the set of
goods that come to the agent’s mind when making his choice. We call “reference good” the
good with average attributes in the evoked set. The evoked set thus determines the attribute
levels the decision maker views as normal, or reference, in a situation. The salient attributes
are those attributes whose levels are unusual or surprising relative to the reference. The
consumer focuses on those when making his choice.
       Most of our results are obtained by assuming that the evoked set coincides with the
choice set itself. In these cases, the application of the model is straightforward and the
reference good captures Bodner and Prelec’s (1994) idea of “centroid reference.” We also
explore situations in which the choice context prompts the agent to think about goods that
are not in the choice set, and in particular to think about the same goods sold at historical,
or normal, prices. In Thaler’s beer example, people seem to be thinking about normal beer
prices at the resort or at the store. Likewise, in the Hastings-Shapiro gasoline evidence,
buyers seem to be recalling previous gasoline prices. In these cases, product features such
as prices that are surprising relative to prior expectations become very salient, and the
consumers focuses on them when making his choice.2
       The dependence of choice on external reference points is a central feature of many be-
havioral models. Most prominently, in Kahneman and Tverksy’s Prospect Theory decision
makers evaluate risky prospects by comparing them to reference points. Koszegi and Rabin
(2006, 2007) suggest that reference points correspond to the decision maker’s expectations.
Here we adopt the general perspective of this work, but propose perhaps a simpler notion of
the reference good as having average attributes of goods in the evoked set. More importantly,
   1
     We are continuing to model the phenomenon of local thinking (Gennaioli and Shleifer 2010, BGS 2012),
which refers to individuals focusing on and incorporating into their decisions some aspects of their envi-
ronment to a much greater extent than others. Other research that pursued a related strategy includes
Mullainathan (2002), Schwartzstein (2012), Gabaix (2011) and Woodford (2012).
   2
     Our approach is related to situations in which decision makers evaluate their options using mental
accounts (Thaler 1980). The marketing literature also stresses the effect of evoked sets on choice (see
Roberts and Lattin 1997 for a review).


                                                    3
apart from the role of the reference good in determining attribute salience, the consumer’s
preferences are completely standard.
   We show that salience provides powerful intuitions to account for the disparate phenom-
ena described above, and delivers several new predictions. In a broad range of situations,
salience creates a tendency for consumers to focus on the relative advantage of goods having
a high quality to price ratio. The model thus delivers the fundamental intuition that buyers
look for bargains, whether expressed in high quality (relative to price) or low prices (relative
to quality). This principle also implies that the same price difference looms smaller to a
local thinker when it occurs at higher prices, explaining the choice of wines in the store vs
restaurant, as well as the radio and the jacket/calculator problems: going to another shop
to save $5 looks like a good deal for the $15 calculator, but not for the $125 jacket.
   This logic helps provide a unified explanation for:

   • Decoy effects: when a bad deal such as a very expensive but marginally superior toaster
      is added to the choice set, the second best toaster looks like a bargain and its quality
      becomes salient. This leads the consumer to revise his original choice. Compromise
      effects, namely the preference for goods having balanced qualities in the choice set,
      arise in a similar way.

   • Context-dependent willingness to pay: recalling that beer is expensive at resorts makes
      a sunbather more willing to pay a higher price (while still viewing the quality of that
      beer as salient) than he would if he was thinking about store prices for beer.

   • Hastings-Shapiro evidence: when gas prices rise, current gas grades look like a bad
      deal relative to normal gas prices. The price of more expensive grades becomes salient
      to the consumer, who therefore switches to cheaper grades.

   • Sales as a manifestation of decoy effects: the original price of a good acts as a decoy
      in increasing the salience of the quality of the good on sale. This perspective explains
      why retailers might use frequent sales, why they would put expensive rather than cheap
      goods on sale, and why sales do not work in the case of standard goods.



                                               4
   • Evidence on demand for insurance: since the percentage variation in deductibles across
       insurance policies is larger than the percentage variation in their premia, differences
       in deductibles are salient. This tilts the consumer towards buying a low deductible
       policy, even though doing so is unjustified by the underlying risk.

   Economists have tried several more standard approaches in accounting for some of the
experimental evidence we discuss here. Wernerfelt (1995) and Kamenica (2008) explain the
decoy effects by suggesting that decoys indirectly provide consumers with information about
the quality of the products. The standard analysis of sales is also information-theoretic; it
focuses on intertemporal price discrimination and seller selection of customers depending on
their willingness to wait (Varian 1980, Lazear 1986, Sobel 1984). The present model offers
two advantages. First, it can account for a broad range of context-dependent choices in a
unified framework based on attribute salience. Second, it can account for some evidence that
we see as dumbfounding from the standard perspective, such as Thaler’s beer example.
   This paper is not the first to propose a psychologically based account of context phe-
nomena.     Huber, Payne and Puto (1982) and Simonson (1989) introduced some of the
most striking experimental evidence and Simonson and Tversky (1992) and Bodner and Pr-
elec (1994) proposed theoretical explanations based on loss aversion. Other papers relate
to context dependence more broadly: Spiegler (2011) reviews several models where bound-
edly rational consumers exhibit context dependent preferences (such as default bias), and
embeds them in standard market settings. Koszegi and Rabin (2006) explore a model of
reference-dependent preferences, and in particular how expectations influence willingness to
pay.    Heidhues and Koszegi (2008) propose a psychological model of sales based on loss
aversion. Two papers most closely related to ours are Cunningham (2011) and Koszegi and
Szeidl (2011); we discuss both of them after presenting the model.




                                               5
2         The Model

2.1        Setup

A consumer evaluates all goods in an evoked set C ≡ {qk }k=1,...,N with N > 1 goods.
Each good k is a vector qk = (q1k , . . . , qmk ) ∈ Rm of m > 1 quality attributes, where qik (i =
1, . . . , m) measures the utility that attribute i generates for the consumer. The last attribute
i = m stands for the price of good k, which gives the consumer a disutility qmk = −pk . The
consumer has full information about the attributes of each good.3 Most of the results in this
paper are derived using the simplest setting where a good is identified by a single quality
attribute and a price, namely qk = (qk , −pk ).
        Absent salience distortions, a consumer values qk with a separable utility function:4

                                                         m
                                                         X
                                             u (qk ) =         θi qik ,                                     (1)
                                                         i=1

where θi is the weight attached to attribute i in the valuation of the good (θm is the weight
attached to the numeraire and hence to the good’s price).5 We normalize θ1 + ... + θm = 1,
which allows us to handle the relative utility weights of different attributes: θi captures the
importance of attribute i for the overall utility of the good (i.e., the strength/frequency with
which a certain attribute is experienced during consumption), and θi /θj is the rational rate
of substitution among attributes j and i.
        A local thinker departs from (1) by inflating the relative weights attached to the attributes
that he perceives to be more salient. As in BGS (2012), we say that attribute i is salient
for good qt if the value of qit “stands out” - relative to qt ’s other attributes - with respect
to the average level q i = k qNik of the same attribute in C. We think of q i as the reference
                          P

    3
      If attribute i is a car’s speed, qik measures the consumer’s pleasure from driving fast in car k. By
considering multiple quality attributes we develop a formalism that can be applied to models of product
characteristics (e.g. Rosen 1974, Keeney and Raiffa 1976).
    4
      Adopting additive representations of preferences is appropriate when attributes are independent in a
specific sense (see Keeney and Raiffa (1976)). Additivity enables us to apply the formalism developed in
BGS (2012), allowing for a stark characterization of the effects of salience. One could extend the formalism
of salience to the case of non-additive preferences, but a fuller analysis is best left for future research.
    5
      We have not included the income w of the consumer in the numeraire good (from which the consumer
obtains total utility w − pk ). This is because w is not an attribute of the good and thus its evaluation is not
distorted by salience. The term θm w is then just an additive constant in the evaluation of any good in C.



                                                       6
level of attribute i in C, and of q = {q 1 , . . . , q N } as the consumer’s reference good (which
may not be a member of C).
    When the set C is equal to the choice set, the reference good is simply the average good
available to the consumer. We also consider the case in which C includes goods that come
to the consumer’s mind in specific choice contexts. In the spirit of Kahneman and Miller
(1986), this allows the reference good to be influenced also by the choice options that the
consumer views as normal in a given context. To capture this idea, we study the case where
the consumer thinks about the historical prices at which these goods he is currently choosing
from were available in the past. Thus, the evoked set C may include the choice set Cchoice
as a subset. Many of our results are obtained when the choice and the evoked set coincide,
Cchoice = C, but historical prices play an important role in generating context-dependent
willingness to pay and other anchoring-like effects. We return to the distinction between
evoked and choice set in Section 2.2.
    Given a reference good q, we formalize the salience of a good’s attributes as follows.

Definition 1 The salience of attribute qit for good qt is measured by a symmetric, contin-
uous function σ(qit , q i ), satisfying:
1) Ordering. For any (q, q) and (q 0 , q 0 ) such that [min(q, q), max(q, q)] ⊂ [min(q 0 , q 0 ), max(q 0 , q 0 )],
we have:
                                             σ(q, q) < σ(q 0 , q 0 ).                                       (2)

2) Diminishing sensitivity. For any q, q > 0 and all  > 0, we have:


                                        σ (q + , q + ) < σ (q, q) .                                       (3)


3) Reflection. For any q, q, q 0 , q 0 > 0 we have:


                            σ(q, q) < σ(q 0 , q 0 ) ⇔ σ(−q, −q) < σ(−q 0 , −q 0 ).                          (4)




    To illustrate these three properties, consider the salience function employed in BGS


                                                        7
(2012), which sets:6
                                                                  |qit − q i |
                                              σ (qit , q i ) =                   ,                                 (5)
                                                                 |qit | + |q i |
for |qit | , |q i | 6= 0, and σ (0, 0) = 0.
       According to ordering, salience increases in contrast: attribute i is more salient for good
qt if qit is farther from its reference level q i in the evoked set. An attribute is salient when it
is very different from, or surprising relative to, its reference value. In (5), this is captured by
the numerator |qit − q i |. Diminishing sensitivity says that salience decreases as the value of
an attribute uniformly increases in absolute value across all goods. In (5), this is captured by
the denominator |qit | + |q i |. Finally, reflection says that salience is shaped by the magnitue
of attributes, so that negative attributes such as prices are treated similarly to positive
attributes. In (5), reflection takes the strong form σ(q, q) = σ(−q, −q).
       To see the intuition behind Definition 1, consider the salience of a good’s price. Ordering
implies that if good qt is more expensive than the reference good (i.e. pt > p), an increase in
its price pt raises the extent to which the good’s price is salient in the evoked set. Conversely,
if good qt is cheaper than the reference good (i.e. pt < p), an increase in pt reduces the
salience of the price for that good. On the other hand, diminishing sensitivity implies that
if the prices of all goods rise, price becomes less salient for all goods. Intuitively, when the
price level is high, price differences across goods are less noticeable.
       Given a salience function σ, a local thinker ranks a good’s attributes and distorts their
utility weights as follows:

Definition 2 Attribute i is more salient than attribute j for good qt if and only if σ(qit , q i ) >
σ(qjt , q j ). Let rit be the salience ranking of attribute i for good qt , where lower rit corresponds
to higher salience. Attributes with equal salience receive the same (lowest possible) ranking.
The local thinker then evaluates good qt by transforming the weight θi attached to attribute
   6
    In BGS (2012) the reference value of attribute i for good t was assumed to be the average level q̄i,−t of
such attribute across all goods other than t. The current specification is slighlty more tractable but yields the
same results. Another specification is adopted in Bordalo (2011), whereby salience is the average pairwise
                                                               P
contrast between good t and its alternatives r 6= t, σ(qit ) =    r6=t c(qit , qir ) , where contrast c(·, ·) satisfies
properties 1 and 2 of Definition 1.




                                                             8
i ∈ {1, ..., m} into:
                                                       rit
                                                 δ
                                  θbit = θi · P        rjt
                                                           ≡ θi ωit ,                                              (6)
                                                j θj δ

where δ ∈ (0, 1]. Thus, the local thinker over-weights attribute i if and only if ωit > 1. The
local thinker’s (LT ) evaluation of good qt is then given by:

                                                       m
                                                       X
                                        LT
                                    u        (qt ) =            θbit · qit .                                       (7)
                                                        i=1


   Relative to the rational case, the local thinker evaluates qt by over-weighting the utility
impact of attribute i if the latter is more salient than average (i.e. δ rit > j θj δ rjt ), and
                                                                              P

under-weighting it otherwise. Parameter δ captures the degree of local thinking. As δ → 1,
the local thinker converges to the rational case (i.e. ωit → 1). As δ → 0, the local thinker
focuses only on the most salient attribute and neglects all others.
   To see how the model works, return to the wine example from the Introduction. A
consumer is evaluating two bottles of wine characterized by their known quality and price.
Suppose that the consumer is considering a high end wine qh = (qh , −ph ) and a low end
wine ql = (ql , −pl ), where qh > ql and ph > pl . Since C ≡ {qh , ql }, the reference wine has
quality q = (qh + ql )/2 and price p = (ph + pl )/2. Using the salience function (5), quality is
                                                             qh −(ql +qh )/2       ph −(pl +ph )/2
salient for the high end wine qh if and only if              qh +(ql +qh )/2
                                                                               >   ph +(pl +ph )/2
                                                                                                   ,   namely when the
deviation of wine qh from the average wine is larger, in percentage terms, along the quality
than the price dimension. The quality qh of the high end wine is thus salient when:

                                               qh  ql
                                                  > ,                                                              (8)
                                               ph  pl

namely, when the high end wine has a higher quality/price ratio than the low end wine. It
is easy to see that when (8) holds, quality is salient for the low end wine as well. If instead
the high end wine has a lower quality/price ratio than the low end wine (i.e. qh /ph < ql /pl ),
then price is the salient attribute for both wines.
   In this example: i) the same attribute (quality or price) is salient for both wines, and
ii) the salient attribute is the relative advantage of the good with the highest q/p. As we
show in Section 3, when the evoked set includes more than two options, different attributes


                                                   9
can be salient for different goods. This good-specific salience helps account for violations of
Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives.
   For a given salience ranking and utility weights θ1 and θ2 attached to quality and price,
respectively, Definition 2 implies that the consumer’s valuation of wine k = h, l is given by:
                                                                
                                      1                        δ
                           θ1 ·             · q k − θ2 ·             · pk if qh /ph > ql /pl
                                  θ1 +δθ2                θ1 +δθ2 
                          
                          
                          
            uLT   (qk ) =   θ1 · δθ1δ+θ2 · qk − θ2 · δθ11+θ2 · pk if qh /ph < ql /pl .           (9)
                          
                          
                          
                                         θ1 · qk − θ2 · pk                if qh /ph = ql /pl

                                                                                     
                                                                                1
If quality is salient, the relative weight of quality increases, θb1k = θ1 · θ1 +δθ 2
                                                                                        > θ1 , and
                                                           
                                                       δ
the relative weight of price decreases, θb2k = θ2 · θ1 +δθ2
                                                              < θ2 , as compared to the rational
consumer’s evaluation.       If in contrast price is salient, its relative weight increases at the
expense of that of quality. Thus, the consumer’s evaluation of any wine k increases relative
to the rational benchmark, uLT (qk ) > u (qk ), when its quality is salient, and decreases when
its price is salient, in which case uLT (qk ) < u (qk ).
   Through its impact on evaluation, salience affects the choice among wines. When prices
are salient, namely when qh /ph < ql /pl , Expression (9) implies that the low end wine ql is
chosen over the high end wine qh provided:


                                  δθ1 · (ql − qh ) − θ2 · (pl − ph ) > 0,                       (10)


which is easier to meet than its rational counterpart, with δ = 1. Intuitively, when price
is salient, the local thinker undervalues both wines, but he undervalues the high end wine
more; this is because the local thinker focuses on the dimension, price, along which the low
end wine does better.
   Analogously, when quality is salient, namely when qh /ph > ql /pl , Expression (9) implies
that the low end wine ql is chosen over the high end wine qh provided:


                                  θ1 · (ql − qh ) − δθ2 · (pl − ph ) > 0,                       (11)


which is harder to meet than its rational counterpart, with δ = 1. Intuitively, when quality


                                                    10
is salient, the local thinker overvalues both wines, but overvalues the high quality wine more.
Thus, he is less likely to choose the low end wine than in the rational case.
   Salience tilts the local thinker’s preferences toward the wine offering the highest qual-
ity/price ratio. When the high end wine has the highest quality/price ratio, the consumer
focuses on quality and is more likely to choose qh . When the low end wine has the highest
quality/price ratio, the consumer focuses on price and is more likely to pick ql . In marketing
and psychology, it has long been recognized that consumers are drawn to goods with a high
quality/price ratio (or value per dollar). This notion has been explained by assuming that
the consumer experiences a distinct “transaction utility” (Thaler 1999), in that he derives
direct pleasure from making a good deal (Jahedi 2011). In our example, the consumer does
not derive any special utility from making good deals. Instead, the quality/price ratio affects
choice by determining whether a good’s relative advantage is salient.
   The quality/price ratio in (9) creates two forms of context dependence in our model.
The first one concerns the consumer’s sensitivity to changes in a good’s attributes. For
instance, an increase in qh always increases the valuation of the high end wine, but the effect
is particularly strong when qh becomes so high relative to ql that quality becomes salient for
wine qh . The second form of context dependence is that the evaluation of a good depends
on the alternatives of comparison. For instance, a reduction in the quality ql of the low end
wine can boost the valuation of the high end wine qh by rendering the latter’s quality salient.
   Given the intuitive appeal of the quality/price ratio, we now consider the class of salience
functions under which q/p is the critical driver of salience. Take an evoked set C consisting
of N > 1 goods characterized by their quality and price [i.e., qk = (qk, − pk )] and by a
reference good q = (q, −p). We find:

Proposition 1 Let qk be a good that neither dominates nor is dominated by the reference
good q. The following two statements are then equivalent:
1) The advantage of qk relative to q is salient if and only if qk /pk > q̄/p̄.
2) Salience is homogeneous of degree zero, i.e. σ(αx, αy) = σ(x, y) for all α > 0.

   When the salience function is homogenous of degree zero, a good’s advantage relative
to the reference is salient provided the good has a favourable quality/price ratio. To see

                                               11
this, suppose that qk has higher quality and price than average, namely qk > q, pk > p.
Then, its advantage relative to the reference good is quality qk . This quality is salient pro-
vided σ (qk , q) > σ (pk , p). Under homogeneity of degree zero this condition is equivalent
to σ (qk /q, 1) > σ (pk /p, 1). By ordering, this is met precisely when qk has a higher qual-
ity/price ratio than average, qk /pk > q/p.             Conversely, if qk has lower quality and price
than average - qk < q, pk < p - its advantage relative to the reference good is price pk . This
price is then salient provided σ (pk , p) > σ (qk , q), which occurs precisely when qk has above
average quality/price ratio.
    Homogeneity of degree zero is a reasonable property, as it ensures that the salience
ranking is scale-invariant, in the sense that it is invariant under linear transformations of the
units (utils) in which the attributes are measured. Interestingly, homogeneity of degree zero
is related to diminishing sensitivity. The Appendix in fact proves:

Lemma 1 If σ(·, ·) satisfies the ordering property for positive attribute values, and is ho-
mogenous of degree zero, then it also satisfies diminishing sensitivity.

    Although our basic results hold under Definition 1, summarizing salience by a good’s
quality to price ratio aids both tractability and psychological intuition. In the remainder,
we therefore restrict our attention to the case where the following assumption holds:

    A.0: The salience function satisfies ordering, reflection and homogeneity of degree zero.

    In section 2.2 we provide a psychological justification for this assumption.7 In light of
A.0, we can fully characterize the salience ranking of any good qk = (qk , −pk ) in the quality
price space, including in regions where it either dominates or is dominated by the reference
good q = (q, −p). The resulting salience rankings are graphically represented in Figure 1
below. Note that there is a trade-off between good qk and the reference good q in quadrants
I (qk < q̄, pk < p̄) and II (qk > q̄, pk > p̄), whereas qk dominates q in quadrant IV and is
dominated by q in quadrant III.
   7
     To extend the homogeneity of degree zero property to attribute levels of zero, we interpret σ(qik , 0) as
limq →0 σ(qik , ai ). Moreover, when comparing σ(qik , 0) and σ(qjk , 0), we assume the limit then keeps the ratio
     i
of hedonic utilities ai /aj constant at 1. Homogeneity of degree zero is stronger than diminishing sensitivity,
                                                        |x−y|
as is exemplified by the salience function σ(x, y) = x+y+θ    , with θ > 0. In this case σ(αx, αy) > σ(x, y) for
α > 1. Thus homogeneity excludes certain weak forms of diminishing sensitivity.

                                                       12
Figure 1: Salience of attributes of qk = (q, −p) depends on its location relative to q = (q, −p).

       From the previous discussion, in quadrants I and II the salience ranking of a good is
determined by its location relative to the upward sloping curve q/p = q̄/p̄, along which the
good’s quality/price ratio is equal to that of the reference good. This determines, together
with the downward sloping curve q · p = q̄ · p̄ in the quadrants III and IV, four regions where
either price or quality is salient.8 To jointly characterize the salience ranking of all goods in
an evoked set C we simply need to compute the reference quality and price, and then place
the goods in the “windmill” diagram of Figure 1 above. In this diagram, a good’s price pk is
salient in regions where it is far from the reference price p̄. Accordingly, the good’s quality
qk is salient in the regions where it is far from the reference quality q. Figure 1 allows us to
develop visual intuitions for the role of salience in explaining choices.


2.2       Discussion of Setup and Assumptions

Our model of context-dependent evaluation hinges on two basic facts about perception: i)
our perceptive apparatus is structured to detect changes in stimuli (captured by the ordering
property), and ii) changes are better detected when they occur close to a baseline reference
level (captured by the diminishing sensitivity property). BGS (2012) provide a fuller de-
   8
    To identify the downward sloping curve, note that when qk dominates the reference (i.e. qk > q and
pk < p), then qk is salient if and only if σ (qk /q, 1) > σ(1, p/pk ), namely if and only if qk pk > qp. Instead,
when qk is dominated by the reference, its quality is salient if and only if qk pk < qp.


                                                       13
scription of these psychological phenomena. That paper introduces a general framework of
choice that combines ordering, diminishing sensitivity and reflection and applies it to choices
under risk. Here we show how the same assumptions shed light on a wide variety of choice
patterns and puzzles in a riskless setting.
       Three assumptions of the model merit further comment. The first is homogeneity of
degree zero (A.0) of salience, which plays a larger role in the present paper than in BGS
(2012). The crucial role of this assumption is to pin down the trade-off between diminishing
sensitivity and ordering, in a way closely related to Weber’s law: the salience of an attribute
for a good remains constant when the level of that attribute increases in all goods, provided
the difference between the good’s level and the reference level increases proportionally. While
we do not claim that this assumption is universally applicable, it is supported by an emerging
paradigm in psychology stressing that people possess an innate “core number system” which
compares magnitudes in terms of ratios.9
       The key predictions of our model are shaped by diminishing sensitivity and ordering.
These properties determine the effect of changing the level of an attribute on its salience.
For instance, ordering implies that increasing the price of a good increases the salience of
its price, provided that price is above average, while diminishing sensitivity implies that
price differences become less salient as the price level increases. These predictions hold
for any increasing utility function, and can be tested experimentally. When ordering and
diminishing sensitivity are in conflict, as when both price levels and price dispersion increase,
homogeneity of degree zero pins down the relative importance of each force. It thus allows to
make precise predictions on the effect of context on the consumer’s choices, such as the role
of the quality to price ratio. These predictions do depend on the consumer’s utility function.
       Second, we have assumed that evaluation depends on the attributes’ salience ranking.
This rank-based discounting aids tractability, but has some shortcomings: i) evaluation is
discontinuous at those attribute values where salience ranking changes, and ii) evaluation
may be non-monotonic. Non-monotonicity may even lead, in finely tuned examples, to a
   9
    Feigenson, Dehaene and Spelke (2004): “To sum up, the findings indicate that infants, children and
adults share a common system for quantification.” This system exhibits a logarithmic (i.e. ratio based)
representation of numerical magnitude: “numerical representations therefore show two hallmarks: they
are ratio-dependent and are robust across multiple modalities of input.” Interestingly, the “system becomes
integrated with the symbolic number system used by children and adults for enumeration and computation.”


                                                    14
dominated good being preferred over a dominating good. In the Appendix we show that
with a continuous salience weighting these shortcomings disappear under general conditions.
In the main text, we however stick to the more tractable rank-based discounting.
       Third and most important, following Kahneman and Miller (1986), we have defined the
reference good as having each attribute’s average level in the evoked set. Since our goal is to
study how salience shapes the effect of context, we limit our analysis by taking the evoked
set as given. Several authors have recently proposed models that endogenize the set of
options that come to the decision maker’s mind, as distinct from the choice set (Rubinstein
and Salant 2007, Eliaz and Spiegler 2010, Masatlioglu et al. 2010, Manzini and Mariotti
2010). These models focus on the “consideration set” as it is understood in the marketing
literature, namely a typically small subset of all available options that the agent actually
considers when making a choice.10 In contrast, in the examples and applications in this
paper, the choice set is small and the evoked set can include other options that are not in
effect available (such as historical prices for goods in the choice set).
       Several models of consumer choice incorporate loss aversion relative to a reference good,
including Tversky and Kahneman (1991), Tversky and Simonson (1992) and Bodner and Pr-
elec (1994). A main implication of these models is a bias towards middle-of-the-road options,
which avoid large perceived losses in every attribute. This prediction is hard to reconcile
with evidence that in many situations consumers do choose extreme options. Moreover,
these models do not speak to the other puzzles reviewed in the Introduction, such as the
Savage car radio problem, context dependent WTP or the Hastings-Shapiro data.
       Recently, several papers have introduced other related models of context dependent eval-
uation. The literature on relative thinking assumes that valuation of a good depends on the
“referent” levels of its characteristics (Azar 2007, Cunningham 2011).                 The fundamental
assumption is that the marginal utility of a characteristic decreases with the level of its
referent. This is reminiscent of the diminishing sensitivity property of salience, and in fact
Cunningham (2011) reproduces some related patterns of choice, such as the Savage car radio
  10
    The determination of the choice set is also an important input in (rational) discrete choice models: the
predictions of these models depend quantitatively on how the set of alternatives is specified. Moreover,
allowing for incomplete consumer information (Goeree 2008) suggests an important role for (un)awareness
of available choices.



                                                    15
puzzle.   By assuming that valuation changes are driven solely by diminishing sensitivity,
Cunningham’s approach implies that all goods’ valuations are distorted in the same way.
Thus, it does not account for patterns of choice in which ordering plays a role, such as the
taste for balance (section 3.4) or the Hastings-Shapiro evidence on gasoline (section 4.1).
    Koszegi and Szeidl (2011) build a model that centrally features the idea of ordering:
their consumers are essentially local thinkers who focus on and overweigh those attributes
in which options differ the most in terms of utility. Koszegi and Szeidl then use their model
to shed light on biases in intertemporal choice. By neglecting diminishing sensitivity, the
Koszegi Szeidl model predicts a strong bias towards concentration, namely consumers tend to
overvalue options whose advantages are concentrated in a single dimension. This bias seems
difficult to reconcile with the evidence on diminishing sensitivity (such as the Savage car radio
puzzle), and also with the evident desire of luxury manufacturers to avoid shortcomings in
any aspect of their merchandise.
    By combining diminishing sensitivity with ordering within the context of an evoked set,
our model provides a unified account of several well-known choice patterns and puzzles.
It reconciles patterns explored separately by Cunningham (2011) and Koszegi and Szeidl
(2011), sheds light on phenomena currently gathered under the banner of mental accounting
(such as context dependent willingness to pay), and generates new predictions of interest in
economic applications.



3     Salience and Choice
We now examine various implications of our model, motivated by the evidence summarized in
the introduction. Section 3.1 considers context effects that occur due to a uniform increase in
the level of one attribute (price) across all goods. Section 3.2 investigates context effects that
occur when new goods are added to the evoked set C. Section 3.3 studies a taste for balance
in goods having two positive quality attributes. Finally, Section 3.4 applies these results to
examine how historical prices affect the local thinker’s willingness to pay for quality. This is
the only case in Section 3 where the choice and the evoked sets differ.




                                               16
3.1       Buying Wine in a Store vs. at a Restaurant

Suppose that a consumer buying wine attaches the same weight to quality and price (θ1 =
θ2 = 1/2). In the wine store, the available wines are:
                                          
                                           q = (30, −$20)
                                             h
                               Cstore   =                  .                              (12)
                                           q = (20, −$10)
                                             l



   The rational consumer is indifferent between qh and ql because u(qh ) = 30−20 = u(ql ) =
20 − 10. This is not true for the local thinker. Since the quality/price ratio of the low end
wine is higher than that of the high end wine (i.e. 20/$10 > 30/$20), price is salient for both
wines. It follows from (10) that the high end wine is undervalued relative to the low end
wine, so the local thinker strictly prefers ql to qh . In the wine store, price is more salient
than quality, so the local thinker is overly sensitive to price differences. He perceives ql to
be slightly less good, but a lot cheaper than qh .
   Suppose now that the same two wines are offered at a restaurant, with uniformly higher
prices:                                    
                                            q = (30, −$60)
                                              h
                             Crestaurant =                  .                             (13)
                                            q = (20, −$50)
                                              l


The rational consumer is again indifferent between qh and ql , because u(qh ) = 30 − 60 =
u(qh ) = 20 − 50. Unlike in the store, however, qh now provides a better quality to price ratio
than ql , since 30/$60 > 20/$50. As a consequence, in the restaurant the consumer focuses on
quality and, from (11), the high end wine is chosen over the alternative. At the restaurant
the local thinker is less sensitive to price differences and perceives qh to be slightly more
expensive but significantly better than ql . This occurs even though the quality gradient
qh − ql and the price gradient ph − pl are the same in the store and at the restaurant, so that
the rational consumer does not systematically change his choice between the two contexts.
   Context influences decisions here because the ranking of the quality to price ratio changes
from the store to the restaurant. The store displays a higher percentage variation along the
price dimension than along the quality dimension, which implies that the cheaper good is the
better deal. The reverse is true at the restaurant. As a consequence, the consumer focuses


                                              17
on price in the store and on quality in the restaurant.
       These effects, arising from the diminishing sensitivity of the salience function, naturally
deliver a well known feature of consumer behavior: lower price sensitivity for choice among
more expensive goods. An example of this phenomenon is Savage’s (1954) car radio prob-
lem11 , in which a consumer is more likely to buy a car radio when the price of the radio is
added to the price of the car than when the radio is sold in isolation, after the car purchase.
To see this, denote by q the car’s quality and by q + qr its quality when the radio is installed.
Denote by p the car’s price and by pr the price of the radio. When choosing whether to buy
the car alone or with the radio, the consumer faces Cbundle ≡ {(q, p), (q + qr , p + pr )}. The
salience of quality for the car with the radio is σ(q + qr , q + qr /2), the salience of its price
is σ(p + pr , p + pr /2). When instead the consumer chooses whether to keep his car without
the radio or to install a radio in it, he faces Cisol ≡ {(q, 0), (q + qr , pr )}. The salience of
quality for the car with the radio is still σ(q + qr , q + qr /2) while the salience of its price
is σ(pr , pr /2). By diminishing sensitivity σ(p + pr , p + pr /2) < σ(pr , pr /2), so the price of
the radio is more salient when the radio is bought in isolation. It is easy to check that this
analysis is confirmed by the q/p logic under assumption A0.
       Similarly, our model sheds light on the jacket and calculator problem (Kahneman and
Tversky 1984), in which subjects who have decided to buy a bundle ((jacket, $125), (calculator, $15))
are willing to travel 10 minutes to save $5 when the discount applies to the calculator, but
not to the more expensive jacket. Intuitively, walking for 10 minutes (vs. not walking at all)
has salience σ(10, 5). Saving 5 dollars on the jacket has salience σ(120, 122.5), saving them
on the calculator has salience σ(10, 12.5). Since σ(10, 12.5) > σ(120, 122.5), the discount is
more likely to be salient if it is applied to the calculator.
       These results generalize to choice among an arbitrary number of goods. To see this,
suppose that the local thinker is choosing between N > 1 goods located along a rational
indifference curve. The indifference condition allows us to identify the effect of salience,
abstracting from rational utility differences. Given the quasilinear utility in (1), the N
goods display a constant quality/price gradient, formally θ1 (qk − qk0 ) = θ2 (pk − pk0 ) for all
  11
     This problem was proposed as a riskless choice counterpart to Allais’ paradox in decision making under
risk, illustrating the breakdown of the sure thing principle. Salience accounts for both versions of the problem,
see BGS (2012).


                                                       18
k, k 0 = 1, ..., N . Assume, without loss of generality, that quality and price increase in the
index k (i.e. q1 < ... < qN and p1 < ... < pN ). In the Appendix we prove:

Proposition 2 Along a rational linear indifference curve, the local thinker chooses the good
with the highest quality/price ratio. In particular:
1) if q1 /p1 > θ2 /θ1 , the cheapest good (q1 , p1 ) has the highest q/p ratio and is chosen;
2) if q1 /p1 < θ2 /θ1 , the most expensive good (qN , pN ) has the highest q/p ratio and is chosen;
3) if q1 /p1 = θ2 /θ1 , the q/p ratio is constant and the consumer is indifferent between the
goods.

       Salience tilts the rational linear indifference curves, favoring either the cheapest or the
highest quality good. Diminishing sensitivity determines which good is chosen. When, as in
case 1), the price level is low relative to the quality level, variation along the price dimenson
is more salient than that along the quality dimension. As a consequence, the consumer
focuses on prices, breaking indifference in favour of the cheapest good. When, as in case
2), the price level is high relative to the quality level, the consumer attends more to quality
differences. As a result, he breaks indifference in favour of the highest quality good. In both
cases the consumer prefers the good with the highest quality to price ratio, which is either
the cheapest or the highest quality good in the choice set.12
       To visualize Proposition 2, note that with linear utility a rational indifference curve is a
positively sloped line in the (q, p) diagram. If the evoked set consists of a collection of points
on an indifference line, then the reference good (q,p) also lies on that line. Exploiting these
features, Figure 2 graphically represents cases 1) and 2) of Proposition 2.
       As in the case of the wine store, in the left panel goods vary more along the price than
along the quality dimension: price is salient and consumers choose the cheapest good. The
reverse holds in the right panel.13 The shift is salience ranking from the left to the right
  12
      The linearity of rational indifference curves (which is due to the quasi linearity of preferences) is useful
to obtain such a sharp characterization. For a concave indifference curve, the reference good will lie below
the rational indifference curve itself, and so salience rankings will differ across goods. As we show below,
concave evoked sets generate decoy effects.
   13
      The local thinker’s tendency to choose extreme goods in the choice set generalizes to any evoked set
C lying on a positively sloped line, even if this line is not a rational indifference curve. Also in this case
all goods will have the same salience ranking, and the good taking the most favourable value of the salient
attribute will thus be maximally overvalued (even if it is not necessarily chosen).


                                                       19
       Figure 2: All goods on an indifference curve have the same salience ranking.

panel thus captures changes in context generated by a uniform change in one of the goods’
attributes (e.g. price). In Section 4.1 we consider the more general effects of uniform price
movements within a sub-category of goods.


3.2    Decoy Effects and Violations of IIA

There is ample experimental evidence that manipulation of the choice set alters the preference
among existing goods, in violation of independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA). A well
documented anomaly in both marketing and psychology is the so called decoy effect (Huber,
Payne and Puto 1983, Tversky and Simonson 1993), in which adding an option dominated
by one of two goods boosts the demand for the dominating good. Another well known
anomaly is the compromise effect (Simonson, 1989), whereby adding an extreme option to a
pairwise choice induces subjects to change their preferences toward the middle of the road,
or compromise, option. We now show how our model can account for these phenomena as a
result of the impact of the added option on salience.
   Consider again the wine example in (12), with a variation in which a third, more expensive




                                             20
and higher quality wine qd is added to the wine list (and θ1 = θ2 )
                                                                       
                                                                       q = (30, −$30)
                                                                        d
                                                                       
                       q = (30, −$20)                                 
                         h
                 C0 =                                          Cdecoy = qh = (30, −$20)           (14)
                       q = (20, −$10)                                 
                         l                                             
                                                                        q = (20, −$10)
                                                                       
                                                                          l



Wine qd is dominated by qh , yielding lower utility than the orginal options, u(qd ) = 0 <
u(qh ) = u(ql ) = 10. A rational decision maker is indifferent between qh and ql but prefers
both to qd . The inclusion of qd in the evoked set does not affect his choice.
       As shown in Section 3.1, in C0 the local thinker picks the low end wine ql because it has
the highest quality/price ratio, so prices are salient. What happens when qd is added to the
list? The new wine delivers the highest quality in the choice set, but is much more expensive
than the other wines. In particular, the quality/price ratio of qd , 30/30, is lower than the
quality/price ratio of the high end wine qh , 30/20. Now, by comparison with qd , the high
end wine seems a better deal than in the original choice set C0 .
       To see the implications for choice, note that in the set Cdecoy , the reference wine is
q = (26.7, −$20). The high end wine qh delivers above reference quality 30 > 26.7 at
the reference price $20. Intuitively, the quality of qh becomes salient. The low end wine
still dominates the reference wine along the price dimension, since $10 < $20, and this
dimension remains salient because ql is a better deal than q, formally 20/10 > 26.7/20. As
a consequence, after the decoy is added, the low end wine remains price salient but the high
end wine becomes quality salient. Under this new salience configuration, the local thinker
prefers qh to ql . Our model therefore yields a decoy effect: in pairwise choice the local
thinker prefers ql to qh but he switches to qh when an expensive inferior good qd is added,
thus violating IIA.14 The intuition is that when the bad deal qd is added, the quality of qh
becomes salient, and qh becomes a good deal.
       This argument does not rely on introducing a decoy qd which is dominated by the origi-
nally neglected option qh . It relies on the introduction in the choice set of an option which
highlights the quality dimension of qh while not being so attractive that it is itself chosen.
Take two goods ql = (ql , pl ), qh = (qh , ph ), such that qh is chosen if and only if it is quality
  14
       As qd lies on a lower indifference curve, and qh is quality salient, qd is never chosen.


                                                         21
is salient. Denoting by ∆u = [qh − ql ] − [ph − pl ] the rational utility difference between them
(with θ1 = θ2 ), this means


                             −(1 − δ)[ph − pl ] ≤ ∆u ≤ (1 − δ)[qh − ql ]                                   (15)


This condition says that preference reversals occur provided the rational utility difference
between the goods is sufficiently small: only in this case a change in salience can affect choice
among the two goods. We restrict our attention to decoy options qd such that q ≤ qh and
p ≤ ph , where (q, p) is the reference good in {ql , qh , qd }. These constraints allow for goods qd
which make qh an intermediate good in the enlarged choice set. The appendix then proves
that, when Equation (15) holds, we have:

Proposition 3
          ql     qh
    i) If      >      , so that price is salient and ql is chosen from {ql , qh }, then for any qd
          pl     ph          h           i
satisfying pqdd < pqhh + ppdl pqhh − pqhh , good qh is quality salient in {ql , qh , qd }. Moreover, there
exist options qd with qd > qh and pd > ph such that qh is chosen from {ql , qh , qd }.
           ql   qh
    ii) If    < , so quality is salient and qh is chosen from {ql , qh }, then there exist no
           pl  ph
decoy options qd such that pqdd ≤ pqhh and qh is price salient in {ql , qh , qd }. In particular, for
no qd satisfying these properties is ql chosen from {ql , qh , qd }.

   Consider first case i), where ql is a good deal when compared to qh , namely ql /pl > qh /pl
(so that the price dimension is salient) and the consumer prefers ql over qh in a pairwise
choice. Then the Proposition identifies a decoy qd sufficient to reverse this preference, namely,
                                                                                          qd       q       qh
when qd has a low enough quality-price ratio. In particular, it must be that              pd
                                                                                               <   p
                                                                                                       <   ph
                                                                                                              .,
that is, the decoy must be a “bad deal”: the constraints on qd imply that the decoy lowers
the overall quality-price ratio in the choice set to the point that qh /ph > q/p. Since the
decoy’s quality is low relative to its price, this makes the quality of qh salient. Then, qh is
chosen as long as the decoy is not too attractive.
   The decoy effect is strongest when the new option qd is dominated by qh , with the same
or lower quality but a much higher price. This is the case in the example (14). However,
preference reversals can also occur when the added option qd is not dominated by qh , in-
cluding when qd > qh and pd > ph . In this case, qh is perceived as providing intermediate

                                                   22
levels of quality and price. As long as qd provides a relatively larger increase in price than
in quality compared to qh , the consumer focuses on the quality of qh and is more likely to
choose it. This case provides a rationale for the compromise effect, which in our model arises
due to a similar mechanism as the decoy effect.
    Figure 3 provides a graphical intuition for the decoy/compromise effect of case i). When
the new good qd has a sufficiently lower q/p ratio than existing options, the evoked set
becomes concave with respect to prices. As a result, the intermediate good has both higher
quality and higher quality/price ratios than the reference good, becoming quality salient.15




       Figure 3: Adding a decoy changes the quality/price ratio of the reference good.

    Consider case ii) of Proposition 3. Now qh ’s quality is already salient in the pairwise
comparison with ql . Adding a decoy to the lower quality good ql , namely a bad deal qd with
relatively low quality to price ratio (as implied by the condition qd /pd < qh /ph ), has no effect
on qh ’s salience ranking: in fact, qh remains a high quality, high quality-price ratio good,
so its quality remains salient. A striking implication is that in this case there is no decoy
option that boosts the relative evaluation of the lower quality good ql , even for decoys such
that ql is a dominating option (qd < ql , pd > pl ) or a compromise option (qd < ql , pd < pl ).
  15
     In typical illustrations of the compromise effect, the three goods lie on a straight line in attribute space,
with the intermediate good equidistant from the other two (Tversky and Simonson, 1993). If utility is
concave, this arrangement translates into a concave choice set as in Figure 3.



                                                       23
       There are instances, not contemplated in Proposition 3, in which a decoy might increase
the relative evaluation of a lower quality good.16 However, Proposition 3 captures an impor-
tant asymmetry generated by our model, whereby goods with high quality and high price are
more likely to benefit from decoy effects than their low quality, low price competitors. This
effect is different from loss aversion (Tversky and Simonson 1993, Bodner and Prelec 1994) in
that consumers do not mechanically prefer middle-of-the-road options. It is, however, consis-
tent with Heath and Chatterjee (1995)’s survey of experimental results on decoy effects. The
authors find that adding appropriate decoys typically boosts experimental subjects’ demand
for high quality goods, but rarely for low quality goods. We explore this asymmetry further
in the context of sales, Section 4.2.


3.3        Goods with Multiple Positive Quality Attributes

Having examined the tradeoff between quality and price, we now consider the trade-off be-
tween two quality dimensions. Several experiments document subjects’ tendency to select
options that offer a more balanced combination of positive qualities in the choice set, in accor-
dance with the compromise effect. We now show that this taste for balance arises naturally
in our model due to diminishing sensitivity: for unbalanced goods, the salient attributes are
their shortcomings rather than their strengths. We also show that this mechanism is richer
than standard loss aversion accounts and yields novel predictions.
       To do so, we consider goods qk ≡ (q1k , q2k , p) that differ in their qualities but not in
their prices, so that price is the least salient dimension. We omit the price for notational
convenience. In this setup, Definition 1 implies that q1k is more salient than q2k for good qk
if and only if σ(q1k , q 1 ) > σ(q2k , q 2 ). Once more, the salience ranking of a good in quality-
quality space is determined by its location relative to the reference (q̄1 , q̄2 ). Good qk presents
a trade-off relative to the reference good whenever it has a higher level of one quality but a
lower level of the other, namely it lies in quadrants III and IV of the left panel of Figure 1.
       Suppose that q1k > q̄1 and q2k < q̄2 . Then, homogeneity of degree zero implies that the
  16
       These include decoys with extremely high quality to price ratios, but very low levels of quality.




                                                        24
upside q1k of good k is salient whenever σ(q1k /q 1 , 1) > σ(1, q 2 /q2k ), which is equivalent to:


                                                q1k · q2k > q̄1 · q̄2 .


The salience ranking is determined by the quality-quality product q1k ·q2k .17 In this respect, a
version of Proposition 1 carries through: if a good is neither dominated by nor dominates the
reference good, its relative advantage is salient if and only if it has a higher quality-quality
product than the reference good.
       Consider now how salience affects choice along a rational indifference curve. In a quality-
quality trade-off, rational indifference curves are downward sloping. Due to diminishing
sensitivity, goods that are unbalanced in the sense of having a low quality-quality product
q1k · q2k will have their weak dimension salient. As a consequence, the consumer chooses an
intermediate good, namely a good with high enough q1k · q2k :

Proposition 4 Let all goods in a choice set be located on a rational indifference curve with
utility level u. Then:
               u
1) if q̄1 <   2θ1
                  ,   the local thinker chooses the good qk with highest q1k subject to q1k · q2k > q 1 · q 2
               u
2) if q̄1 >   2θ1
                  ,   the local thinker chooses the good qk with highest q2k subject to q1k · q2k > q 1 · q 2
               u
3) if q̄1 =   2θ1
                  ,   the local thinker chooses a good “sufficiently close” to (q 1 , q 2 ).

       The local thinker picks the good that is most specialized (has the most extreme strength)
relative to the reference good, provided that good’s weakness is not so bad that it is noticed.
If the reference level of q 1 in the choice set is low, case 1, the consumer chooses the good
which has the highest value of this attribute but also a sufficiently high value of q2k . When
instead the reference level of q 1 is high, case 2, the consumer chooses the good having the
highest value of this attribute but also a sufficiently high value of q1k . When the reference
is itself balanced, case 3, the consumer chooses a good close to it. The Appendix fully
characterizes the consumer’s choice in the latter case.
       The local thinker’s choice balances two forces. On the one hand, keeping the salience
ranking fixed, the local thinker tries to maximize the salient quality along the rational
  17
    This condition can be directly mapped into our previous analysis of the quality-price tradeoff by noting
                                                                       −1
that one can write the product q1k · q2k as a quality-cost ratio q1k /q2k , which measures the added value of
q1 per unit lost of q2 needed to keep good qk ’s relative salience constant.

                                                         25
indifference curve. On the other hand, as the good’s strength becomes more pronounced
at the expense of its weakness, the latter becomes increasingly salient due to diminishing
sensitivity.18
       At the same time, diminsihing sensitivity plays a central role in generating the de-
coy/compromise effect in the quality-price space described in Proposition 3. In that case,
very unbalanced goods are those with high quality and high price. If the choice set is concave
with respect to prices, then diminishing sensitivity is very strong for extreme goods, ensuring
that their prices are salient. This renders intermediate goods relatively more attractive.
       This effect is again different from loss aversion (Tversky and Simonson 1993, Bodner and
Prelec 1994) in that consumers do not mechanically prefer middle-of-the-road options. They
instead prefer goods that are somewhat specialized in favor of their salient upsides. Unlike in
Koszegi and Szeidl’s “bias towards concentration”, specialization here cannot be excessive,
because a severe lack of quality in any dimension is highly salient. An uncommonly spacious
back seat may enhance consumers’ valuation of a car, but not if this comes at the cost of an
extremely small trunk. Producers often specialize a little, rarely a lot.


3.4       Salience and Willingness to Pay

Willingness to pay (WTP) is a central concept in economic theory. The WTP for quality q is
defined as the maximum price at which the consumer is willing to buy q instead of sticking
to the outside option of no consumption q0 = (q0 , p0 ), where typically q0 = p0 = 0. In
standard theory, knowledge of q and of q0 are sufficient to determine WTP for q (assuming
quasi-linear utility).
       In contrast to this prediction, evidence suggests that the willingness to pay for a good can
be influenced by contextual factors. In a famous experiment (Thaler 1985), subjects were
first asked to imagine sunbathing on a beach on a very hot summer day and then to state
their willingness to pay for a beer to be bought nearby and brought to them by a friend.
  18
    Thus, in quality-quality tradeoffs the local thinker does not go all the way to the extreme good, as he
does in quality-price trade-offs. In fact, along a quality-price indifference curve, an increase in quality is
matched by an increase in price, so that diminishing sensitivity causes both attributes to become less salient.
In contrast, along a quality-quality indifference curve one quality increases at the expense of the other. Due
to diminishing sensitivity, the reduction in one quality dimension exerts a stronger effect on salience than
the increase in the other quality dimension.


                                                      26
Subjects stated a higher willingness to pay when the place from which a beer is bought
was specified to be a nearby resort hotel than when it was a nearby grocery store. Thus,
the source of beer influences the subject’s willingness to pay even though the consumption
experience is identical in the two scenarios (back at the beach).
   Thaler’s explanation for this effect is based on “mental accounting.” First, information
about the nearby location prompts the subject to imagine a price for the beer, such as a
price experienced in the past at a similar location. This evoked price constitutes a mental
account, which the subject uses to assess his WTP. Second, and crucially, the consumer is
assumed to derive utility from buying a good below its evoked price (transaction utility).
Because the evoked price at the resort is higher, and the transaction utility associated with
buying at the resort is ceteris paribus also higher, the consumer states a higher WTP for
beer from the resort.
   In our model, information about the nearby location also prompts the decision maker
to imagine a price for beer. However, our explanation does not rely on transaction utility.
Instead, this evoked price affects salience. When thinking of the high price at the resort, the
local thinker is willing to pay a high price for the beer and still perceive quality as salient.
When thinking of the low price in the store, however, the local thinker is not willing to pay
a high price for the beer, as that price would be very salient. In other words, in our model
the evoked price acts, through salience, as an anchor for the consumer.
   To see this formally, suppose that the consumer must state his WTP for quality q in the
evoked set C ≡ {qk }k=0,...,N , N ≥ 1. Good q0 = (0, 0) is the outside option of not consuming
q. Goods qk = (q, −pk ), k = 1, ..., N identify the context in which WTP is stated. In the
beer example, context could be summarized by a single option q1 (i.e. N = 1), capturing the
price recalled by the consumer for the resort or the store, respectively. Alternatively, context
might induce the consumer to recall an entire distribution q1 , . . . , qN of possible resort or
store prices for beer of quality q. Either way, the consumer includes these recalled prices for
q in his evoked set. These prices do not constitute choice options in a strict sense (the only
choice the subject is making is to select a WTP for q), so this is the first instance in our
model where the evoked and the choice sets differ.
   Since the consumer is evaluating the good q = (q, −p) for a price p, his full evoked set is


                                              27
C ∪ {(q, −p)}. We define the consumer’s willingness to pay for q in a choice context C as:


                          WTP(q|C) = sup p                                                   (16)

                          s.t. uLT (q|C ∪ {(q, −p)}) ≥ uLT (q0 |C ∪ {(q, −p)}).


WTP is still defined as the maximum price p that the consumer is willing to pay for q
against the prospect of obtaining the outside option q0 = (0, 0), but the superscript LT
indicates that now the consumer’s preferences are distorted by salience. This change has one
crucial implication: different values of p can alter the salience of q, changing the consumer’s
valuation of the good. As a consequence, the maximization in (16) tends to select a price p
such that q is salient.
   In the evoked set C ∪ {(q, −p)}, the reference good has quality q = q · N     +1
                                                                               N +2
                                                                                    and price
p = Np+2 + p̂ NN+2 , where p̂ = N
                               P
                                k=1 pk /N is the average price of the alternative goods. We

also assume for simplicity that the consumer weighs quality and price equally (i.e. θ1 = θ2 ).
We can then show:

Proposition 5 The consumer’s willingness to pay for q depends on the price p̂ as follows:
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                       δq      if                pb ≤ δq
                                     
                                     
                                                                            1
                                                            δq < pb ≤           ·q
                                     
                                      pb       if                          δ
                       W T P (q|C) =                                                         (17)
                                                      1                1               1
                                      q/δ
                                     
                                               if    δ
                                                          · q < pb ≤   δ
                                                                            ·q·      k(N )
                                     
                                     
                                                                  1           1
                                                                      ·q·
                                     
                                      δq       if         pb >   δ         k(N )


                   N (N +1)
where k(N ) =   (N +2)2 −(N +1)
                                  < 1. As δ → 1, the willingness to pay tends to q and becomes
independent of context pb.

    The price context only affects WTP if the consumer is a local thinker, namely if δ < 1. If
δ = 1, Equation (16) recovers the standard case where WTP equals q and does not depend
on pb.
    For pb ≤ 1δ q · k(N
                      1
                        )
                          the consumer’s WTP weakly increases in the average price of alternative
goods pb. In contexts where quality is more expensive, namely pb is higher, the consumer is



                                                 28
willing to pay a higher price p and still view quality as salient.19 The highest possible WTP
is q/δ, which is the consumer’s valuation when quality is salient. Through salience, a higher
price pb acts like an anchor, increasing WTP. Drawing the consumer’s attention to higher
prices at which q is available induces him to increase the price at which he perceives the
same quality as a good deal, increasing his WTP.
      Interestingly, Proposition 5 suggests that when the reference price is implausibly high, this
effect vanishes. If pb is too high, even for a local thinker focusing on quality (i.e. pb > q/δ),
price becomes salient and the consumer’s WTP drops. The WTP in (16) is graphically
represented in Figure 4.




               Figure 4: Willingness to Pay for q as a function of reference price p̂.

      To see how Thaler’s example works in our model, imagine that - upon learning that
the nearby location is a resort - subjects populate their evoked set by recalling beer prices
that they experienced (or expect) in resorts. This generates a reference price p̂resort =
PN                                                                  PN
  k=1 pk,resort /N . The reference price for the store is p̂store =  k=1 pk,store /N . Naturally,

p̂resort > p̂store . The model says that, provided the reference prices do not preclude all trade
(i.e. pbresort , pbstore < q/δ), the consumer’s WTP is weakly higher at the resort than in the
store, consistent with Thaler’s example.
      This analysis shows that in our model context shapes evaluation not only through the
characteristics of the alternatives of choice, as in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, but also through the
 19
      Put differently, as pb increases the consumer perceives (q, p) as a good deal even at higher prices p.


                                                        29
reference options that enter the consumer’s evoked set. Take for example the choice of wine
in a store versus at a restaurant. Although as we showed in Section 3.1 the higher prices at
the restaurant induce the consumer to select high quality wines, this is unlikely to happen if
wine prices are outrageous even by restaurant standards. Unexpectedly high wine prices at
a restaurant will be very salient to the consumer, even if price differences among the actual
options of choice are fairly small. In other words, salience is not only shaped by the actual
options in the choice set, but also by the extent to which the options of choice differ from
the consumer’s past experiences/expectation. We address this mechanism in Section 4.1.



4     Applications
We now discuss field evidence on context effects and illustrate how our model can help us
think about them in a coherent way.


4.1    Context Effects due to Price Changes

Hastings and Shapiro (2011) show that consumers react to parallel increases in gas prices by
switching to cheaper (and lower quality) gasoline. One possible explanation for this behavior
is mental accounting (Thaler 1999): when thinking about purchasing gas, the consumer
thinks about the “gas consumption” account, to which he allocates a fixed monetary budget.
The budget is targeted to past gas prices, so that - as gas prices increase - the consumer
(who mostly cares about the quantity of gas) shifts his consumption from the expensive to
the cheaper gas.
    In our model, as in mental accounting, the consumer who purchases gas has in mind a
reference gas expenditure, and in particular historical gas prices. In our model, however,
the consumer does not allocate a fixed monetary budget to gas consumption. Instead, as
prices of all gas grades increase beyond their reference value, prices become more salient
than qualities. As a consequence, the consumer becomes overly sensitive to price differences,
causing him to switch to lower octane, cheaper gas.
    To see this, consider as in Section 3.1 a consumer choosing between a high end wine
qh = (30, −$60) and a low end wine ql = (20, −$50) at a restaurant. When choosing

                                             30
among these wines, however, the consumer also recalls the past prices at which he bought
the two wines at this (or other) restaurants. The situation (restaurant) evokes consuming
the goods at past prices, qhist
                           h    = (30, −phist     hist
                                         h ) and ql    = (20, −phist
                                                                l    ). Rather than reminding
the consumer of his “restaurant wine” budget, the situation reminds the consumer of past
                                                                      
restaurant prices for wine. The evoked set of the consumer is then C = qh , ql , qhist hist
                                                                                  h , ql    ,
but the consumer only chooses among qh and ql . Imagine two alternative situations. In the
first, the prices found by the consumer at the restaurant are identical to the wines’ historical
prices. The evoked set is thus:
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                              qh =    (30, −$60)
                                             
                                             
                                                       (20, −$50)
                                             
                                              q =
                                                l
                            Chist=actual   =                                               (18)
                                             
                                             
                                              qhist
                                                h    = (30, −$60)
                                             
                                             
                                              qhist = (20, −$50)
                                             
                                                l


With this evoked set, salience and choice are identical to the case studied in Section 3.1.
When reference prices are equal to actual prices, the consumer chooses solely based on the
choice set. As in Section 3.1, the consumer opts for the expensive wine.
   Suppose alternatively that the consumer finds the wine prices at this restaurant to be
much higher than historical prices for restaurant wine. In particular, suppose that the prices
of the available wines are unexpectedly high by $30, namely phist
                                                             h    = $30, phist
                                                                          l    = $20. The
evoked set is then:                          
                                             
                                             
                                              qh =    (30, −$60)
                                             
                                             
                                                       (20, −$50)
                                             
                                              q =
                                                l
                            Chist<actual   =                                               (19)
                                             
                                             
                                              qhist
                                                h    = (30, −$30)
                                             
                                             
                                              qhist = (20, −$20)
                                             
                                                l

In this case, the reference wine is q = (25, −$40). The high end wine qh still yields above
average quality, but given its very high price it has a lower than average quality/price ratio,
as 30/$60 < 25/$40. As a consequence, the high end wine becomes price salient. Since its
price is high, this greatly reduces its value as perceived by the local thinker, and he chooses
the low end wine, regardless of its salience ranking (in this numerical example the low end
wine is valued correctly because quality and price are equally salient). When the consumer

                                                31
finds wines at the restaurant to be unexpectedly pricey, he switches to lower quality wines.
   This intuition rationalizes the Hastings Shapiro example where increase in gasoline prices
induce consumers to switch towards cheaper low octane gas. To the extent that historical
prices are fixed in the evoked set, any current increase in prices – particularly in the prices
of expensive goods – will be salient. This is due to the ordering property of the salience
function: as the price of an expensive good rises, price becomes more salient for that good.
Including historical prices in the evoked set provides a natural way to capture the consumer’s
adaptation to a reference price: if he has observed a given price sufficiently many times, that
price effectively becomes the reference price to which all other prices are compared.
   This effect is due to an increase in the prices of a sub-category of goods in the evoked set,
regardless of the role of historical prices. Imagine for instance a consumer choosing among
different qualities of Bordeaux wines. The more expensive Bordeaux wines are relative to
other wines in the wine list, the more salient the price of Bordeaux wines will be. This
induces the consumer to substitute towards cheaper Bordeaux, or potentially to leave the
category altogether. This effect is thus fundamentally different from the one at play in the
restaurant vs store example of Section 3.1. In that case, the price of all wines uniformly
increased at the restaurant, making quality salient and inducing the consumer to substitute
towards higher quality wines.
   In general, it is ambiguous whether consumers react to price hikes in a given category of
goods by substituting away from the most expensive items in the category or towards them.
To gain traction on this issue, take an evoked set C having N > 1 elements and partition
it into two subsets CF and CC . Subset CF is the set of goods for which price is held fixed,
while CC is the set for which price increases. Denote by ω the fraction of goods that belong
to CC , by p the average price of goods in C, and by pX the average price in CX , X = F, C.
We then show:

Proposition 6 If pC > p, a marginal increase in the prices of all goods in CC (holding
constant the prices in CF ) boosts the salience of price for the most expensive goods in CC
only if:
                                     pmax
                                      C − pC   1−ω
                                             <     ,                                       (20)
                                        pF      ω


                                              32
where pmax
       C   is the highest price in CC . If ω = 1, the salience of price decreases for all goods
in CC .

   When the prices of items in the expensive category CC increase, the most expensive
category members become more price salient when two conditions are met. First, the price
range pmax
       C   − pC in the category must be small. Indeed, as price differences in the category
become small, the price hike tends to uniformly draw the consumer’s attention to all prices
in the category, starting with the most expensive items. As price becomes more salient in
CC , the consumer substitutes away from its most expensive goods.
   Second, the size ω of the category must be small. When ω is large, too many goods
increase in price, and diminishing sensitivity prevails, rendering quality more salient as in
the store vs restaurant example. When instead few prices change (ω is small) the forces of
ordering prevail, increasing price salience for the items whose price have increased. This is
the mechanism at work in the wine example of Equations (18) and (19). Thus, our model
yields a testable prediction as to which effect of price hikes should prevail depending on price
dispersion.


4.2       Salience and “Misleading Sales”

Retailers frequently resort to sales events as a means to sell their products.     In 1988, for
example, sales accounted for over 60% of department store volume (Ortmeyer, Quelch and
Salmon 1991).    The standard explanation for sales is price discrimination: sporadic sales
allow retailers to lure low willingness to pay customers, whereas high willingness to pay
customers who cannot wait for a sale buy at the higher regular prices. It is probably true
that low willingness to pay customers tend to sort into sales events, but the high frequency
and predictability of sales casts some doubt on the universal validity of the price discrim-
ination hypothesis. In particular, there is growing concern that retailers may deliberately
inflate regular prices in order to lure consumers into artificial sales events. The Pennsylvania
Bureau of Consumer Protection has succesfully pursued retailers for advertising misleading
sales prices. In Massachusetts, regulatory changes have tightened rules for price compari-


                                              33
son claims, for example requiring that retail catalogues state that the “original” price is a
reference price and not necessarily the previous selling price.
       In this section we show that salience - and in particular the logic of decoy effects - can
shed light on these “misleading sales” events, yielding two new testable predictions:

    • In a store selling different qualities, misleading sales boost demand only for high quality
         goods,

    • Misleading sales boost demand only for non-standard goods.

       To see how the model works, suppose that a consumer is considering whether or not to
buy a good of quality q and price p in a store.              The good is non-standard in the sense
that it is only available in this store, so the effective choice set faced by the consumer is
C0 ≡ {(0, 0), (q, p)}, where (0, 0) is the outside option of not buying the good. We later
consider the case of standard goods, which can be easily found at different stores. As before,
the consumer weights quality and price equally, θ1 = θ2 .
       With respect to this purchasing decision, the salience of the good’s quality for the con-
sumer is equal to σ(q, q/2) while the salience of its price is equal to σ(p, p/2). Given ho-
mogeneity of degree zero, σ(q, q/2) = σ(p, p/2), namely quality and price are equally salient
for any q and any p. Thus, in C0 the consumer’s valuation of the good is rational and the
maximum price he can be charged for the good is his true valuation, namely p = q.
       Suppose now that there is a sale event in the store. By a sale event we mean that the con-
sumer is offered the same quality q at the sale price ps rather than at the full regular price pf >
ps . Crucially, then, when deciding whether or not to buy the good, the regular price becomes
part of the consumer’s evoked set, which becomes equal to Csale ≡ {(0, 0), (q, ps ), (q, pf )}.20
       Consider the standing of the option (q, ps ) in the new evoked set Csale . The salience of
                                                                 ps +pf
quality is σ(q, 2q/3), while the salience of price is σ(ps ,        3
                                                                        ).   The crucial issue here is that
the retailer can manipulate the salience of price by manipulating the price discount ps /pf .
In particular, it is easy to show:
  20
    This is either because the store displays the regular price at the moment of the sale and/or because the
consumer recalls the regular price. Another, less realistic, possibility is that the consumer now considers
three options: buy nothing, buy quality q today, or buy quality q at the regular price in the future.



                                                    34
Proposition 7 The retailer can charge a sale price ps = q/δ and still have the customer
buy the product by setting any full price in the interval pf ∈ (q/δ, 7q/2δ).

       By artificially inflating the regular price of the good and by offering at the same time
a generous discount, the retailer can extract up to the local thinker’s valuation q/δ from
the consumer. This is because the consumer views the discount as a good deal, inflating
his valuation of quality. The model limits the maximal regular price and thus the maximal
discount to ps /pf ≥ 2/7. The reason is that an excessively high regular price renders prices
salient, reducing the consumer’s valuation.
       We now illustrate our first prediction, namely that a “misleading sales” policy should be
only effective for a high quality good. Suppose that the store has an expensive high quality
good qh = (qh , ph ) and a cheaper, lower quality good ql = (ql , pl ), where qh > ql , and ph > pl .
For the sake of illustration, we assume that the prices at which these goods are sold are fixed
(e.g. by the producer).21 The store, however, can try to influence which good is sold by
adopting a misleading sales policy. In the case of the high quality good, this amounts to
making the good available also at a full price pf h > ph . Similarly, for the low quality good,
the store can set a full price ph > pf l > pl . Suppose that the goods are such that qh is sold
if and only if it is quality salient, implying that condition (15) holds and qh − δph > 0. We
then find:

Proposition 8 The store can always make the high quality good quality salient, and have
the consumer choose it over the low quality good, by holding a sale on qh where the full
price phf is suitably chosen. In contrast, a sale is innefectual for the low quality good: if the
consumer chooses qh in the absence of a sale, there exists no full price pf l ∈ (pl , ph ) for ql
that makes qh price salient, and ql be chosen, in the context of the sale.

       It is always possible to engineer sales inducing the local thinker to overvalue the high
quality good qh relative to ql , but not the reverse. The reason is that holding a sale on
the good with lowest quality/price ratio unambiguously decreases the quality/price ratio of
the reference good. This effect reinforces the salience of quality for the high quality good
  21
     A general analysis of sales policies, including the case where a store is able to choose the goods’ prices,
is left for future work.


                                                      35
and renders the low quality good price salient (for lower price is the advantage of the latter
good). As a result, the sale boosts the overvaluation of the high quality good and may cause
an undervaluation of the low quality one. Both of these effects imply that sales on the low
quality good are unlikely to work.22
       By contrast, sales work if the high quality good is initially undervalued relative to the
low quality good. In this case, holding a sale on the high quality good qh boosts the salience
of its quality, increasing this good’s valuation relative to ql (regardless of the latter’s salient
attribute). Thus, sales should be effective specifically for high quality goods that, in the
absence of sales, would be price salient.
       Consider now the second prediction of our model, namely that sales are unlikely to work
when standard goods are involved, for which market prices are well known. To see this,
suppose that the consumer wishes to purchase a standard good of quality q, for instance
a metro ticket. There are N > 1 potential sellers of the good. Suppose for the sake of
the argument that each of these sellers implements a misleading sales policy consisting of a
regular price pf and a sales price ps for the good, where pf /ps = k ∈ (1, 7/2) (see Proposition
7 above).
       In this case, the consumer’s evoked set consists of 2N goods (two goods for each of the N
sales), and the outside option of not buying (0, 0). Formally, Csale ≡ {(0, 0), (q, ps ), ..., (q, pf )}
where (q, ps ) and (q, pf ) are repeated N times. For the items on sale, then, the salience of
quality is σ(q, q 2N2N+1 ), and that of price is σ(ps , ps N2N+N
                                                               +1
                                                                 k
                                                                   ). Due to homogeneity of degree zero,
these expressions imply that when the number of sellers is sufficiently large, namely when
                                                 p
                                            4 + 2 2(1 + k)
                                         N>                ,
                                                4(k − 1)

the items on sale have salient price [i.e., σ(q, q 2N2N+1 ) < σ(ps , ps N2N+N
                                                                            +1
                                                                              k
                                                                                )], rather than salient
quality as in the non-standard good case of Proposition 7.                  This is true for any given
magnitude k of the sale.
       This result is intuitive. As the number of sellers N increases, the average quality q =
q 2N2N+1 in the choice set gets arbitrarily close to the quality q of the standard good. As a result,
  22
    Blattberg and Wisniewski (1989) present suggestive evidence for this effect, in the context of sales at a
grocery chain.

                                                     36
quality becomes non-salient. By contrast, the price variability generated by sales renders
prices salient, increasing the consumer’s price sensitivity above its rational counterpart. As
a result, when deciding where to buy a standardized good the local thinker focuses on
price because price is the attribute that varies most across sellers (almost by definition of
standardized goods)! This implies that a generalized policy of misleading sales does not work
in the case of standardized goods, because it induces consumers to focus on prices, reducing
their willingness to pay.
   This argument has the additional implication that an individual seller may find it prof-
itable to abandon a misleading sale policy and set a stable price equal to the average price
p = ps N2N+N
           +1
             k
               set by other stores across sales and non-sales events. By charging exactly the
average price, this store becomes quality salient and consumers switch to it. This holds
even though the average price charged by the store is above the sale price at which the
standardized good might be available in the market. This can help explain why stores with
consistently low prices, called EDLP for everyday low prices, have steadily been gaining
market share of standardized goods from mainstream stores that engage in frequent sales in
standardized markets such as grocery and general merchandise (see Ortmeyer, Quelch and
Salmon, 1991).
   Our model has further implications for the pricing of standard vs non standard goods.
Because the quality of standard goods does not vary across stores, our model predicts that
consumers should be more price sensitive for standard than for nonstandard goods (relative
to the rational case). This can help explain an empirical regularity uncovered by Lynch
and Ariely (2000), who studied online wine markets. The authors found that consumers
are very price sensitive for standard wines, which are offered by many sellers, but not for
unique wines, sold by one or few sellers. Relatedly, Jaeger and Storchmann (2011) find
that price dispersion in wine retail prices increases with price levels (which we explain with
diminishing sensitivity), and particularly so for vintage (i.e., non-standard) wines. One
possible equilibrium implication of this reasoning can be that standard goods should not
only display lower price dispersion than non-standard goods, but they should also have a
higher quality to price ratio on average because consumers tend to undervalue price-salient
goods relative to their true preferences. Diminishing sensitivity would also induce price


                                             37
dispersion to increase with the price level.


4.3        An application to Insurance Demand

Barseghyan, Molinari, O’Donoghue and Teitelbaum (2011) analyze consumer choice of in-
surance plans which differ in two dimensions, deductibles and premia. They find evidence
that consumers put too much weight on plans’ deductibles, relative to their premia. As an
illustration, many consumers prefer a home all perils plan with a $500 deductible and a $679
premium to a plan with a $1000 deductible and a $605 premium, implying that the risk of
a claim for a home accident is at least 14.8%, when the mean risk estimated from the data
is around 8.4%. Sydnor (2010) finds similar evidence in the choice of home insurance. Both
papers stress that the data are at odds with standard risk aversion and suggest an interpre-
tation of the evidence in which that consumers overweight the (small) claim probabilities.
We now show how this behavior can be understood in our model, formalizing the intuition
that deductible to cost ratio plays a role in insurance choice.
    At time t0 , a consumer decides whether to buy insurance against a loss L that materializes
at time t1 with probability p. His consumption utility is linear (we abstract from risk aversion
and time discounting), so we can normalize his endowment to zero. A rational consumer
with linear utility sees no benefit of buying insurance, so both the demand for insurance and
the choice of which plan to buy are driven by salience.
    An insurance plan Ii = (Ri , Pi ) has a cost Pi and covers the amount Ri in case loss L
materializes. The implied deductible is Di = L − Ri . The consumer’s utility under plan Ii
is equal to:
                                       −pL + pRi − Pi .

The choice of not buying insurance is represented by plan I0 = (0, 0), and the premium at
which a rational consumer is indifferent between Ii and I0 is equal to the expected coverage
p · Ri .
    Following Barseghyan et al (2011), and in line with industry practice, we consider linear




                                               38
pricing schemes Pi = c + φ · Ri . In particular, we assume that:


                                        Pi = c + p · Ri .                                   (21)


Equation (21) implies that any extra unit of insurance is fairly priced at the margin but the
insurance company makes a profit c ≥ 0 on the plan.
   Consider a local thinker’s choice between two plans IH , IL . Plan IH provides a higher
coverage RH > RL but entails a higher premium PH > PL . Given the pricing Equation (21),
the rational consumer is indifferent between IH and IL . However, this is not so for the local
thinker. Consistent with Definition 1, salience is defined on the utility value of the attributes
(R, P ) of the insurance policies. The coverage of policies IH and IL is then more salient than
their premiums whenever
                                          RH   PH
                                             >    ,                                         (22)
                                          RL   PL
namely when the higher coverage granted by plan IH in case of accident is higher, in percent-
age terms, than the extra premium the consumer must pay for it. By exploiting Equation
(21), this condition can be written in terms of deductibles as follows:

                                 L − DH   c + p · (L − DH )
                                        >                                                   (23)
                                 L − DL   c + p · (L − DL )

It is easy to see that under the pricing policy of Equation (21), condition (22) is always met.
This is because the accident happens with probability p less than one so that – given the
profit c – the premium Pi increases less than proportionally with the coverage Ri .
   To further illustrate this result, let s denote the percentage savings guaranteed in case
of accident by the generous policy IH . By writing DH = (1 − s)DL and by taking the
linear approximation of Equation (23) around s = 0, it is easy to see that deductibles
are salient when the percentage decrease s in the deductible granted by IH is larger than
its incremental premium p · s. This condition always holds because p < 1. Intuitively, the
reduction in deductible granted by the generous plan IH is much higher, in percentage terms,
than the extra price the consumer has to pay for it. As a result, the difference in deductibles
across policies “stands out” and draws the consumer’s attention when making his decision.


                                               39
    Given the salience of a plan’s coverage (and thus of deductibles), the consumer’s perceived
utility from the insurance is given by:


                                     −pL + pRi − δ · Pi .


Since the no-insurance option (0, 0) is evaluated correctly (as both dimensions are equal to
0 and thus equally salient), the consumer’s WTP for the high coverage policy is:

                                                 p
                                          PH =     · RH ,
                                                 δ

which is above the actuarially fair price, justifying a profit margin c > 0. As the consumer
focuses on deductibles, his preferences tilt in favor of low-deductible policies even when their
prices are unfavorable from an actuarial perspective.



5     Conclusion
We combine two ideas to explain a wide range of experimental and field evidence regarding
individual choice, as well as to make new predictions.
    The first idea is that choices are made in context and that in particular goods are eval-
uated by comparison with other goods the decision maker is thinking about. This idea is
intimately related to Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) concept of reference points, and is
also central to related studies of choice by Tversky and Kahneman (1991), Tversky and
Simonson (1993), Bodner and Prelec (1994) and Koszegi and Rabin (2006). In our model,
context is often determined by the choice set itself, and the reference good relative to which
the options are evaluated has the average characteristics of all the goods in the choice set. In
some examples, however, decision makers also recall their previous experiences with goods
in the choice set, such as seeing them at historical or normal prices, in which case these
experiences also influence context. We use Kahneman and Miller’s (1986) concept of the
evoked set to describe situations in which prior experiences shape context, and then define
the reference good as one having the average characteristics in the evoked set.
    The second idea, which extends our earlier work on choice under risk (BGS 2012), holds

                                                 40
that the salience of each good’s attributes relative to the reference good, such as its quality
and price, determines the attention the decision maker pays to these attributes as well as
their weight in his decision. We argue that ordering and diminishing sensitivity are the two
critical properties of salience that together help account for a broad range of evidence.
   We show that our model provides insight into several puzzles of consumer choice. The
model makes stark predictions for choice in experimental settings, in which the reference
good is well defined. First, by showing how irrelevant alternatives change the reference good,
the model accounts for two well-known violations of independence of irrelevant alternatives,
namely decoy and compromise effects. Moreover, it predicts that these effects differentially
benefit more extreme goods (e.g. expensive, high-quality goods). In the design of desirable
goods, the model predicts a preference for some specialization as long as a minimum balance
across attributes is provided. Moreover, by allowing expected or historical prices to shape
the reference good, the model also helps think about context-dependent willingness to pay,
exemplified by Thaler’s celebrated beer example. In a companion paper (BGS 2012b), we
show that our model also helps account for the endowment effect. Taken together, these
predictions suggest that the salience mechanism can be seen as a simpler alternative to loss
aversion in generating context effects.
   Turning to the field evidence, we show that our model provides a unified way of thinking
about several phenomena described as mental accounting, and makes predictions for how
consumers would react to changes in the prices of individual goods or whole categories of
goods. In particular, we provide a natural explanation of Hastings and Shapiro’s empirical
finding that consumer substitute toward lower quality gasoline when all gas prices rise, while
at the same time accounting for instances in which consumer substitute toward higher quality
goods when prices rise (e.g. the wine example). We present a new theory of sales, based on
the idea that the original prices of goods put on sale serve as decoys that attract consumers
to these goods. Our approach, unlike the standard model of sales, explains why firms often
try to put goods on sale immediately after offering them first, so that “original” prices are in
effect reference prices and not the previous selling price (leading to conflict with regulators).
It also generates new predictions, such as that a store selling different qualities would only
put high quality goods on sale, and that sales are most effective in boosting demand for


                                               41
non-standard goods. Finally, our model also helps explain some puzzling evidence regarding
consumer demand for over-priced insurance with very low deductibles.
   In generating our predictions, we took the evoked set as given, without discussing the
important problem of its determination. In the applications we considered, the evoked set
is either identical to the choice set, in which case the problem is trivial, or else combines
the choice set with fairly natural historical experiences that come to the decision makers
mind. In other examples, however, the problem of the determination of the evoked set, just
like that of the determination of expectations or of reference points, becomes a much more
complex matter of what the decision maker recalls and thinks about. We leave this much
harder problem to future work.




                                             42
Appendix

A.0 Introduction
   As highlighted in Section 2.1, the quality/price ratio in (9) creates two forms of context
dependence in our model. The first one is that a consumer is overly sensitive to changes
in a good’s salient attributes. The second is that the evaluation of a good depends on the
alternatives of comparison. Formally:

Observation (valuation and choice). The local thinker over-values good qt , formally
uLT (qt ) > u (qt ), if and only if:
                                        cov ωit , qi,t > 0,
                                                      
                                                                                                (24)

while he over-values good qt relative to good qk , formally uLT (qt )−uLT (qk ) > u (qt )−u (qk ),
                                                 
if and only if cov (ωit , qi,t ) > cov ωik , qi,k , which can be rewritten as:


                          cov ωit , qi,t − qi,k + cov ωit − ωik , qi,k > 0.
                                                                     
                                                                                                (25)




   To derive (24), note that Definition 2 implies uLT (qt ) = Ei [ωit · qit ], where the expectation
is measured relative to the probability distribution defined by the weights (θ1 , ..., θm+1 ).
Expanding the right hand side and using Ei [ωit ] = 1, we get uLT (qt ) = u(qt ) + cov(ωit , qi,t ).
   According to (24), salience boosts the valuation of a good when its most salient attributes,
namely those having the higher weights ωit , are precisely those along which the consumer
obtains the highest utility qi,t . In addition, salience boosts the valuation of good qt relative
to that of good qk if the association between salience and utility is more positive for good qt .
Equation (25) decomposes this condition into two effects. First, qt is overvalued relative to qk
when – for common weights ωit across the two goods – qt fares better than qk along the salient
attributes [i.e. cov (ωit , qi,t − qi,k ) > 0]. This effect generalizes the wine example above. But
with more than two goods, differences in the salience rankings of the goods’ attributes
create a second effect: qt tends to be overvalued relative to qk if the salience ranking of qt
                                                                                               
overweights, relative to qk , those attributes yielding high utility [i.e. cov ωit − ωik , qi,k > 0].

                                                 43
A.1 Proofs

Proposition 1 Let qk be a good that neither dominates nor is dominated by the average
good q. The following two statements are then equivalent:
1) The advantage of qk relative to the average good q is salient if and only if qk /pk > q̄/p̄.
2) The salience function is homogeneous of degree zero, i.e. σ(αx, αy) = σ(x, y) for all
α > 0.

Proof. The salience of qk ’s quality is σ(qk , q), while the salience of price is σ(pk , p). Suppose
that 1) holds, so that σ(qk , q) > σ(pk , p) if and only if qk /pk > q̄/p̄, namely qk /q̄ > pk /p̄.
Consider the implications for σ(qk , q). For any given values of pk , p, the condition σ(qk , q) =
σ(pk , p) is invariant under scaling of qk and q, as it depends only of the ratio qk /q̄. As
                                                                                         
a result, σ(qk , q) must only depend on this ratio, and must be proportional to σ qqk , 1 .
Setting qk = q shows the proportionality constant is 1.
    Suppose now that 2) holds. Then σ(qk , q) = σ(qk /q, 1) and σ(pk , p) = σ(pk /p, 1), where
both qk /q and pk /p are larger than 1. By the ordering property of salience, then, quality is
salient if and only if qk /q̄ > pk /p̄.

Lemma 1 If σ(·, ·) satisfies the ordering property for positive attribute values, and is ho-
mogenous of degree zero, then it also satisfies diminishing sensitivity.

Proof. Let x, y > 0 and epsilon > 0. Under the conditions of the Lemma, we have
                                                        x
σ(x + , y + ) = σ(x, α(y + )), where α =            x+
                                                           .   For either ordering of x, y, we have
α(y + ) ∈ (min{x, y}, max{x, y}). As a consequence, it follows from ordering that σ(x +
, y + ) < σ(x, y).

Proposition 2 Along a rational linear indifference curve, the local thinker chooses the good
with the highest quality/price ratio. In particular:
1) if q1 /p1 > θ2 /θ1 , the cheapest good (q1 , p1 ) has the highest quality/price ratio and is chosen;
2) if q1 /p1 < θ2 /θ1 , the most expensive good (qN , pN ) has the highest quality/price ratio and
is chosen;
3) if q1 /p1 = θ2 /θ1 , all goods have the same quality/price ratio and the consumer is indifferent
between them.

                                                  44
Proof. Consider an indifference curve characterized by u(q, p) = θ1 q − θ2 p = u. As in the
text, order the elements of the choice set by increasing quality and price, so that q1 = (q1 , p1 )
                                                                           qi       θ2
is the cheapest good. The goods’ quality-price ratios satisfy              pi
                                                                                =   θ1
                                                                                         + θ1upi , and in particular
                                              q       θ2        u
the average good (q, p) satisfies             p
                                                  =   θ1
                                                           +   θ1 p
                                                                    .
         q1        θ2
    1)   p1
              >    θ1
                        when u < 0, in which case the price quality/ratio is decreasing as price
increases, and price is salient for all goods. This is because price is the relative advantage
of cheap goods (whose prices are under p and have high quality/price ratios), while it is the
relative disadvantage of expensive goods (whose prices are under p and have low quality/price
ratios). Since the cheapest good is the best option along the salient price dimension, it is
                                                                          δθ1 qi −θ2 pi
chosen. Formally, all goods are undervalued, uLT (qi , pi ) =               δθ1 +θ2
                                                                                        ,   but the cheapest good
is the least undervalued.
         q1        θ2
    2)   p1
              <    θ1
                        when u > 0, in which case the price quality/ratio is increasing as price
increases, and quality is salient for all goods. Since the most expensive good is the best
option along the salient quality dimension, it is chosen. Formally, all goods are overvalued,
                   θ1 qi −δθ2 pi
uLT (qi , pi ) =     θ1 +δθ2
                                 ,   but the highest quality good is the most overvalued.
         q1        θ2
    3)   p1
              =    θ1
                        when u = 0, in which case the price quality/ratio is constant along the
indifference curve. As a result, quality and price are equally salient for all goods. The local
thinker evaluates each good correctly (as the rational agent) and is thus indifferent between
them.

    Take two goods ql = (ql , pl ), qh = (qh , ph ), such that qh is chosen if and only if it is quality
is salient. Denoting by ∆u = [qh − ql ] − [ph − pl ] the rational utility difference between them
(with θ1 = θ2 ), this means


                                       −(1 − δ)[ph − pl ] ≤ ∆u ≤ (1 − δ)[qh − ql ]                             (26)


We restrict our attention to decoy options qd such that q ≤ qh and p ≤ ph , where (q, p) is
the reference good in {ql , qh , qd }. These constraints allow for goods qd which make qh an
intermediate good in the enlarged choice set. When Equation (26) holds, we have:




                                                                    45
Proposition 3
          ql     qh
    i) If      >      , so that price is salient and ql is chosen from {ql , qh }, then for any qd
          pl     ph          h           i
satisfying pqdd < pqhh + ppdl pqhh − pqhh , good qh is quality salient in {ql , qh , qd }. Moreover, there
exist options qd with qd > qh and pd > ph such that qh is chosen from {ql , qh , qd }.
           ql   qh
    ii) If    < , so quality is salient and qh is chosen from {ql , qh }, then there exist no
           pl  ph
decoy options qd such that pqdd ≤ pqhh and qh is price salient in {ql , qh , qd }. In particular, for
no qd satisfying these properties is ql chosen from {ql , qh , qd }.

Proof. A sufficient condition for reversal between ql and qh is that good qh is chosen if and
only if its relative advantage, namely quality, is salient. This means that qh − δph > ql − δpl
and also δql − pl > δqh − ph . The first expression yields ∆u > −(1 − δ)(ph − pl ) and the
second yields ∆u < (1 − δ)(qh + ql ), where ∆u = [qh − ql ] − [ph − pl ].
     Next, consider case i). Since ql /pl > qh /ph , so that good qh has a relatively low quality
price ratio, price is salient in {ql , qh } and ql is chosen. If adding the decoy qd to the choice set
makes qh quality salient, then the latter is preferred to ql in {ql , qh , qd }. Good qh becomes
quality salient in several different regimes: a) if qh has high quality and high quality/price
                                               qh       q
ratio relative to the reference good,          ph
                                                    >   p
                                                            and qh > q, ph > p. b) if qh dominates the
reference good, with higher quality and lower price, qh · ph > q · p and qh > q, ph < p. c)
                                                                                             qh       q
if qh has low quality and low quality/price ratio relative to the reference good,            ph
                                                                                                  <   p
                                                                                                          and
qh < q, ph < p. And d) if qh is dominated by the reference good, with lower quality and
higher price, qh · ph < q · p and qh < q, ph > p.
     We are mainly interested in regime a), in which the decoy is located close to the other
goods, i.e. q < qh and p < ph , and it is a “bad deal”, i.e. it has a low quality-price ratio. In
fact, in this regime the condition that qh has quality/price ratio above the reference good
reads:                                                              
                                           qd   qh     pl qh      ql
                                              <      +          −
                                           pd   ph pd p h p l
                                                          
We can write this as qd < pd pqhh          + pl pqhh − pqll . So the upper boundary for qd has slope
qh /ph , but it is shifted downwards by a factor proportional to qh /ph − ql /pl . In particular,
qd       qh       ql
pd
     <   ph
              <   pl
                     .   (Both regimes a) and b) impose upper bounds on qd . In regime b), q d < qh ,
p > ph and the condition on qh · ph yields qd < qh [3ph /p − 1] − ql . Regimes c) and d) instead

                                                            46
impose lower bounds on qd .)
    In regime a), qh is quality salient so (26) guarantees it is preferred to ql . To see that
the alternative qd is never chosen, two cases are distinguished: either qd has higher quality
and lower quality-price ratio than qh , in which case it is price salient; or it has lower quality
and lower quality-price ratio than qh , in which case it can either be dominated (qd < qh and
pd > ph ) or not. In either case, by being quality salient qh is overvalued relative to qd . Thus,
a small enough δ can be found such that qh is chosen. A sufficient condition for qh to be
chosen, for any δ, is that the decoy lies on a lower rational indifference curve than qh . This
is guaranteed for dominated qd , and by continuity for some qd with qd > qh as well. In fact,
given the assumptions that θ1 = θ2 and that qh provides positive utility, this holds for all
decoys in regime a).
    Consider now case ii). Since ql /pl < qh /ph , so that good qh has a relatively high quality
price ratio, quality is salient in {ql , qh } and qh is chosen. Given the constraints q < qh and
p < ph , adding a decoy qd to the choice set makes qh price salient when it increases the
quality price ratio of the average good to the level where qh /ph < q/p. However, this is
excluded by the condition that the decoy is a “bad deal”, namely qd /pd < max{ql /pl , qh /ph }.



Proposition 4 Let all goods in a choice set be located on a rational indifference curve with
utility level u. Then:
               u
1) if q̄1 <   2θ1
                  ,   the local thinker chooses the good qk with highest q1k subject to q1k · q2k > q 1 · q 2
               u
2) if q̄1 >   2θ1
                  ,   the local thinker chooses the good qk with highest q2k subject to q1k · q2k > q 1 · q 2
               u
3) if q̄1 =   2θ1
                  ,   the local thinker chooses a good “sufficiently close” to (q 1 , q 2 ).

Proof. Consider an indifference curve characterized by u(q1 , q2 ) = θ1 q1 + θ2 q2 = u. The
average good q also lies on the indifference curve, and good qk ’s advantage relative to q
is salient whenever q1k · q2k > q 1 · q 2 . Since qualities are non-negative, qi ranges from 0 to
                                                                             
 u                                                                     u   u
θi
   , and the average qualities along   the   indifference curve are      ,
                                                                      2θ1 2θ2
                                                                                . This identifies the
central point of the indifference curve, which maximizes the product of qualities, namely
               u           u
q1k · q2k ≤   2θ1
                      ·   2θ2
                                for all k.
                                   u
    If q 1 is low, q 1 <          2θ1
                                      ,   then goods which are closer to the central point satisfy q1k · q2k >

                                                             47
q 1 · q 2 . Thus their relative advantage, namely quality along dimension 1, is salient. If
         u                                                             u
q1k >   2θ1
            ,   then these goods are overvalued, while if q1k <       2θ1
                                                                            they are undervalued.
   For goods farther from the central point, q1k · q2k < q 1 · q 2 , their relative disadvantage
                                                                                         u
is salient. Goods with low q1 (q1k < q 1 ) have q1 salient. Since q 1 <                 2θ1
                                                                                            ,   these goods are
undervalued. Goods with high q1 and low q2 (q1k > q 1 · q 2 /q2k ) have q2 salient. Since
         u
q2 <    2θ2
            ,   these goods are also undervalued. Crucially, by construction goods far from the
central point are more undervalued than those close to the central point. Case 1) follows,
and case 2) follows from an identical reasoning.
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                          u
   Consider now case 3), and suppose for simplicity that the average good q =                               , u
                                                                                                         2θ1 2θ2

is not part of the choice set. In this case, all available goods satisfy q1k · q2k < q 1 · q 2 . Thus
all goods’ relative disadvantages relative to the average are salient. In this case, relative
disadvantages coincide with absolute disadvantages, so all goods are undervalued. The least
undervalued goods are the ones closest to the average (central) good itself.

   This tendency for the local thinker to “go to the middle” in quality-quality space can
generate violations of IIA, leading in particular to the so called compromise effect. Consider
a pairwise choice between goods q1 and q2 , which have equal rational utility u and specialize
                                         u
in attribute q2 , that is q11 , q12 <   2θ1
                                            .   Suppose now that q2 is less balanced than q1 in the
sense that q12 < q11 . Then q1 is chosen because it has higher levels of the salient attribute
q1 . However, by introducing a good q3 which is even less balanced than q2 but yields a
similar rational utility, it is often possible to transform in the consumer’s eyes the previously
unbalanced q2 into a middle of the road compromise, rendering q2 ’s advantage q22 salient.
In particular,

                                                                                 1                             u
Corollary 1 Let goods q1 ,q2 have rational utility u and satisfy                   q
                                                                                 2 11
                                                                                        < q12 < q11 ≤         2θ1
                                                                                                                  .
Then: i) the balanced good q1 is chosen from the choice set {q1 , q2 }, and ii) there exists an
extreme good q3 , satisfying q13 ≤ 21 q11 and with rational utility arbitrarily close to u, such
that the intermediate good q2 is chosen from {q1 , q2 , q3 }.

Proof. i) In the pairwise choice between q1 and q2 , the former is the more balanced good.
                                                  u
Namely, the average good satisfies q 1 <         2θ1
                                                       and q1 satisfies q1k · q2k > q 1 · q 2 . Proposition 4
implies that q1 is chosen.

                                                       48
                              u
   ii) Since q12 < q11 <     2θ1
                                 ,   both goods have upsides along dimension 2, which is also the
advantage of good q2 relative to q1 . As a consequence, if quality q2 becomes salient for good
q2 its valuation becomes larger than that of q1 . This can be achieved by adding a third
good q3 with a sufficiently low quality q1 3 such that the resulting average along quality q1
is close to q12 . The condition 21 q11 < q12 ensures that this is possible when qualities are non
negative. Note that q2 is chosen over q3 if the latter has an upside lower than q22 , or if that
upside is not salient.

   The compromise effect for goods with two quality attributes is very similar to the compro-
mise and decoy effects detailed previously in the context of quality/price space, in that adding
an irrelevant alternative can render the strength of the intermediate good salient. Unlike
in the case of decoys, this effect does not necessarily rely on a dominated (or unattractive)
irrelevant alternative. It relies on an irrelevant alternative that is sufficiently unbalanced to
make the previously rejected good be perceived as a good compromise. It is by generating
a taste for balance that salience creates a compromise effect.


Proposition 5 The consumer’s willingness to pay for q depends on the price p̂ as follows:
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                         δq      if                pb ≤ δq
                                       
                                       
                                                                              1
                                                              δq < pb ≤           ·q
                                       
                                        pb       if                          δ
                         W T P (q|C) =                                                         (27)
                                                        1                1               1
                                       
                                       
                                        q/δ      if    δ
                                                            · q < pb ≤   δ
                                                                              ·q·      k(N )
                                       
                                       
                                                                    1           1
                                                                        ·q·
                                       
                                        δq       if         pb >   δ         k(N )


                   N (N +1)
where k(N ) =   (N +2)2 −(N +1)
                                  < 1. As δ → 1, the willingness to pay tends to q and becomes
independent of context pb.

Proof. The average quality in C ∪ {(q, −p)} is q = q N +1
                                                     N +2
                                                          . The average price is

                                    "     N
                                               #
                                 1       X          1
                            p=        p+     pi =      [p + p̂N ]
                               N +2      i=1
                                                  N +2




                                                   49
             1
                 PN
where p̂ =   N      i=1   pi . Thus, the salience of quality and price of good (q, −p) are, respectively
                                                                       
                                        N +1                     1      p̂
                                   σ 1,             ,     σ 1,        1+ N
                                        N +2                   N +2     p

                    N (N +1)
Set k(N ) =      (N +2)2 −(N +1)
                                   < 1. It follows that quality is salient when

                                                                                      
                                                                                 p
                                    p ∈ (p̂ · k(N ), p̂) , or p̂ ∈ p,
                                                                               k(N )

and accordingly, price is salient when

                                                                         p
                                             p̂ < p and p̂ >
                                                                       k(N )

Recall the definition of willingness to pay:


             WTP(q|C) = sup p s.t. uLT (q|C ∪ {(q, −p)}) ≥ uLT (q0 |C ∪ {(q, −p)}).


Consider first the case where the good is expensive relative to the reference price, p̂ < p.
Then price is salient, so the consumer buys the good if and only if its discounted quality is
sufficiently high, δq ≥ p. Thus, WTP= δq whenever p̂ < δq.
   Consider now the case where quality is salient, so the good is cheaper than the reference
price, p̂ ≥ p, but the price is not too low. If quality is salient, the consumer buys the good
                                                                   q
                                                 ≥ p. Thus, price can be jacked up all the
as long as its inflated quality is above its price,                δ

way to q/δ, as long as it does not change the salience ranking: WTP= max qδ , p̂ . As a
                                                                             

consequence, for p̂ ≤ qδ , WTP= p̂. For             q 1
                                                    δ k(N )
                                                              > p̂ > qδ , we find WTP= qδ .
                                            q 1
   Finally, consider the case p̂ >          δ k(N )
                                                    .   Now the reference price is so high that even at the
highest possible price for the good, namely q/δ, its price is salient. As a result, WTP goes
back down to δq.

   Take an evoked set C having N > 1 elements and divide it into two subsets CF and
CC such that CF ∩ CC = ∅ and CF ∪ CC = C. Denote by ω the fraction of goods that
belong to CF , by p the average price of goods in C and by pX the average price in subset
CX , X = F, C. We then prove:

                                                              50
Proposition 6 Denote by pmax
                         C   the highest price in CC . Then, a marginal increase in the
prices of all goods in CC (holding constant the prices in CF ) boosts the salience of price for
the most expensive goods in CC only if ω > 0 and pmax
                                                  C   > p and provided:

                                      pmax
                                       C − pC    ω
                                              <     .                                       (28)
                                         pF     1−ω



If ω = 0, the salience of price decreases for all goods in CC .

Proof. Suppose the prices of all goods in CC are shifted by a small γ > 0. Then the average
price in C shifts by (1−ω)γ, where (1−ω) is the share of goods in CC . Consider the salience of
price for goods in CC which have price p̂, i.e. σ (p̂ + γ, p + (1 − ω)γ). Diminishing sensitivity
implies that salience decreases in γ whenever ω = 0, or when ω > 0 but p̂ < p. This is because
in either situation the average payoff level increases but the difference between payoffs weakly
decreases.
   For salience to increase in γ, it is necessary that the difference in payoffs increases as
well, so that the ordering property of salience may dominate over diminishing sensitivity.
A necessary condition for salience to increase is thus that ω > 0 and p̂ > p. The precise
trade-off between payoff level and payoff difference (i.e. between diminishing sensitivity
and ordering) is not pinned down by the properties of salience considered in Definition 1.
However, assuming homogeneity of degree zero, we get that

                                                              p̂ + γ
                    ∂γ σ (p̂ + γ, p + (1 − ω)γ) > 0 ⇔ ∂γ                >0
                                                           p + (1 − ω)γ

Replacing p̂ for pmax
                  C , we get the condition in the proposition.


Proposition 7 The retailer can charge a sale price ps = q/δ and still have the customer
buy the product by setting any full price in the interval pf ∈ (q/δ, 7q/2δ).

Proof. As in the text, consider the evoked set Csale = {(0, 0), (q, ps ), (q, pf )}. Consider the
evaluation of the good on sale, (q, ps ). The salience of its quality is (using homogeneity  of
                                                                                          pf
                                                                                          
                                                                        p +p           1+
degree zero) σ q, 2q   = σ 1, 23 . The salience of its price is σ ps , s 3 f = σ 1, 3ps .
                               
                   3


                                               51
                                                                pf
                                                                     ∈ 1, 72 . In fact, if pf is much
                                                                            
Therefore, quality is more salient than price as long as        ps

higher than ps , then the price difference among them becomes salient again. For ratios pf /ps
at which quality is salient, the willingness to pay is ps = q/δ, from which the result follows.



Proposition 8 The store can always make the high quality good quality salient, and have
the consumer choose it over the low quality good, by holding a sale on qh where the full
price phf is suitably chosen. In contrast, a sale is innefectual for the low quality good: if the
consumer chooses qh in the absence of a sale, there exists no full price pf l ∈ (pl , ph ) for ql
that makes qh price salient, and ql be chosen, in the context of the sale.

Proof. The store can always make the high quality good quality salient by holding a sale
with a full price pf h = 3ph − pl (in which case ph coincides with the average quality in the
choice set).
   Instead, by holding a sale on the low quality good, the store lowers the quality-price
ratio of the reference good. Thus, as long as pf l < ph , this makes it easier for qh to be
quality salient, as it has both higher quality and price and also higher quality to price ratio
compared to the reference good. In particular, if in the absence of a sale qh is quality salient
and chosen by the consumer, holding the sale for ql has no effect on the consumer’s choice.




A.2 Continuous Salience Distorsions

   The discontinuous nature of salience distortions can give rise to a non-monotonic relation
between quality and utility, and similarly between price and utility. When q < q, increasing
q can make price salient and decrease utility. When p < p, increasing p can make quality
salient and increase utility. These effects can be corrected if salience distortions are made
continuous. Formally, let:


                             uLT (q, p) = δ[σ(q, q)] · q − δ[σ(p, p)] · p


                                                 52
where δ[σ(·, ·)] is some increasing function of salience. Then impose dq uLT (q, p) > 0 and
dp uLT (q, p) < 0. This yields


                  ∂q uLT (q, p) > 0 ⇔ δ 0 [σ(q, q)] · σ 0 (q, q) · q + δ[σ(q, q)] > 0           (29)


By assumption δ[σ(q, q)] > 0 and the logic of overweighting salient states implies that
δ 0 [σ(q, q)] > 0. Thus, a sufficient condition for evaluation to increase in quality is that

                                                          1
                              σ 0 (q, q) = ∂q σ(q, q) +     ∂q σ(q, q) > 0
                                                          N

From the ordering property of salience, the first term is negative only when q < q, while the
second term is negative only when q > q. The diminishing sensitivity property of salience
ensures that when q > q the above inequality always holds. This is because increasing quality
when quality is above average increases its salience and therefore perceived utility. On the
other hand, that inequality never holds when q < q. Thus the constraint from (??) is that
salience does not fall too fast as q approaches q from below.
   To see this, assume that δ[σ(q, q)] = exp[(1 − δ)σ(q, q)], where now δ ∈ (0, 1], and that
the salience function satisfies homogeneity of degree zero. Then from (29) we get:
                                                          
                                       0       q           q   q
                            (1 − δ)σ             ,1 · 1 −        +1>0
                                               q          Nq q

where N is the number of options in the evoked set. As advertised, this condition restricts
how fast salience falls (how negative σ 0 is) as q approaches q from below. It is easy to see
that, for all δ < 1, this condition is satisfied with the standard salience function σ(q, q) =
|q − q|/(|q| + |q|). Naturally, this also ensures that dp u(q, p) < 0.
   Monotonicity of evaluation also ensures that dominant goods have lower evaluation than
the corresponding dominating goods, and are never chosen. In fact, keeping the reference
good constant, monotonicity implies that moving a good from a dominated position to a
dominating position strictly increases its evaluation.




                                                    53
   References:

Alchian, Armen and William Allen. 1964. Exchange and production: competition, coordina-
tion and control. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Pub. Co.

Azar, Ofer. 2007. “Relative thinking theory.” Journal of Socio-Economics, 36 (1): 1 – 14.

Barseghyan, Levon, Francesca Molinari, Ted O’Donoghue, and Josh Teitelbaum. 2011.
“The Nature of Risk Preferences: Evidence from Insurance Choices”, SSRN Working Paper
1646520.

Blattberg, Robert and Kenneth Wisniewski. 1989. “Price-Induced Patterns of Competition,
Marketing Science 8(4), 291 309.

Bodner, Ronit and Drazen Prelec. 1994. “The Centroid Model of Context Dependent
Choice”, Unpublished Manuscript, MIT.

Bordalo, Pedro. 2011. “Salience Theory and Context Effects”, Unpublished Manuscript
Royal Holloway, University of London.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. 2012. “Salience Theory of Choice
under Risk”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. 2012b. “Salience and Experimen-
tal Tests of the Endowment Effect”, American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings,
Forthcoming.

Cunningham, Tom. 2011. “Comparisons and Choice”, Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard
University.

Eliaz, Kfir and Ran Spiegler. 2010. “Consideration sets and competitive marketing”, Review
of Economic Studies, 78 (1): 235 – 262.

Feigenson, Lisa, Stanislas Dehaene and Elizabeth Spelke. 2004. “Core systems of number”,
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8 (7): 307 – 314

Gabaix, Xavier. 2011. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality”, NBER working
paper No. 16911.


                                            54
Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. “What Comes to Mind”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 125 (4): 1399–1433.

Goeree, Michelle. 2008. “Limited Information and Advertising in the U.S. Personal Com-
puter Industry”, Econometrica, 76 (5): 1017 – 1074.

Hastings, Justine and Jesse Shapiro. 2011. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice:
Evidence from Commodity Price Shocks”. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago
Booth School of Business.

Heidhues, Paul and Botond Koszegi. 2008. “Competition and price variation when con-
sumers are loss averse”. The American Economic Review, 98 (4): 1245 – 1268

Huber, Joel, John Payne and Christopher Puto. 1982. “Adding asymmetrically dominated
alternatives: violations of the regularity and similarity hypothesis”, Journal of Consumer
Research, 9 (1): 90 – 98.

Jaeger, David A. and Karl Storchmann. 2011. “Wine Retail Price Dispersion in the United
States: Searching for Expensive Wines?”, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceed-
ings, 101 (3): 136 – 141.

Jahedi, Salar. 2011. “A taste for bargains”, Unpublished Manuscript, University of Arkansas

Kahneman, Daniel and Dale T. Miller. 1986. “Norm theory: Comparing reality to its
alternatives”, Psychological Review, 93: 136–153.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: an Analysis of Decision
under Risk”, Econometrica, 47 (2): 263– 292.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1984. “Choices, Values and Frames”, American
Psychologist, 39: 341 – 350.

Kamenica, Emir. 2008. “Contextual Inference in markets: on the informational content of
product lines.” The American Economic Review, 98 (5): 2127 – 2149

Keeney, Ralph, and Howard Raiffa. 1976. Decisions with multiple objectives: Preferences
and Value Trade-Offs. Cambridge University Press.

Koszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (4): 1133 – 1165.

                                            55
Koszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin. 2007. “Reference-Dependent Risk Attitudes”, Amer-
ican Economic Review, 7 (4): 1047 – 1073.

Koszegi, Botond and Adam Szeidl. 2011. “A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice”,
unpublished manuscript, UC-Berkeley.

Lazear, E. 1986. “Retail pricing and clearance sales”. American Economic Review, 76 (1):
14 – 32.

Lynch, John and Dan Ariely. 2000. “Wine online: search costs affect competition on price,
quality and distribution.”, Marketing Science, 19 (1): 83 – 103

Manzini, Paola and Marco Mariotti. 2007. “Sequentially Rationalizable Choice”, American
Economic Review, 97 (5): 1824 – 1839.

Masatlioglu, Yusufcan, Daisuke Nakajima and Erkut Ozbay. 2010. “Revealed Attention”,
forthcoming in American Economic Review.

Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2002. “Thinking through categories”, unpublished manuscript, Har-
vard University.

Ortmeyer, Gwen, John Quelch and Walter Salmon. 1991. “Restoring credibility to retail
pricing”, Sloan Management Review, 33 (1): 55 – 66.

Roberts, John and James Lattin. 1997. “Consideration: Review of Research and Prospects
for Future insights”, Journal of Marketing Research, 34 (3): 406 – 410.

Rosen, S . 1974. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition”, The Journal of Political Economy, 82 (1): 34 – 55.

Rubinstein, Ariel and Yuval Salant. 2008. “(A,f): choice with frames”, Review of Economic
Studies, 75 (4): 1287 – 1296.

Savage, Daniel. 1954. The Foundation of Statistics. New York: Dover Publications.

Schwartzstein, Joshua. 2012. “Selective attention and learning”, Unpublished Manuscript,
Harvard University.

Simonson, Itamar. 1989. “Choice based on reasons: the case of the attraction and compro-
mise effects”, Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (2): 158–174.

                                            56
Simonson, Itamar, and Amos Tversky. 1992. “Choice in context: Tradeoff contrast and
extremeness aversion”, Journal of Marketing Research, 29 (3): 281 – 295.

Spiegler, Ran. 2011. Bounded rationality and Industrial Organization. Oxford University
Press.

Sobel, Joel. 1984. “The timing of sales”. Review of Economic Studies, 51 (3): 353 – 368.

Sydnor, Justin. 2010. “(Over)insuring Modest Risks”. American Economic Journal: Ap-
plied Economics, 2: 177 – 199.

Taylor, Shelley and Suzanne Thompson. 1982. “Stalking the ellusive vividness effect.”
Psychological Review, 89 (2): 155 – 181.

Thaler, Richard. 1980. “Toward a Positive Theory of Cconsumer Choice”, Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization, 1 (1): 39 – 60.

Thaler, Richard. 1985. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice”, Marketing Science, 4
(3): 199 – 214.

Thaler, Richard. 1999. “Mental Accounting Matters”, Journal of Behavioral Decision Mak-
ing, 12: 183 – 206.

Tversky, Amos and Danier Kahneman. 1991. “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-
Dependent Model”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (4): 1039 – 1061

Tversky, Amos and Itamar Simonson. 1993. “Context Dependent Choices”, Marketing
Science, 39 (10): 1179 – 1189

Varian, Hal. 1980. “A model of sales”. American Economic Review, 70: 651 – 659.

Wernerfelt, Birger. 1995.“A rational reconstruction of the compromise effect: using market
data to infer utilities”, Journal of Consumer Research, 21 (4): 627 – 633.

Woodford, Michael. 2012.“Inattentive valuation and Reference-Dependent Choice”, Unpub-
lished Manuscript, Columbia University.




                                             57
