                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE IMPACT OF CORPORATE SUSTAINABILITY ON ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES
                         AND PERFORMANCE

                                           Robert G. Eccles
                                           Ioannis Ioannou
                                           George Serafeim

                                        Working Paper 17950
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17950


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012

This paper was previously circulated as "The Impact of a Corporate Culture of Sustainability on Corporate
Behavior and Performance." Robert G. Eccles is a Professor of Management Practice at Harvard Business
School. Ioannis Ioannou is an Assistant Professor of Strategy and Entrepreneurship at London Business
School. George Serafeim is an Assistant Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business
School. Robert Eccles and George Serafeim gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Division
of Faculty Research and Development of the Harvard Business School. We would like to thank Christopher
Greenwald for supplying us with the ASSET4 data. Moreover, we would like to thank Cecile Churet,
Michael Baldinger and Iordanis Chatziprodromou from Sustainable Asset Management for giving
us access to their proprietary data. We are grateful to Chris Allen, Jeff Cronin, Christine Rivera, and
James Zeitler for research assistance. We thank Ben Esty, David Larcker, Joshua Margolis, Costas
Markides, Jeremy Stein, Catherine Thomas, and seminar participants at Boston College, Columbia
University, ESMT, the INSEAD - Social Innovation Center, the NBER conference on the “Causes
and Consequences of Corporate Culture”, Cardiff University, Saint Andrews University, International
Finance Corporation, and the Business and Environment Initiative at Harvard Business School for
helpful comments. Finally, we would like to thank the Department Editor, Prof. B. Cassiman, an anonymous
Associate Editor and three anonymous reviewers for insightful guidance through the review process
and excellent insights. We are solely responsible for any remaining errors in this manuscript. We are
solely responsible for any errors in this manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert G. Eccles, Ioannis Ioannou, and George Serafeim. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Corporate Sustainability on Organizational Processes and Performance
Robert G. Eccles, Ioannis Ioannou, and George Serafeim
NBER Working Paper No. 17950
March 2012, Revised 2014
JEL No. G3,M14

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate the effect of corporate sustainability on organizational processes and performance.
Using a matched sample of 180 US companies, we find that corporations that voluntarily adopted
sustainability policies by 1993 – termed as High Sustainability companies – exhibit by 2009 distinct
organizational processes compared to a matched sample of companies that adopted almost none of
these policies – termed as Low Sustainability companies. The boards of directors of High Sustainability
companies are more likely to be formally responsible for sustainability and top executive compensation
incentives are more likely to be a function of sustainability metrics. High Sustainability companies
are more likely to have established processes for stakeholder engagement, to be more long-term oriented,
and to exhibit higher measurement and disclosure of nonfinancial information. Finally, High Sustainability
companies significantly outperform their counterparts over the long-term, both in terms of stock market
and accounting performance.


Robert G. Eccles                                    George Serafeim
Harvard Business School                             381 Morgan Hall
reccles@hbs.edu                                     Harvard Business School
                                                    Boston
Ioannis Ioannou                                     MA 02163
London Business School                              gserafeim@hbs.edu
iioannou@london.edu
1. Introduction

During the last 20 years, a relatively small but growing number of companies have begun to voluntarily
integrate social and environmental issues in their business models and organizational processes (i.e., their
strategy) through the adoption of related corporate policies.1 The integration of such issues into a
company’s strategy raises a number of fundamental questions for scholars of organizations. Are there
organizations that compete by focusing on sustainability? Does the governance structure of this type of
companies differ from that of other companies and, if yes, in what ways? Do such companies have
distinct stakeholder engagement processes and adopt different time horizons in their decision-making? In
what ways are their measurement and reporting systems different? What are the performance implications
of integrating social and environmental issues into a company’s organizational processes?
         Some scholars argue that companies can “do well by doing good” because meeting the needs of
non-shareholding stakeholders creates shareholder value (Freeman et al., 2010, Porter and Kramer, 2011).
They also assume that by not meeting the needs of non-shareholding stakeholders, companies can destroy
shareholder value because of consumer boycotts (e.g., Sen et al., 2001), the inability to hire the most
talented people (e.g., Greening and Turban 2000), and by paying punitive fines to governments.
Conversely, others argue that the integration of environmental and social policies could destroy
shareholder wealth (e.g., Friedman 1970; Navarro 1988; Galaskiewicz 1997). Sustainability may be an
agency cost: managers receive private benefits from addressing environmental and social issues, but
doing so has negative financial implications (e.g. higher cost structure) for their organizations (Balotti &
Hanks, 1999; Brown et al. (2006). Accordingly, companies that do not operate under such additional
constraints will be relatively more competitive and, as a result, more profitable in highly competitive
environments (Jensen, 2001).
         In this study, we explore the organizational and performance implications for organizations that
integrate social and environmental issues into their processes through the adoption of corporate policies.
Our overarching thesis is that such organizations represent an alternative and distinct way of competing
for the modern corporation, characterized by a governance structure that in addition to financial
performance, accounts for the environmental and social impact of the company, a long-term approach
towards maximizing inter-temporal profits, an active stakeholder management process, and more
developed measurement and reporting systems. Empirically, we identify 90 companies – we term these as
High Sustainability companies - with a substantial number of environmental and social policies adopted
since the early to mid-1990s, reflecting strategic choices that are independent and, in fact, far preceded
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1
  During the same period many more companies were active in corporate social responsibility (CSR) as an ancillary activity.
However, many of these companies did not necessarily implement or were unable to implement CSR as a central strategic
objective of the corporation. Moreover, CSR has diffused broadly in the business world only in the last seven years (Eccles and
Krzus, 2010).

                                                              2
!
the recent hype around sustainability issues (Eccles and Krzus, 2010). We use propensity score matching
in 1993 to identify 90 comparable companies that adopted almost none of these policies - the Low
Sustainability companies.
            Consistent with our expectations, we find that High Sustainability companies are significantly
more likely to assign responsibility to the board of directors for sustainability and to form a separate
board committee for sustainability. They are more likely to make executive compensation a function of
environmental, social, and external perception metrics. These companies are also significantly more likely
to establish a more comprehensive and engaged stakeholder management process while maintaining a
longer-term orientation: they are owned by proportionately more long-term oriented investors and they
communicate more long-term information in their conference calls with sell-side analysts. We moreover
find that High Sustainability companies are more likely to measure information related to key
stakeholders such as employees, customers2, and suppliers — and to increase the credibility of these
measures by using auditing procedures. High Sustainability companies not only measure but also disclose
relatively more nonfinancial data. Our findings suggest that, to a large extent, by 2009 the adoption of
these sustainability policies reflects their underlying institutionalization within the organization rather
than “greenwashing” and “cheap talk”.
            Importantly, we track corporate performance for 18 years and find that High Sustainability
companies outperform Low Sustainability companies both in stock market as well as accounting
performance. Using a four-factor model to account for potential differences in the risk profile of the two
groups, we find that annual abnormal performance is higher for the High Sustainability group compared
to the Low Sustainability group. We also find that High Sustainability companies perform better when
considering accounting rates of return, such as return-on-equity (ROE) and return-on-assets (ROA), and
that this outperformance is more pronounced for companies that sell products to individuals (i.e.,
business-to-customer [B2C] companies), compete on the basis of brand and reputation, and make
substantial use of natural resources. Finally, using analyst forecasts of annual earnings we find that the
market underestimated the future profitability of the High Sustainability companies compared to the Low
Sustainability ones.
            Consequently, with this study, we make both empirical and theoretical contributions. We identify
and then characterize “sustainable” organizations: a category of modern corporations that compete by
integrating social and environmental issues into their strategy and processes. We are able to identify four
pillars      (i.e.,   governance,        stakeholder        engagement,        time     horizon       of    decision-making,   and
measurement/reporting) that are directly affected by a commitment to sustainability and constitute first-
order determinants of the ability to build a sustainable organization in the long-run. We suggest that these
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
2
    Although we find directionally consistent results for customers, our results are not statistically significant.

                                                                     3
!
four pillars are consistent with the “team production” model of the corporation (Blair and Stout, 1999:
p.258). An important implication of this is that directors do not face a conflict in supporting the
management practices of High Sustainability firms. The pillars of the sustainable organization that we
identify also point to specific directions that future research may follow to uncover the mechanisms that
contribute to the long-term outperformance that we document here. Thus, we contribute towards moving
the field beyond the question of whether sustainability is linked to financial performance and towards
understanding under what conditions and why sustainability pays (Margolis and Walsh, 2003).
2. Sample Selection and Summary Statistics
To understand the effects of integrating social and environmental issues in an organization’s processes,
we first need to identify companies that have explicitly placed a high level of emphasis on non-
shareholding stakeholders as part of their strategy. Moreover, we need to find companies that have
adopted these policies for a significant number of years prior to corporate social responsibility (CSR) and
sustainability becoming widespread, to reduce the possibility of including companies that are
“greenwashing.” By identifying companies based on policy adoption decisions that were made a
sufficiently long time ago - thus introducing a long lag between our independent and dependent variables
- we mitigate the likelihood of biases arising from reverse causality.
               We identify two groups of companies: those that have and those that have not adopted a
comprehensive set of corporate policies related to the environment, employees, community, products, and
customers. The complete set of these policies is provided in the Appendix. The Thomson Reuters
ASSET4 database, which has already been used in the literature (e.g., Ioannou and Serafeim, 2012;
Cheng, Ioannou, and Serafeim, 2013), provides data on the adoption or non-adoption of these policies, for
at least one year, for 775 US companies in years 2003 to 2005.3 Starting with this initial list of 775 US
companies, we eliminate 100 financial institutions because many of the environmental and social policies
are not likely to be applicable or material to them. Rather, the environmental and social policies of the
companies in their loan and investment portfolios are more likely to be significant for their performance
(Eccles and Serafeim 2013). For the remaining 675 companies we construct an equal-weighted index of
all policies (Sustainability Policies) that measures the percentage of the full set of identified policies that
every company is committed to in each year.
              Moreover, we track (backwards) over time the extent of adoption of these policies for those
companies that score at the top quartile of Sustainability Policies, and we focus on years prior to 2003, for

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
3
  Founded in 2003, ASSET4 was a privately held Swiss-based company, acquired by Thomson Reuters in 2009. The company
collects data and scores companies on environmental and social dimensions since 2002. Research analysts of ASSET4 collect
more than 900 evaluation points per company, where all the primary data used must be objective and publicly available. Typical
sources include stock exchange filings, annual financial and sustainability reports, non-governmental organizations’ websites,
and various news sources. Every year, a company receives a z-score for each of the pillars, benchmarking its performance with
the rest of the companies in the database.

                                                                4
!
which ASSET4 data do not exist. We collect this data by reading published reports, such as annual and
sustainability reports, and visiting corporate websites to understand the historical origins of the adopted
policies. Furthermore, we conducted more than 200 interviews with corporate executives to validate the
historical adoption of these policies.4 The adoption of these sustainability policies prior to 2003 was
measured, checked, and validated by the archival research and the interviews conducted by the authors.
At the end of this process, we were able to identify 90 organizations that adopted a substantial number of
these policies in the early to mid-90s (on average 40% of the policies identified in the Appendix, and by
the late 2000s almost 50%). We label this set of companies as the High Sustainability group. Of the
remaining 78 companies (i.e., 168 companies in the top quartile of 675 companies minus the 90 High
Sustainability companies), 70 companies had not adopted these policies by the early to mid-90s. For the
other eight companies we were unable to identify the historical origins of these policies. Subsequently, we
match each High Sustainability company with a company that scores in the lowest two quartiles of
Sustainability Policies. Companies in those two quartiles have, on average, adopted only 10% of the
policies, even by the late 2000s and they had adopted almost none of these policies in the mid-90s.
Because we require each High Sustainability company to be in existence since at least the early 1990s, we
impose the same restriction for the pool of possible control companies, resulting in 269 remaining
candidate control companies (out of the 336 companies in the two lowest quartiles).
              We implement a propensity score matching process in 1993, the earliest year in which we can
confirm that all High Sustainability companies had adopted these sustainability policies5. We match each
High Sustainability company with a control company that is in the same industry classification
benchmark subsector (or sector if a company in the same subsector is not available), by requiring exact
matching for the sector membership. We use as covariates in the logit regression the natural logarithm of
total assets (as a proxy for size), ROA,6 asset turnover (measured as sales over total assets), market value
of equity over book value of equity (MTB) as a proxy for growth opportunities, and leverage (measured
as total liabilities over total assets). We use propensity score matching without replacement and closest
neighbor matching.7 Size and asset turnover load with a positive and highly significant coefficient in the
logit regression (untabulated results). The coefficient on MTB is positive and weakly significant. The
coefficients on leverage and ROA are both insignificant. We label the set of control companies that are
selected through this process as the Low Sustainability group. Due to the proprietary nature of the data we
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
4
   These interviews took place during 2011, were typically 60 minutes long each, mostly over the phone but some in person, and
were primarily with C-level executives or business unit heads.
5
  !We confirm that the results are not sensitive to the specific matching year by redoing the matching in 1992 and 1994: in any one
year only less than 5% of the matched pairs change.!
6
   We also used ROE as a measure of performance and all the results were very similar to the results reported in this paper. We
also included other variables such as stock returns over the past one, two or three years but none of them was significant.
7
   Using a caliper of 0.01 to ensure that none of the matched pairs is materially different reduces our sample by two pairs or four
companies. All our results are unchanged if we use that sample of 176 companies.

                                                                5
!
use for our independent variables, we do not to disclose the names of the 180 companies in the final
sample.8
               Table 1 Panel A, shows the sector composition of our sample and highlights that a wide range of
sectors are represented. 9 Panel B shows the average values of several company metrics (i.e. total assets,
ROA, ROE, leverage, turnover and MTB) across the two groups in the year of matching. None of the
differences in the averages across the two groups are statistically significant, suggesting that the matching
process worked effectively. Moreover, the two groups have very similar risk profiles: both the standard
deviation of daily returns and the equity betas are approximately equal.
3. Corporate Governance
The responsibilities of the board of directors and the incentives provided to top management are two
fundamental attributes of the corporate governance system. Boards of directors perform a monitoring and
advising role and ensure that management is making decisions in a way that is consistent with
organizational objectives. While the common belief is that these objectives must put shareholders’
interests first, over the interests of non-shareholding stakeholders, such as employees and customers,
Blair and Stout (1999) argue that this is not the case and show that US law does not mandate that boards
put shareholders’ interests first. In situations requiring “team production,” in which team members must
make company-specific investments to improve the joint outcome of the corporation as a whole, they
show that shareholders (and in fact, all other stakeholders) might prefer relinquishing control over both
the team’s assets and output to a third party (i.e. a mediating hierarchy). If control is relinquished to a
third party, like the board of directors, then by acting as a “hierarch,” the board may sometimes
subordinate shareholders’ interests to those of the other stakeholders for the shareholders’ own long-term
benefit. In other words, this “team production” theory of corporate governance enables boards to support
sustainability objectives if they so choose since sustainability objectives form an integral part of the “joint
welfare function” (p.288) that boards are supposed to serve according to the law.
              Moreover, compensation systems for top management align managerial incentives with the goals
of the organization, as approved by the board, by linking executive compensation to key performance
indicators that are used for measuring corporate performance (Govindarajan and Gupta, 1985). In fact,
Ittner, Larcker, and Rajan (1997) show that the use of nonfinancial metrics in annual bonus contracts is
consistent with an “informativeness” hypothesis, according to which nonfinancial metrics provide
incremental information regarding the manager’s action choice.


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
8
  Accordingly, the examples of specific policies or actions by companies that we use in the remainder of this study should not
automatically imply that these companies are part of our sample in general or any of the two groups in particular.
9
  Because many companies are industrially diversified, we also restrict our sample to 38 matched pair companies that operate
only in one three-digit SIC code industry. All results remained similar when we restricted our sample to these companies.

                                                                6
!
               Therefore, we posit that for organizations that consider environmental and social objectives as
core, the board of directors is more likely to have direct responsibility over such issues; it is also more
likely that top management compensation will be a function of sustainability metrics in addition to other
traditional financial metrics. To test these predictions we analyze proprietary data provided to us by
Sustainable Asset Management (SAM). SAM collects the relevant data and constructs the Dow Jones
Sustainability Index. Once a year, SAM initiates and leads an independent sustainability assessment of
approximately 2,250 of the largest corporations around the world. The SAM Corporate Sustainability
Assessment is based on the annual SAM Questionnaire, which consists of an in-depth analysis based on
approximately 100 questions on economic, environmental, and social issues, with a particular focus on
companies’ potential for long-term value creation. The questionnaire is designed to ensure objectivity by
limiting qualitative answers through predefined multiple-choice questions. In addition, companies must
also submit concrete and relevant information to support the answers they provide to the questionnaire.
The SAM Questionnaires are distributed to the CEOs and heads of investor relations.. The completed
company questionnaire, signed by a senior company representative, is the most important source of
information for the assessment.10
               Table 2 shows the governance data items that SAM provided to us for fiscal year 2009, as they
relate to the board of directors and the executives’ incentive systems. We find results that are consistent
with our predictions. Fifty three percent of the companies in the High Sustainability group assign formal
responsibility around sustainability to the board of directors whereas only 22% of the Low Sustainability
companies do so. Similarly, 41% (15%) of the High Sustainability companies (Low Sustainability) form a
separate board-level sustainability committee. The responsibilities of such a committee include both
assisting the management with strategy formulation and periodically reviewing sustainability
performance. For example, at the Ford Corporation the committee assists management in the formulation
and implementation of policies, principles, and practices to foster sustainable growth on a global basis
and to respond to evolving public sentiment and government regulation in the area of GHG emissions.
Other functions include assisting management in setting strategy, establishing goals, and integrating
sustainability into daily business activities, and reviewing partnerships and relationships that support the
company’s sustainable growth.
               Another important governance component is the set of metrics that are linked to senior executive
compensation. The two groups significantly differ on this dimension as well: of the High Sustainability
companies, 18%, 35%, and 32% link compensation to environmental, social, and external perception

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
10
  We also note that to ensure the quality and objectivity of the process, an independent third party (Deloitte) conducts an external
audit of the assessment process each year and accordingly provides an assurance statement. More details are available at the
following link, last accessed July 4th, 2013: http://www.sustainability-indices.com/sustainability-assessment/corporate-
sustainability-assessment.jsp

                                                                 7
!
metrics, respectively. Respectively, and in contrast, only 8%, 22%, and 11% of the Low Sustainability
companies do so. Companies in the High Sustainability group are more likely to use monetary incentives
to focus executives’ efforts on nonfinancial aspects of corporate performance11. For example, Intel has
linked executive compensation to environmental metrics since the mid-90s, and since 2008 Intel also
links all employees’ bonuses to environmental metrics. Although a small portion of the overall employee
bonus calculation, the 2010 metrics focused on carbon emission reductions in operations and energy-
efficiency goals for new products.
              Overall, the results indicate that High Sustainability companies are characterized by a distinct
governance structure: reflecting the joint interests of all stakeholders of the corporation, formal
responsibility for sustainability is more likely to be directly assigned to the board of directors and, top
management compensation is more likely to be a function of a set of performance metrics that includes
sustainability metrics.
4. Stakeholder Engagement
Since High Sustainability companies are characterized by a distinct corporate governance model that
accounts for a wider range of stakeholders, we predict that such companies are also more likely to adopt a
greater range of stakeholder engagement practices. Indeed, to the extent that the board is, according to the
team production model, “allowed free rein to consider and make trade-offs between the conflicting
interests of different corporate constituencies” (Blair and Stout, (1999): p. 291), then it is imperative that
stakeholders’ needs and expectations are deeply understood through engagement. Thus, engagement is
necessary so as to enable the corporation to make decisions about how best to address them (Freeman,
1984; Berman et al., 1999; Freeman et al., 2007; Barnett, 2007; Laplume et al., 2008) in terms of
maximizing what the team production model would term as the “joint welfare function” of the
corporation. Nevertheless, stakeholders’ interests are not always aligned, and in fact they are often in
conflict, at least in the short term. The objectives of an environmental NGO, for example, can interfere
with the objectives of a social NGO. It is therefore through stakeholder engagement that the company
determines the materiality of each of these stakeholder demands to determine the right balance in meeting
all stakeholders’ expectations (Eccles and Serafeim, 2013).
              Prior literature has suggested and empirically shown that stakeholder engagement is directly
linked to superior financial performance by enabling companies to develop intangible assets in the form
of strong long-term relationships, which can then become sources of competitive advantage (e.g., Hillman

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
11
   We also construct a variable that summarizes all the mechanisms discussed in table 2 by calculating the percentage of
processes and practices that the focal company has adopted. Because companies might look considerably different in terms of
size, growth opportunities, and performance by 2009, we control for these factors by measuring them at the end of 2009.
Consistent with the results above, in unreported results we find that High Sustainability companies adopt significantly more of
these processes and practices: the coefficient is positive and significant (0.144, p-value=0.006). Larger companies and more
profitable companies adopt more of these processes, whereas growth opportunities are not related to their adoption.

                                                                8
!
and Keim, 2001). Thus, superior stakeholder engagement is based on a company’s ability to establish
long-term relationships with key stakeholders. Similarly, it has been argued that when a corporation is
able to credibly commit to contracting with its stakeholders on the basis of mutual trust and cooperation
and a longer-term horizon, then the corporation “will experience reduced agency costs, transactions costs,
and costs associated with team production” (Jones, 1995; Foo, 2007; Cheng et al., 2013). We argue,
therefore, that companies that have embedded the elements of mutual trust and cooperation and the
building of long-term relationships with key stakeholders through the integration of social and
environmental issues in their strategy will be better positioned to benefit from these more efficient forms
of contracting (Jones, 1995). This argument is also consistent with a central notion of the Blair and Stout
(1999) model: resolving problems of horizontal coordination across stakeholders is more critical in a team
production setting than problems of vertical coordination (i.e. the principal-agent model) (p. 265).
Conversely, companies that have not integrated such issues (or companies that predominantly focus only
on internal vertical problems of coordination) are more likely to incur agency and transactions costs, and
therefore they are more likely to contract on the basis of curbing opportunistic behavior. This type of
relatively less efficient contracting then impedes their ability to adopt a broader range of stakeholder
engagement practices.
        We use the proprietary data for fiscal year 2009 obtained from SAM to explore stakeholder
engagement across the two groups. Table 3 compares the High and Low Sustainability companies across
several data items that relate to actions prior to, during, and after the stakeholder engagement process. In
particular, each item in Table 3 measures the frequency of adoption of the focal practice within each
group, and the last column presents a significance test of the differences between them. We find that High
Sustainability companies are more likely to adopt practices of stakeholder engagement for all three phases
of the process compared to the Low Sustainability ones.
        Specifically, prior to the stakeholder engagement process, High Sustainability companies are
more likely to train their local managers in stakeholder management practices (14.9% vs. 0%, Training),
and to perform their due diligence by undertaking an examination of costs, opportunities, and risks
(31.1% vs. 2.7%, Opportunities Risks Examination). Moreover, High Sustainability companies are more
likely to identify issues and stakeholders that are important for their long-term success (45.9% vs. 10.8%,
Stakeholder Identification). During the stakeholder engagement process itself, our analysis shows that
High Sustainability companies are more likely to ensure that all stakeholders raise their concerns (32.4%
vs. 2.7%, Concerns) and to develop with their stakeholders a common understanding of the issues
relevant to the underlying issue at hand (36.5% vs. 13.5%, Common Understanding). In addition, they are
more likely to mutually agree upon a grievance mechanism with the stakeholders involved (18.9% vs.
2.7%, Grievance Mechanism) and to agree on the targets of the engagement process (16.2% vs. 0%,

                                                     9
!
Targets).Moreover, High Sustainability companies are more likely to pursue a mutual agreement on the
type of engagement with their stakeholders (36.5% vs. 8.1%, Scope Agreement).
          Finally, we find that after the completion of the stakeholder engagement process, High
Sustainability companies are more likely to provide feedback from their stakeholders directly to the board
or other key departments within the corporation (32.4% vs. 5.4%, Board Feedback), and are more likely
to make the results of the engagement process available to the stakeholders involved (31.1% vs. 0%,
Result Reporting) and the broader public (20.3% vs. 0%, Public Reports). In sum, High Sustainability
companies appear to be more proactive, more transparent, and more accountable in the way they engage
with their stakeholders12.
     In general, the results confirm our predictions: High Sustainability companies are distinct in their
stakeholder engagement model in that, compared to the Low Sustainability companies, they are more
focused on understanding the needs of their stakeholders, making investments in managing these
relationships, and reporting internally as well as externally on the quality of their stakeholder
relationships.
5. Time Horizon
In assessing the impact of stakeholder engagement, previous literature has argued that the effective
management of stakeholder relationships can generate persistence of superior financial performance over
the longer-term or a faster recovery of poorly performing companies (Choi and Wang, 2009). This occurs
because building good stakeholder relations is not only idiosyncratic to each company, but it is also based
on mutual respect, trust, and cooperation that require significant time to develop. Furthermore,
stakeholder engagement leads to the adoption of a longer-term time horizon because typically there are
short-term trade-offs in meeting the needs of different stakeholder groups. To build and maintain mutual
respect, trust, and cooperation with stakeholders, the company must, over time, demonstrate a
commitment to balancing these different stakeholders’ interests. Certainly, this requires that stakeholders
have a long-term perspective as well. This is fostered by the company itself demonstrating its willingness
to make the necessary investments in the relationship, thus giving stakeholders an incentive to adopt a
long-term orientation as well. In other words, effective stakeholder engagement necessitates the adoption
of a longer-term time horizon.
         Relatedly, the extant literature on “short-termism” (e.g., Laverty, 1996) shows that executive
compensation incentives that are based on short-term metrics may push managers to make decisions that
deliver short-term performance at the expense of long-term value creation. Consequently, a short-term
focus may result in a failure to make the necessary strategic investments to ensure future profitability.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12
   Similar to section 3 and footnote 11, we construct a variable summarizing the stakeholder engagement mechanisms discussed
in table 3 by calculating the percentage of practices that a company adopted. Consistent with table 3, in unreported results of a
multivariate analysis we find that High Sustainability companies adopt significantly more of these practices.

                                                              10
!
Importantly, such a short-term focus often implies a negative externality being imposed on various other
non-shareholding stakeholders. Thus, short-termism is incompatible with superior stakeholder
engagement and a long-term focus on stakeholder relationships. This argument is also consistent with
another key idea of the mediating hierarchy model by Blair and Stout (1999): “that treating directors as
trustees charged with serving interests above and beyond those of shareholders in fact can be in
shareholders’ “long-run interests”. This is because yielding control rights over the corporation to the
board ex ante limits opportunistic and short-term rent-seeking behaviors and thus, enables other
stakeholders to make firm-specific investments that are necessary to generate a surplus from team
production in the long-run, (p.305). It follows then, that corporations with a solid and credible
commitment to multiple stakeholders are less likely to suffer the pathologies associated with short-
termism. Given the documented commitment of High Sustainability companies to stakeholder
engagement, we further predict that they will be more likely to adopt a longer-term approach, and that this
approach will also be reflected in the type of investors that invest in their stock.13
              Importantly, the company communicates its norms and values both internally and externally, and
since a long-term time horizon is a key element of integrating social and environmental issues, we would
expect High Sustainability companies to put in their communications a greater emphasis on the long-term.
Investors that are interested in generating short-term results by selling their stock after it appreciates will
avoid investing in long-term-oriented companies since these companies are willing to sacrifice such short-
term results if doing so will produce higher long-term gains. In contrast, investors who plan on holding a
stock for a longer period of time will be attracted to companies that are optimizing financial performance
over a longer time horizon and are less interested in short-term performance fluctuations. For example,
after Paul Polman became the CEO of Unilever and announced the implementation of the “Sustainable
Living Plan” while abolishing quarterly earnings forecasts, ownership of Unilever’s stock by hedge funds
dropped from 15% to 5% in three years, leading to reduced fluctuations in the company’s share price.
              To test our predictions, in Table 4 we use data from Thomson Reuters Street Events to first
measure the extent to which the content of the conversations between a focal corporation and sell-side
analysts is comprised of long-term vs. short-term keywords. We construct this measure following the
methodology in Brochet, Loumioti, and Serafeim (2012) as the ratio of the number of keywords used in
conference calls that characterize time periods of more than one year over the number of keywords that
characterize time periods of less than one year. Second, we measure the time horizon of the investor base

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
13
   We acknowledge that under some conditions the reverse may be true: investor behavior may be driving managerial decision-
making. However, in the case of sustainability policies, we argue that this is rather unlikely. Since stakeholder relations take
several years to build, the probability of a large enough shareholder base retaining ownership for a sufficiently long amount of
time in order to institute a radical corporate change towards sustainability seems low. This line of argument would also require
investors to themselves engage with the company over a long period of time in such a way as to establish a culture of more long-
term thinking which in turn, would push the corporation towards better shareholder and other stakeholder engagement. !

                                                                11
!
of a corporation following Bushee (2001) by calculating the percentage of shares outstanding held by
“dedicated” vs. “transient” investors. Bushee (2001) classifies institutional investors using a factor and a
cluster analysis approach. Transient investors have high portfolio turnover and highly diversified
portfolios. In contrast, dedicated investors have low turnover and more concentrated holdings. We
measure how long-term oriented the investor base of a company is by calculating the difference between
the percentage of shares held by dedicated investors minus the percentage of shares held by transient
investors. The results are consistent with our predictions. We find that High Sustainability companies are
more likely to have conference call discussions whose content is relatively more long-term as opposed to
short-term focused (1.08 vs. 0.96, Long-term vs. Short-term Discussion). In addition, High Sustainability
companies are significantly more likely to attract dedicated rather than transient investors (-2.29 vs. -5.31,
Long-term vs. Short-term Investors)14.
       In sum, our findings suggest that High Sustainability companies are effective communicators of their
long-term approach: not only do they speak in terms of the long-run but in fact, they are persuading long-
term investors to invest in their stock.
6. Measurement and Disclosure
Measurement
Performance measurement is essential for management to determine how well it is executing on its
strategy and to make any necessary corrections (Kaplan and Norton, 2008). Companies that regard
shareholders as their only stakeholder have a relatively simpler measurement challenge since they can
simply focus on the financial results affecting its stock price. Companies that focus on multiple
stakeholders, on the other hand, have a more complex management challenge; financial metrics alone will
not inform them or their stakeholders sufficiently regarding how well they are meeting their expectations.
Instead, they must measure results that are directly relevant to the stakeholder group (e.g. career
opportunities for employees) by taking a “Balanced Scorecard” approach to measuring performance.
Further complicating their measurement challenge is that the metrics across stakeholders are not directly
comparable and their relationship to financial performance is rather difficult to characterize. Despite these
limitations, the quality, comparability, and credibility of information are enhanced by internal and
external audit procedures that verify its accuracy and/or the extent to which certain reporting practices are
being followed.
              Given that High Sustainability companies place a greater emphasis on stakeholder engagement
than the Low Sustainability ones, we expect that they would also place more emphasis on performance
metrics that are relevant to non-shareholding stakeholder groups. In particular, we expect High

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14
  Similar to previous sections, in unreported results from a multivariate analysis of these long-term oriented behaviors we find
consistent results.

                                                                12
!
Sustainability companies to put more emphasis on measuring and monitoring performance, auditing
performance measures, adherence to standards, and reporting on performance. Using the proprietary SAM
data described in Section 4, we are able to test for differences along these dimensions across the two
groups. Table 5 presents comparisons for Employees (Panel A), Customers (Panel B), and Suppliers
(Panel C). Similar to the results of previous sections, each of these three panels measures the frequency of
adoption of the focal practice, and the last column presents a significance test of the differences between
the two groups.
         For Employees, we find significant differences on three of the four metrics. High Sustainability
companies are significantly more likely to measure execution of skill mapping and development strategy
(54.1% vs. 16.2%, HR Performance Indicators/Nonfinancial), the number of fatalities in company
facilities (77.4% vs. 26.3%, KPI Labor/EHS Fatalities Tracking), and the number of “near misses” on
serious accidents in company facilities (64.5% vs. 26.3%, KPI Labor/EHS Near Miss Tracking). We find
no significant difference for the percentage of companies that use health and safety performance tracking
to follow labor relations issues. This may be due to laws and regulations requiring all companies to
collect such measures (e.g., as required by the Occupational Health and Safety Administration [OSHA]),
thereby eliminating any potential differences; the high adoption percentages for both groups indicate that
this might well be the case (95.2% vs. 89.5%, KPI Labor / EHS Performance Tracking). These results
reflect the greater commitment that High Sustainability companies make to the employee stakeholder
group.
         Panel B focuses on Customers and shows the frequency of adoption of seven relevant practices.
Contrary to our expectations and our findings regarding Employees, there is virtually no difference
between High and Low Sustainability companies on any one of these metrics, although across all metrics
more companies in the High Sustainability group measure customer-related data. If anything, one would
argue that the relationship between effective engagement and the creation of shareholder value is even
more direct for Customers than it is for Employees, yet we note that for both groups, a very small
percentage of companies are measuring the quality of this relationship. One possible reason could be the
rather nascent state of customer relationship management practices. Moreover, our data seem to indicate
that these results are linked to the ease with which these practices can be measured. For example,
variables like Cost of Service and Potential Lifetime Value are very difficult to measure and only 6.8%
and 8.1%, respectively, of the High Sustainability companies measure it. The highest percentages for this




                                                    13
!
group are for Geographical Segmentation (18.9%), Customer Generated Revenues (18.9%), and
Historical Sales Trends (16.2%), which are arguably easier to measure.15
               Nevertheless, there are some significant differences between the two groups in terms of
Suppliers. We examine the standards used to select and manage relationships with Suppliers, which can
determine the quality of the relationship they have with the company. Panel C shows the frequency of
adoption of 11 related practices: six of these are strongly and significantly different across the two groups
with p-values of <0.001 and the rest are significantly different at p-values <0.06. These standards fall into
either environmental or social issues, or a combination of the two. In terms of environmental issues,
significantly more High Sustainability companies use environmental monitoring systems in the
certification/audit/verification process (50.0% vs. 18.2%, Environmental Management Systems),
environmental data availability by the supplier (12.3% vs. 0.0%, Environmental Data Availability), the
supplier’s environmental policies (17.4% vs. 0.0%, Environmental Policy), and the supplier’s
environmental production standards (45.6% vs. 25.7%, Environmental Production Standards) in selecting
and evaluating suppliers than do Low Sustainability companies. Similarly, on social issues for selecting
and evaluating suppliers, significantly more High Sustainability companies use human rights standards
such as forced labor, slave labor, and child labor (17.4% vs. 5.7%, Human Rights Standards), labor
standards/requirements (18.6% vs. 8.1%, Labor Standards), and occupational, health, and safety
standards (62.9% vs. 25.7%, OHS Standards). Finally, High Sustainability companies make a greater use
of compliance to general standards, both international (12.3% vs. 0.0%, International Standards
Compliance) and domestic (14.9% vs. 8.1%, National Standards Compliance), in selecting and evaluating
Suppliers.
              The reliability and credibility of performance measurement is enhanced when it is subject to some
form of objective, third-party audit or assurance. The purpose of an audit is to ensure that the appropriate
measurement standards have been applied and that the internal control and measurement systems
producing information according to these standards are robust. Companies can also perform internal
audits whereby a separate department is responsible for verifying the numbers produced by another
department. With rare exceptions, an external or internal audit or assurance opinion is not required for
reported nonfinancial information on a company’s environmental and social performance. However,
given the greater importance that High Sustainability companies accord to nonfinancial metrics (e.g.,
linking executive compensation to such metrics), we predict a greater use of assurance by High
Sustainability companies than Low Sustainability companies.


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15
 !Because some of the customer metrics are more likely to be relevant to business-to-consumer (B2C) rather than business-to-
business business (B2B) models, we restricted the sample to B2C paired companies. However, the results were very similar with
no significant differences across the two groups, although the absolute level of measurement was slightly higher for both groups.!!

                                                                14
!
              Panel D shows the frequency of adoption of 13 focal practices regarding the use of internal and
external audit and assurance procedures. For the most part, the results are marginally significant but the
one case where our hypothesis does get strong support is the practice of having an external third-party
conduct an audit of the company’s corporate sustainability report (11.1% vs. 1.4%, Sustainability report
external audit), with a p-value of 0.017. The only other item that has any degree of statistical significance
is when a company bases its performance measurement on relevant external standards and programs, such
as the Global Reporting Initiative’s G3 Guidelines; 16.2% of the High Sustainability companies do this,
in contrast to only 2.7% of the Low Sustainability ones.
              We note that very few of the High Sustainability companies implement assurance practices: of the
11 focal items in Panel D the highest percentage for the High Sustainability companies is 16.2%. There
are a number of reasons why assurance procedures are so uncommon. Technologies for measuring and
auditing nonfinancial information are still in a relatively nascent state of development compared to
financial information (Simnett, Vantraelen, and Chua, 2009). This is not surprising given that external
reporting of such information only started about 10 years ago, has only received a significant level of
interest in the past five years, and even today only a small percentage of companies are reporting this
information. One of the most important and difficult to overcome barriers to auditing nonfinancial
information is the lack of an agreed-upon set of measurement standards. This, in turn, makes it very
difficult to create auditing standards. Another barrier is the lack of sophisticated information technology
systems for measuring nonfinancial performance. Three other barriers are important to mention. First,
audit firms are in the early stages of developing the capabilities to audit nonfinancial information. This,
combined with the lack of standards and IT systems, creates the second barrier which is a concern that
performing this function will increase their legal risk beyond the amount they already face for performing
financial audits. Third, firms which do have capabilities for auditing nonfinancial information (e.g.
engineering firms for environmental information), lack the global scale and full range of capabilities that
would be required to serve large corporations. While a large number of boutique companies could be
hired, the aggregate transaction and coordination costs can often be prohibitively high16.
Disclosure
Shareholders are informed about a company’s performance through required financial disclosures.
Similarly, for non-shareholding stakeholders to know how well a company is meeting their expectations,
credible and accurate information on the relevant performance metrics must be disclosed. Thus, another
important element is the extent to which a company is willing to be holistically transparent in its external

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16
  Similar to prior sections, we construct a variable that summarizes all the measurement and assurance practices discussed in
Panels A through D by calculating the percentage of practices that a focal company adopted. We then run a multivariate
specification and in unreported results we confirm the main findings of table 5: High Sustainability companies adopt significantly
more of the nonfinancial measurement (except Customers) and assurance practices.

                                                                15
!
reporting about its nonfinancial performance. Just as reporting of nonfinancial information to the
company’s board is an important part of corporate governance, external reporting of performance
improves managerial accountability to shareholders and other non-shareholding stakeholders. Therefore,
we expect High Sustainability companies to be more transparent and to exhibit a better balance between
financial and nonfinancial information in their external disclosures.
               We test this prediction in Panel A of Table 6 based on four metrics. First, we use ESG Disclosure
scores, calculated by both Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters; it is a measure of how complete the
company’s reporting is on a range of environmental, social, and governance topics based on a scale of 0%
to 100%. The average Bloomberg ESG Disclosure score for High Sustainability companies is 29.90%,
compared to 17.86% for the Low Sustainability ones. Respectively, the Thomson Reuters ESG Disclosure
scores are 46.38% and 36.91%.17 Both of these differences are statistically significant across the two
groups. We also compare the two groups in terms of the percentage of companies whose sustainability
reports cover their entire global activities, using Thomson Reuters ASSET4 data. All else equal, a more
global report represents a higher level of transparency and accountability than one focused only on a
company’s home country. We again find a statistically significant difference: 41.1% of the High
Sustainability companies have a global report compared to only 8.31% of the Low Sustainability
companies.
              Using data provided by SAM, we also test whether High Sustainability companies are more likely
to integrate environmental and social information with their financial reporting. This type of integration is
increasingly being advocated as a way to ensure that corporations are held accountable for their impact on
the environment and society (Eccles and Krzus, 2010) and, in fact, it was recently mandated in South
Africa. We find that 25.7% of the High Sustainability companies integrate social information and 32.4%
integrate environmental information. Correspondingly, only 5.4% and 10.8% of the Low Sustainability
companies do so. Moreover, we analyzed the difference in the balance between financial and nonfinancial
discussion in conference calls, using the Thomson Reuters Street Events conference call database
described in Section 4. We classified all words referring to items captured by the accounting system and
the stock market system as financial. We classified words that would typically be found in a balanced
scorecard (Kaplan and Norton, 1996), except for financial keywords, as nonfinancial.18 Then we
constructed a ratio that measures the number of nonfinancial keywords over financial keywords. The
average ratio for the High Sustainability companies is 0.96, suggesting that, on average, these companies

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17
   The Thomson Reuters ESG disclosure score screens fewer data points for the presence of disclosure and that is why companies
tend to have higher disclosure scores.
18
   We identified 38 keywords as nonfinancial. Examples include customer, employee, supplier, risk management, reputation,
leadership, strategy, and brand. We identified 155 keywords as financial. Examples include sales, earnings, gross margin, and
cash flow.

                                                                16
!
are using an equal number of financial and nonfinancial keywords in their discussion with the investment
community. For Low Sustainability companies, the ratio is 0.68, suggesting that they discuss less
frequently nonfinancial aspects of the business.19
7. Corporate Performance
              Our analysis shows that the High Sustainability companies behave in ways that are more
consistent with a team production model of the firm (Blair and Stout, 1999) rather than the
“principal/agent” model. This former model emphasizes the importance of constructive horizontal
relationships among stakeholders, rather than the vertical relationships between a principal (shareholders)
and an agent (executives). In the former, the role of the board is seen as representing the interests of a
dispersed group of shareholders. In the latter, the role of the board is seen as representing the interests of
the corporation itself. The board acts as a “mediating hierarch” in order to give all stakeholders the
necessary confidence to make company-specific investments which will create a “pie” larger than the one
they can create for themselves and ensure that they are rewarded, at least above what they can otherwise
earn. From this model, the elements of the High Sustainability companies follow and are internally
consistent. The board will explicitly take responsibility for non-shareholding stakeholders’ interests (e.g.
sustainability committee), and will reward executives for performance measures broader than shareholder
return. For management to execute on a strategy that takes account of non-shareholding stakeholders’
interest, as discussed earlier, engagement is essential. Maintaining these relationships requires a long-term
commitment by both the company and its stakeholders in order for sacrifices in the short-term by one
group for another to be rewarded over the long-term. This process requires a broad set of performance
metrics, including nonfinancial ones, which must be credibly reported externally so that stakeholders have
a way to monitor the extent to which their needs are being met.
              This argument generates the question of whether High Sustainability companies under or
outperform the Low Sustainability ones. On the one hand, High Sustainability companies might
underperform because, for example, they experience higher labor costs by providing more benefits to
their employees, and forego valuable business opportunities that do not fit their values and norms. On the
other hand, High Sustainability companies might outperform because they are able to attract better human
capital, establish more reliable supply chains, avoid conflicts and costly controversies with nearby
communities, and engage in more product and process innovations to remain competitive given the
additional environmental and social constraints. For example, Philips has translated its environmental
commitments to product innovation around energy-efficient light bulbs and into developing solar-power
lighting in sub-Saharan Africa.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19
   In unreported results from a multivariate analysis (OLS and logistic models as appropriate) we control for company size,
growth opportunities, and performance measured at the end of 2009. Consistent with the main results, we find that High
Sustainability companies adopt significantly more of the nonfinancial disclosure mechanisms.

                                                                17
!
        The performance question can also be framed in terms of the specific processes and practices
distinguishing the High Sustainability companies from the Low Sustainability ones. Such processes and
practices could actually hurt performance for three reasons: (1) additional costs or inefficient resource
allocation, (2) distraction of the board’s and management’s attention from creating value for shareholders,
and perhaps confusing the market as well, (3) creating expectations that cannot be met, leading to
increased risk. Some of the processes and practices in which the High Sustainability companies are
engaged, such as stakeholder engagement and measuring, reporting, auditing of nonfinancial performance
metrics, are either additional costs or they are resource commitments which could be spent in alternative
ways. Time spent by the board on sustainability issues is time not spent on other issues. When the board
is considering the interests of non-shareholding stakeholders and top management is partially rewarded
for related performance metrics, both may inadvertently fail to focus on issues that are important for
creating shareholder value. The same can be true by placing more emphasis on nonfinancial metrics in
conversations with analysts who, in turn, may begin to doubt the company’s commitment to shareholder
value, putting pressure on the company’s stock price. Similarly, an emphasis on the longer term may
reduce discipline for achieving short-term results, raising market concerns or perhaps maybe even causing
the market to think that this emphasis on the long-term is because management knows it will not be able
to deliver performance in the short term.
        Engaging stakeholders, having the board consider their interests, measuring (and reporting) on
performance for non-shareholding stakeholders, and rewarding management for delivering on it can
increase stakeholders’ expectations. Satisfying such expectations might then lead to stakeholders raising
their demands even more to try and extract higher value from their relationship with the company. These
demands can further weaken a company’s ability to deliver value to its shareholders. Moreover, higher
expectations can create an “expectation/performance” gap (Eccles, Newquist, and Schatz, 2007) which
can have negative repercussions on the part of non-shareholding stakeholders and shareholders as well.
        A counterargument can be presented for each of the three reasons cited above. In all cases, the
counterargument is consistent with the team production model of the corporation with stakeholder
engagement being the mechanism for securing the company-specific investments which are necessary.
First, by engaging with its stakeholders, the company has the opportunity to help them understand that
their interests ultimately depend upon the company’s ability to satisfy the interests of all other
stakeholders, including shareholders. As a result, the company can generate with stakeholders “win/win”
situations through innovative solutions that benefit a particular stakeholder group while, increasing the pie
for all stakeholders. These solutions are more likely if stakeholders have made the necessary company-
specific investments, another core element of the team production model. Furthermore, the costs of
engaging with stakeholders may be lower than those resulting from failure to engage (e.g. consumer

                                                     18
!
boycotts). Similarly, gathering, reporting, and auditing nonfinancial information enables management to
make better resource allocation decisions vis-à-vis the different stakeholder groups to optimize the team
production model. Reporting and auditing is also important for establishing credibility and trust in
stakeholder relations, increasing the probability that innovative “win/win” solutions will unravel.
              Second is the distraction argument. We suggest that stakeholder engagement will be most
effective when taken seriously by top management. Having the board focused on sustainability and
paying top management for sustainability performance are two powerful mechanisms for making this
happen. Making investments to improve nonfinancial performance in the short term that will pay off in
the form of improved financial performance in the long term requires that investors believe management
has a strong “business case” for these investments. More robust analyst calls that discuss financial and
nonfinancial performance in an integrated way and from a long-term perspective, backed up by the
reporting and auditing of nonfinancial performance metrics, give investors the confidence that
management does indeed have such a case.
              Third is the increasing expectations argument. In a well-managed team production model
approach, this is unlikely to happen. Stakeholders, all of whom have made company-specific investments,
understand that the value for them depends upon value being created for others, even accepting that
tradeoffs often exist, at least in the short term. A board focused on sustainability in its role as a
“mediating hierarch” gives stakeholders confidence that this will take place. In fact, we would argue that
the risk of increasing expectations is actually greater when engagement is less. In this case, stakeholders
do not have the benefit of a broader and deeper understanding of how their objectives are related to those
of other stakeholders. Consequently, they only focus on their own, “raising the bar” every time their
demands have been met until management can no longer do so, perhaps resulting in campaigns that
impose additional costs on the company.
              Empirical examinations of the link between sustainability and financial performance to date have
resulted in contradictory findings, ranging from a positive to a negative to a U-shaped, or even to an
inverse-U shaped relation (Margolis and Walsh, 2003; Peloza, 2009; Aguinis and Glavas, 2012).
Importantly, none of these studies has measured financial performance over long enough periods of time
to allow for superior sustainability performance to impact either positively or negatively financial
performance. To delve into the performance implications we track the stock market performance of
companies in both groups from 1993 to 2010. The use of stock returns addresses concerns over reverse
causality in the absence of private information20. Accordingly, we find that High Sustainability companies

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
20
  In the presence of private information, reverse causality is a concern. For example, if managers with private information that
their companies are going to outperform in the future adopt environmental and social policies today, then the expectation of
higher stock returns is causing the adoption of these policies. However, we believe that this explanation is unlikely to obtain for a
number of reasons. First, we are not aware of a theory suggesting that managers expecting to outperform market expectations in

                                                                19
!
significantly outperform Low Sustainability companies. Investing $1 in the beginning of 1993 in a value-
weighted (equal-weighted) portfolio of High Sustainability companies would have grown to $22.6 ($14.3)
by the end of 2010. In contrast, investing $1 in the beginning of 1993 in a value-weighted (equal-
weighted) portfolio of control companies would have only grown to $15.4 ($11.7) by the end of 2010.
Table 7 presents estimates from a four-factor model that controls for the market, size, book-to-market,
and momentum factors. We find that both portfolios exhibit statistically significant positive abnormal
performance relative to the market that may be attributed, to a considerable extent, to the way we selected
our sample (i.e. survivorship bias). However, the relative performance difference is not affected since, by
construction of our sample, both groups are equally likely to have survived. Accordingly, we find that the
annual abnormal performance is higher for the High Sustainability group compared to the Low
Sustainability group by 4.8% (significant at less than 5% level) on a value-weighted base and by 2.3%
(significant at less than 10% level) on an equal-weighted base. In fact, when we examine the performance
of the two portfolios, we find that the High Sustainability portfolio significantly outperforms the control
portfolio in 11 out of the 18 years, and exhibits lower volatility. Whereas the standard deviation of
monthly abnormal returns is 1.43% and 1.72% on a value-weighted and equal-weighted base, respectively
for the High Sustainability group, the corresponding estimates, for the Low Sustainability group, are
1.72% and 1.79%.21
               Because in our sample selection process we identify firms that were included in the ASSET4
dataset until 2003 we also examine the stock price performance of the two groups after 2003. We find that
the annual abnormal performance is higher for the High Sustainability group compared to the Low
Sustainability group by 3.0% (significant at less than 5% level) on a value-weighted base and by 2.5%
(significant at less than 10% level) on an equal-weighted base. This result suggests that survivorship bias
and selection in the ASSET4 dataset arising from our research design is unlikely to account for the
estimated performance differences.
               To ensure that our results are not driven by long-run mean reversion in equity prices (Poterba and
Summers, 1988) or accounting profitability (Fama and French, 2000), we also examine the performance
of the two groups for the three years before 1993 (untabulated). We find that the two groups exhibit very

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
the future would be more likely to adopt environmental and social policies today. More importantly, empirical evidence suggests
that managers are unable to forecast returns past 100 days (Jenter, Lewellen, and Warner, 2011). Therefore, accurately
forecasting returns over the next 3, 5, or 10 years is rather unlikely.
21
   We performed an additional analysis where for each pair of matched companies we construct a portfolio that buys the High
Sustainability companies and sells short the Low Sustainability companies. For each one of those 90 pairs we run a four-factor
model and estimate 90 alphas. If an alpha is positive it means that the High Sustainability company has outperformed the Low
Sustainability company after taking into account exposure to systematic risk factors, and vice versa. In untabulated results, 78%
of the estimated alphas are positive, suggesting that for 78% of the pairs, the High Sustainability company has a higher
performance than the Low Sustainability company. Thirty-eight percent of the alphas are positive and significant. We note that
only 3.5% of the pairs have negative and significant alphas. The parametric test that alphas are significantly different from zero
has a p-value of 0.0123 and the non-parametric test has a p-value of 0.0235

                                                                                               20
!
similar performance throughout these three years: cumulative stock returns are higher for the High
Sustainability group by only 1%. These results are consistent with our previous finding that matching in
any one of the years between 1990 and1993 has little impact on the composition of the pairs.
Sector Analysis
To shed light on the mechanisms that generate this outperformance, we construct a cross-sectional model
where the dependent variable is the alpha for each company from the four-factor model and the
independent variable is an indicator variable for whether a company is a member of the High
Sustainability group. We interact this variable with three additional indicator variables, each representing
sectors where we expect this outperformance to be more pronounced. The first takes the value of one for
companies that are in business-to-consumer (B2C) sectors and zero for companies that are in business-to-
business (B2B) sectors. We expect that High Sustainability companies will outperform their counterparts
more in B2C businesses. In B2C businesses, individual consumers are the customers, in contrast to B2B
businesses where companies and governments are the customers. Arguably, the sensitivity of individual
consumers to the company’s public perception is higher (e.g., Corey, 1991; Du, Bhattacharya, and Sen
2007; Lev, Petrovits, and Radhakrishnan, 2010) and, as a result, the link between sustainability and
greater customer satisfaction, loyalty, and buying decisions should be stronger in B2C businesses. In fact,
several articles in marketing find that social responsibility initiatives have a significant influence on
multiple customer-related outcomes (Bhattacharya and Sen, 2004). For example, based on results from
laboratory experiments, sustainability practices (in their context termed as CSR) are reported to affect,
either directly or indirectly, consumer product responses (Brown 1998; Brown and Dacin 1997),
customer–company identification (Sen and Bhattacharya, 2001), customer donations to nonprofit
organizations (Lichtenstein, Drumwright, and Bridgette 2004), and customers’ product attitude (Berens,
Van Riel, and Van Bruggen 2005). More recently, Tian et al. (2011) find that Chinese consumers, who
show a high level of awareness and trust of sustainability (in their context termed as CSR), are more
likely to provide a positive corporate evaluation, product association, and purchase intention for
companies with a good sustainability record.
        The second moderator is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for companies that are in
sectors where competition is predominantly driven by brand and reputation. Competing in such industries
usually requires employing high quality human capital for developing new products and sophisticated
marketing campaigns, and investment in continuous and rapid innovation. In these sectors, we expect that
the link between sustainability and attracting better employees, attaining higher levels of innovation, and
the management of reputational risk will be stronger. We proxy for sectors where brands and reputation
are relatively more important by constructing an indicator variable taking the value of one for sectors that
score at the fourth quartile of the market-to-book ratio in 1993 across all companies.

                                                     21
!
              Finally, the third moderator is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for sectors where
companies’ products significantly depend upon extracting large amounts of natural resources (e.g., oil and
gas, chemicals, industrial metals, and mining). Particularly in recent years, companies in these sectors
have been subject to intense public scrutiny and many times have been in conflict with their local
communities. Moreover, environmental impact and resource scarcity are increasingly pressing social
issues that have increased regulation and put pressure on companies to minimize their environmental
impact by becoming more resource efficient. Therefore, we expect the link between sustainability and a
more secure license to operate, better community relations, and commercial benefits from and resource
efficiency to be stronger in these sectors.
               Table 8 presents the results from the cross-sectional model. In all specifications we include sector
fixed effects. In the first column, the model includes as an independent variable only the indicator
variable for High Sustainability companies. As expected, the coefficient is positive and significant. In the
second column we introduce the interaction terms with the moderator variables. All three coefficients on
the interaction terms are positive, as predicted. The coefficients on High Sustainability x B2C and High
Sustainability x Brand are significant at the 5% level. The coefficient on High Sustainability x Natural
Resources is significant at the 10% level. High Sustainability companies in B2C or Brand sectors
outperform their counterparts in 13 out of 18 calendar years whereas High Sustainability companies in the
                                                                                                       22
Natural Resources sector outperform their counterparts in 11 out of 18 years.                               Overall, these results
support our predictions that companies that integrate social and environmental issues in their
organizational processes and practices have benefited relatively more in B2C sectors, in sectors where
companies compete on the basis of brands and human capital, and where companies’ products depend on
extracting large amounts of natural resources.23
Alternative Explanations
Alternative Explanation I: Price Pressure from SRI funds


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
22
   We studied the outperformance of High Sustainability firms over time in the three sectors. We did not observe any similarity
across sectors in terms of when the outperformance starts. Outperformance in natural resources started later than outperformance
in the brand and B2C sectors.
23
   We also explored policy adoption within the Natural Resources, B2C, and Brand sectors. In untabulated results, we find that
the Natural Resources sector has significantly lower adoption of social policies and significantly higher adoption of
environmental policies. Firms in the B2C category exhibit the opposite pattern: a higher adoption of social policies and a lower
adoption of environmental policies. Firms in the Brand category have a higher adoption of policies across almost all issues.
Through cluster analysis, we also check for any specific configurations of policies appearing more often within the High
Sustainability group, but do not find any strong evidence of such clusters. The only clustering that somewhat appears in the data
is a division between environmental and social policies. We therefore create three categories: the environmental cluster which
accounts for 21% of the High Sustainability firms, the social cluster (26%) and the no policy cluster (53%). We note that these
clusters are not tight and their statistical significance is moderate, at best. Nevertheless, in untabulated results we reproduce Table
8 by including indicators for firms that appear to be members of an environmental policy cluster or a social policy cluster (no
policy is the omitted category). The results suggest that the coefficient on the social policy cluster has a significant positive
coefficient whereas the coefficient on the environmental policy cluster is also positive but its significance is moderate.

                                                                 22
!
One potential alternative explanation for the higher stock returns for High Sustainability companies is
price pressure from the emergence of Socially Responsible Investing (SRI). According to the Social
Investment Forum, institutional investors that claim to incorporate ESG data into their investment
decisions had $162 billion in assets under management in 1995 and $2.5 trillion in 2010. However, the
number of SRI funds that actually practice ESG integration in a systematic way is lower, with most SRI
funds practicing “negative screening” (i.e., excluding from their investment universe specific sectors,
such as tobacco and weapons manufacturers), an investment strategy that does not affect our results since
the two groups have exactly the same industry composition. Nonetheless, to better understand whether
our results are driven by price pressure, and to mitigate concerns around the inefficiency of stock prices as
a performance metric, we examine the accounting performance of the two groups of companies, which
should not be affected by price pressure in stock markets. Moreover, the use of accounting measures
addresses concerns over stock price as a performance measure in the presence of market inefficiencies
that can prevent operating performance from being reflected in stock prices.
         We find that High Sustainability companies outperform the Low Sustainability ones when we
consider accounting rates of return. Based on ROA, investing $1 in assets in the beginning of 1993 in a
value-weighted (equal-weighted) portfolio of High Sustainability companies would have grown to $7.1
($3.5) by the end of 2010. In contrast, investing $1 in assets in a value-weighted (equal-weighted)
portfolio of control companies would have grown to $4.4 ($3.3). Based on ROE, investing $1 in book
value of equity in the beginning of 1993 in a value-weighted (equal-weighted) portfolio of High
Sustainability companies would have grown to $31.7 ($15.8) by the end of 2010. In contrast, investing $1
in book value of equity in a value-weighted (equal-weighted) portfolio of control companies would have
grown to $25.7 ($9.3).24 The portfolio of High Sustainability companies outperforms the portfolio of
control companies in 14 out of 18 years.
Alternative Explanation II: Sustainability as a Luxury Good
Another alternative explanation is that the adoption of environmental and social policies is a luxury good
that companies can afford when they are performing well. Therefore to include in the Low Sustainability
group companies that throughout the years did not adopt these policies is equivalent to selecting
companies that will underperform. Econometrically, a bias in our results would only arise if an
unidentified characteristic is correlated with the adoption of sustainability policies, is uncorrelated with
performance in the early 90s, and it is correlated with performance after 1993. However, the argument is
inconsistent with the fact that in the early 1990s the two groups of companies had statistically identical
performance but had adopted very different policies. It is also inconsistent with operating performance
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
24
  It is worth noting that a substantial number of firms in the Low Sustainability group adopted a few environmental and social
policies throughout the 2000s. If this is not purely due to greenwashing, then this might bias our results against finding
performance differences across the two groups.

                                                             23
!
and leverage not being significant in the logit model of propensity score matching, and with the fact that
Low Sustainability companies have positive alphas in the future. Moreover, when we test if past
profitability is correlated with future adoption of policies (i.e. changes in Sustainability Policies) we do
not find a significant association. The coefficient on past performance (e.g., three-year cumulative ROA,
ROE, or stock returns) is slightly negative and insignificant. Finally, the luxury good argument would
predict that companies would drop sustainability policies in challenging times, such as during the
financial crisis of 2008 and 2009. Yet, contrary to this argument, we find that companies increased the
number of policies during the financial crisis. Sustainability Policies, our equal-weighted policy index,
increased from 0.28 in 2007 to 0.33, 0.34, and 0.36 in years 2008, 2009, and 2010 respectively.
Alternative Explanation III: Omitted Risk Factor
The stock market outperformance documented here might be driven by an omitted risk factor that we
have been unable to identify and account for. Accordingly, we examine analyst surprises to annual
earnings announcements to differentiate between the omitted risk factor explanation and the market not
fully incorporating in stock prices the future profitability of High Sustainability companies. Table 9
shows the results of analyzing forecast errors for the two groups. We report results using as dependent
variables forecast errors (i.e., actual earnings minus the consensus forecasts) deflated by both the standard
deviation of analyst forecasts (SUE) and the absolute consensus forecast (%FE). Consistent with previous
research, we use the most recent consensus forecast error before the earnings announcement (Edmans,
2011). The coefficient on High Sustainability is positive and significant, suggesting that High
Sustainability companies have higher positive forecast errors and analysts being more positively surprised
by the future earnings of these companies.
Alternative Explanation IV: Survivorship Bias and Future Default Rates
For our main sample we identified companies that had survived until the late 2000s since we were
interested in studying companies that have adopted environmental and social policies for multiple
consecutive years. Because we have imposed the survivorship criterion for both groups of companies, it
should not affect the relative performance of the two groups. However, one remaining concern is that
being a High Sustainability company may be a high risk-high return strategy, linked to a higher
probability of default. In untabulated results, we calculate the index of Sustainability Policies for all US
companies with available data in 2003. Then we calculate the probability of default and liquidation for
each company between 2004 and 2010. We do not observe any systematic relation between Sustainability
Policies and probability of default. Controlling for other determinants of default, we find that the
coefficient on Sustainability Policies is negative and insignificant, suggesting that companies that have
adopted more such policies have a lower probability of default, even though this estimate is not reliably
different than zero.

                                                     24
!
Alternative Explanation V: Corporate Governance as a Correlated Omitted Variable
Correlated omitted variables could be causing both the adoption of sustainability policies and future
performance. Our matching procedure attempted to create two statistically identical groups of companies,
but other characteristics that were not included could still be influencing the results. One important such
variable is corporate governance. Gompers et al. (2003) show that companies with more shareholder-
friendly governance provisions (G-index) outperformed their competitors in the 1990s. If High
Sustainability companies have a lower G-index, then our results might be driven by governance
differences. However, we find that companies classified as High Sustainability have a higher G-index
(average is 9.6) compared to Low Sustainability companies (average is 8.2), suggesting that High
Sustainability companies have more powerful boards and less shareholder-friendly provisions, consistent
with a team-production model of governance. Moreover, we analyzed the board characteristics of the two
groups of companies in terms of independence and size and did not find any differences across the two
groups.
8. Discussion
In this article, we study a matched sample of 180 US companies, 90 of which we classify as High
Sustainability companies while another 90 we classify as Low Sustainability companies The Low
Sustainability companies largely correspond to the traditional model of corporate profit maximization in
which social and environmental issues are typically regarded as externalities. Often enough, responsibility
for forcing corporations to account for such externalities, whether positive or negative, rests with
governments and various laws and regulations that postulate remedial actions. The High Sustainability
companies, in contrast, not only pay attention to externalities but, in fact, they are characterized by
distinct governance mechanisms which directly involve the board in sustainability issues and link
executive compensation to sustainability objectives; a much higher level of and deeper stakeholder
engagement, coupled with mechanisms for making it as effective as possible, including reporting; a
longer-term time horizon in their external communications which is matched by a larger proportion of
long-term investors; greater attention to nonfinancial measures regarding employees; a greater emphasis
on external environmental and social standards for selecting, monitoring, and measuring the performance
of their suppliers; and a higher level of transparency in their disclosure of nonfinancial information. In
addition, during the 18-year period we study, the High Sustainability companies outperform the Low
Sustainability ones in terms of both stock market and accounting measures while the market did not
actually expect this outperformance. The processes, practices and performance of the High Sustainability
companies are consistent with a team production theory of the firm according to which the corporation
represents a “nexus of firm-specific investments” by stakeholders rather than a “nexus of contracts” and
constitutes a solution to team production problems (Blair and Stout, 1999: p.258).

                                                    25
!
        We note that as with any study that lacks random assignment of treatment in a laboratory setting,
causality rather than correlation between the independent and dependent variables of interest is up for
debate. While we believe that our research design has many appealing characteristics, we acknowledge
the possibility that confounding factors might still exist. Future research can examine the robustness and
generalizability of our results to other settings, in other countries, and across alternative company types,
such as private or smaller companies.
        We suggest several areas for future research. The first area is to develop a better understanding of
the conditions under which companies decide to incorporate social and environmental issues into their
organizational processes and practices. In this study, we do not observe the transition of any company
from the Low Sustainability to the High Sustainability group. This finding raises the question of why
managers of Low Sustainability firms do not adopt more sustainability policies given that in the long-
term, these policies are not costly in terms of sacrificing financial performance. We speculate that they do
not because of three main reasons. First, an argument based on agency could partially explain the non-
adoption of these policies. We find that High Sustainability firms exhibit significantly lower stock return
volatility, which in turn implies a lower valuation of executive stock options, thus directly impacting the
wealth of senior executives. Indeed, a rich literature documents how managers influence stock return
volatility to increase their executive compensation (Bebchuck, Fried and Walker, 2002). Second, a long
literature within strategy suggests that typically managers suffer from (cognitive) inertia (or path-
dependency) and in many cases they are slow (or “boundedly rational”) when it comes to adapting
business models, operating conditions, and making strategic decisions, even when all these actions could
be financially beneficial (e.g. Henderson and Clark, 1990; Christensen, 1997; Tripsas and Gavetti, 2000).
Third, according to our findings, numerous organizational processes and structures are consistent with a
commitment to sustainability in terms of governance, stakeholder engagement, long-term orientation and
reporting and disclosure. Yet existing literature suggests that even if managers know that they should be
adopting such sustainability policies, they might not know exactly what to do with each one of them, how
to effectively integrate them, and how to reconfigure the entire organization towards sustainability since
the required knowledge can be tacit and/or complex (Winter, 1987; Winter, 1988), or may involves
building complementarities (Rivkin, 2000). We note, though, that this paper should not be taken to imply
that firms permanently cannot switch from the Low to the High Sustainability group. Indeed, what our
analysis does seem to point to is a sufficient persistence, over many years, of those organizational
processes and practices that may be linked to performance differentials. Therefore, future studies can
build on the literature that explores persistence in fundamental organizational traits, but concurrently
seeks to understand processes of change over time via the adoption of organizational practices that are
consistent with the given organizational trait. A useful starting point could be Zollo and Winter (2002)

                                                    26
!
who develop a conceptual model to discuss mechanisms of deliberate organizational learning that co-
evolve over time and enable organizations to develop dynamic capabilities (Teece, Pisano and Shuen,
1997).
          The second area is the mechanisms by which sustainability issues get integrated. Two companies
under the same conditions favoring the integration of sustainability issues could differ in the extent,
speed, and sequence with which they are able to do so. Do the elements of corporate governance,
stakeholder engagement, long-term time horizon, and broader metrics for measurement and reporting
evolve simultaneously and to the same extent? Interestingly, even on those characteristics where the High
Sustainability companies are significantly different than the Low Sustainability ones, the absolute levels
of adoption are relatively low in most instances. This suggests that adoption of these practices within an
existing organizational configuration is costly and that frictions may impede the creation of sustainable
organizations. Therefore, understanding the choice amongst the range of available sustainability policies
constitutes a promising area for future research based on the findings of this study. It also raises another
interesting question, which is “What is the optimal degree of adoption of sustainability policies and
practices?” Is optimality defined in terms of equal attention to all of the elements within some constraints
or can a company practice one element to a very strong degree and pay less attention to others? Since
sustainability involves tradeoffs, both across financial and nonfinancial objectives, and between
nonfinancial objectives themselves, such choices need to be well understood in order to inform decision-
making.
          Moreover, our study contributes to the literature that focuses on the team production model of the
corporation (e.g. Blair and Stout, 1999) by providing empirical evidence of the criticality of social and
environmental actors as key corporate stakeholders. Our findings also hint towards the possibility that
organizational structures that reinforce the team production model may be associated with long-term
outperformance. Therefore, we lend preliminary support to the idea that conceptualizing the public
organization as a solution to team production problems might be a superior conceptualization vis-à-vis the
principal-agent model. Importantly, our work contributes towards a more nuanced understanding of the
shifting perceptions surrounding the shareholder-primacy model. Blair and Stout (1999) indicate that the
historical redirection of wealth towards shareholders, and thus the indirect reinforcement of the
shareholder primacy model, may have been the result of a shift in market forces. To the extent that global
social and environmental challenges are currently re-shuffling market forces in a way that steeply
increases the cost of remaining in the productive coalition for non-shareholding stakeholders (e.g. carbon
pricing), the evidence for long-term outperformance that we document here may lead us to expect in the
future a rebalancing of the allocation of corporate surplus away from shareholders and towards non-



                                                     27
!
shareholding stakeholders. This will undoubtedly have important implications for the notion of
shareholder primacy.

                                                  References

Aguinis, H., and Glavas, A. 2012. What We Know and Don’t Know About Corporate Social Responsibility A
         Review and Research Agenda. Journal of Management, 38(4): 932-968.
Balotti, R. and Hanks, J. 1999. Giving at the office: a reappraisal of charitable contributions by corporations.
         Business Lawyer 54 (3): 956-966.
Barnett, M. L. 2007. Stakeholder influence capacity and the variability of financial returns to corporate social
         responsibility. Academy of Management Review, 32(3): 794-816.
Bebchuk, L.A., J.M. Fried and D.I. Walker. 2002. “Managerial power and rent extraction in the design of
executive compensation”, The University of Chicago Law Review 69:751−846
Berens, G., van Riel, C.B.M., van Bruggen, G.H. 2005. Corporate Associations and Consumer Product
         Responses: The Moderating Role of Corporate Brand Dominance. Journal of Marketing, 69 (July),
         35–48.
Berman, S. L., Wicks, A. C., Kotha, S., & Jones, T. M. 1999. Does stakeholder orientation matter? The
         relationship between stakeholder management models and firm financial performance. Academy of
         Management Journal, 42(5): 488-506.
Bhattacharya, C.B.and Sen, S. 2004. Doing Better at Doing Good. California Management Review, 47 (1), 9–
         24.
Blair, M., and Stout, L. 1999. A Team Production Theory of Corporate Law. Virginia Law Review, 85 (2):
         248-328.
Brochet, F., Loumioti, M., and Serafeim, G. 2012. Short-termism, Investor Clientele, and Corporate
         Performance. Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Brown, T.J. 1998. Corporate Associations in Marketing: Antecedents and Consequences. Corporate
         Reputation Review, 1 (3): 215–233.
Brown, T.J. and Dacin, P.A. 1997. The Company and the Product: Corporate Associations and Consumer
         Product Responses. Journal of Marketing, 61 (January): 68–84.
Brown, W., Helland, E., and Smith, K. 2006. Corporate Philanthropic Practices. Journal of Corporate Finance
         12: 855-877.
Bushee, B. J. 2001. Do Institutional Investors Prefer Near-Term Earnings over Long-Run Value?
         Contemporary Accounting Research, 18(2): 207-246
Cheng, B., Ioannou, I. and Serafeim, G. 2014. Corporate Social Responsibility and Access to Finance.
         Strategic Management Journal, 35 (1): 1-23.
Choi, J., and Wang, H., 2009. Stakeholder Relations and the Persistence of Corporate Financial Performance.
         Strategic Management Journal, 30: 895-907
Christensen, C. M. 1997. Making strategy: Learning by doing. Harvard Business Review, 75(6): 141-156.
Cochran, P. L. and Wood, R. A. 1984. Corporate social responsibility and financial performance. The Academy
         of Management Journal, 27(1): 42-56.
Corey, E. R. 1991. Industrial marketing: cases and concepts. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Du, S., Bhattacharya, C. B., and Sen, S. 2007. Reaping relational rewards from corporate social responsibility:
         the role of competitive positioning. International Journal of Research in Marketing 24: 224-241.
Eccles, R. G., Newquist, S., and Schatz, R. 2007. Reputation and its risks. Harvard Business Review, February.
Eccles, R. G., and Krzus, M. 2010. One Report: Integrated Reporting for a Sustainable Strategy. New York:
         John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Eccles, R., and Serafeim G. 2013. The Performance Frontier: Innovating for a Sustainable Strategy. “The
         Big Idea” Harvard Business Review, 91 (5).
Edmans, A. 2011. Does the Stock Market Fully Value Intangibles? Employee Satisfaction and Equity Prices.
         Journal of Financial Economics, 101: 621-640.
Fama, E., and French, K. 2000. Forecasting Profitability and Earnings. Journal of Business, 73 (2): 161-175.



                                                      28
!
Foo, L.M., 2007. Stakeholder engagement in emerging economies: considering the strategic benefits of
         stakeholder engagement in a cross-cultural and geopolitical context. Corporate Governance, 7(4):
         379-387.
Friedman, M., 1970. The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits. New York Times Magazine,
         13 Sept., 32 (33): 122-126.
Freeman, R. E., 1984. Strategic Management: A stakeholder perspective. Boston, MA: Piman, United States.
Galaskiewicz, J. 1997. An Urban Grants Economy Revisited: Corporate Charitable Contributions in the Twin
         Cities, 1979-81, 1987-89. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(3): 445-471.
Greening, D. W. and Turban, D. B., 2000. Corporate Social Performance as a Competitive Advantage in
         Attracting a Quality Workforce. Business & Society, 39(3): 254-280.
Gompers, P., Ishii, J., and Metrick, A. 2003. Corporate Governance and Equity Prices. Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 118 (1): 107-156.
Govindarajan, V., and Gupta, A. 1985. Linking Control Systems to Business Unit Strategy: Impact on
         Performance. Accounting, Organizations, and Society 10 (1): 51-66.
Henderson, R. and Clark K. 1990. Architectural Innovation: The Reconfiguration of Existing Product
         Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35:9-31.
         Hill, C., and Jones, G. 2001. Strategic Management. Houghton Mifflin.
Hillman, A. J. and Keim, G. D., 2001. Shareholder Value, Stakeholder Management, and Social Issues: What's
         the Bottom Line? Strategic Management Journal, 22(2): 125-139.
Ioannou, I. and Serafeim, G. 2012. What Drives Corporate Social Performance? The Role of Nation-level
         Institutions. Journal of International Business Studies 43: 834-864.
Ittner, C., Larcker, D., and Rajan, M. 1997. The Choice of Performance Measures in Annual Bonus Contracts.
         The Accounting Review 72 (2): 231-255.
Jensen, M. 2001. Value Maximization, Stakeholder Theory and the Corporate Objective Function. Journal of
         Applied Corporate Finance (fall): 8-21.
Jenter, D., Lewellen, K. and Warner, J.B. 2011. Security Issue Timing: What Do Managers Know, and When
         Do They Know It? The Journal of Finance, 66(2):413-443.
Kaplan, R., and Norton, D. 1996. Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Management System. Harvard
         Business Review 74 (1): 75-85.
Kaplan, R., and Norton D. 2008. Execution Premium: Linking Strategy to Operations for Competitive
         Advantage. Harvard Business School Press.
Laplume, A. O., Sonpar, K., & Litz, R. A. 2008. Stakeholder theory: Reviewing a theory that moves us.
         Journal of management, 34(6): 1152-1189.
Lev, B., Petrovits, C., and Radhakrishnan, S. Is doing good good for you? How corporate charitable
         contributions enhance revenue growth. Strategic Management Journal 31: 182-200.
Lichtenstein, D. R., Drumwright, M.E. and Braig, B.M. 2004.The Effect of Corporate Social Responsibility on
         Customer Donations to Corporate-Supported Nonprofits. Journal of Marketing, 68(October): 16–32.
Jones, T.M., 1995. Instrumental stakeholder theory: A Synthesis of Ethics and Economics. Academy of
         Management Review, 20: 404-437.
Laverty, K. J. 1996. Economic “Short-Termism”: The Debate, The Unresolved Issues, and The Implications
         for Management Practice and Research. The Academy of Management Review, 21(3): 825-860.
Margolis, J. D. and Walsh, J. P. 2003. Misery loves companies: Rethinking social initiatives by business.
         Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(2): 268-305.
Navarro, P. 1988. Why do corporations give to charity? Journal of Business, 61(1): 65-93.
Peloza, J. 2009. The Challenge of Measuring Financial Impacts from Investments in Corporate Social
         Performance. Journal of Management, 35(6): 1518-1541
Porter, M., and Kramer, M. 2011. Creating Shared Value. Harvard Business Review, 89 (1/2): 62-77.
Poterba, J.M. and Summers, L.H. 1988. Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and Implications. Journal
         of Financial Economics, 22(1): 27-59.
Rivkin, J. W. 2000. Imitation of complex strategies. Management Science, 46(6): 824-844.
Sen, S. and Bhattacharya, C.B. 2001. Does Doing Good Always Lead to Doing Better? Consumer Reactions
         to Corporate Social Responsibility. Journal of Marketing Research, 38 (May): 225–244.



                                                     29
!
Sen, S., Gurhan-Canli, Z. And Morwitz, V. 2001. Withholding Consumption: A Social Dilemma Perspective
         on Consumer Boycotts. Journal of Consumer Research, 28(3): 399-417.
Simnett, R., A. Vantraelen, and W. F. Chua. 2009. Assurance on Sustainability Reports: An International
Comparison. The Accounting Review 84 (May): 937–967.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., and Shuen, A. 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic
         Management Journal, 18(7): 509-533.
Tian, Z., Wang, R., and Yang, W. 2011. Consumer responses to corporate social responsibility (CSR) in
         China. Journal of Business Ethics, 101(2): 197-212.
Tripsas, M., and Gavetti, G. 2000. Capabilities, cognition, and inertia: Evidence from digital imaging.
         Strategic Management Journal, 21(10-11): 1147-1161.
Winter, S. G. 1987. “Knowledge and Competence as Strategic Assets,” in The Competitive Challenge:
         Strategies for Industrial Innovation and Renewal, D.J. Teece, ed., (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1987),
         pp. 159-184.
Winter, S. G. 1988. On Coase, Competence, and the Corporation. JL Econ. & Org., 4: 163.
Zollo, M., and Winter, S. G. 2002. Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities. Organization
         Science, 13(3): 339-351.


                                   Table 1 Summary statistics for two groups
                                    Panel A: Sector composition of the sample
                     Sector                    % of sample         !!                      Sector                 % of sample
    Oil & Gas Producers                          4.40%           !!     Household Goods & Home Construction         3.30%
    Oil Equipment, Services & Distribution       3.30%           !!     Leisure Goods                               3.30%
    Chemicals                                    5.60%           !!     Personal Goods                              2.20%
    Industrial Metals                            1.10%           !!     Health Care Equipment & Services            7.80%
    Mining                                       1.10%           !!     Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology             4.40%
    Construction & Materials                     1.10%           !!     Retailers                                   5.60%
    Aerospace & Defense                          1.10%           !!     Media                                       3.30%
    General Industrials                          4.40%           !!     Travel & Leisure                            3.30%
    Electronic & Electrical Equipment            2.20%           !!     Fixed Line Telecommunications               2.20%
    Industrial Engineering                       3.30%           !!     Mobile Telecommunications                   1.10%
    Industrial Transportation                    1.10%           !!     Electricity                                 6.70%
    Support Services                             1.10%           !!     Gas, Water & Multi-utilities                3.30%
    Automobiles & Parts                          3.30%           !!     Software & Computer Services                5.60%
    Beverages                                    1.10%           !!     Technology Hardware & Equipment             8.90%
    Food Producers                               4.40%           !!     Total                                      100.00%



               Panel B: Company characteristics across two groups at the year of matching (1993)
                                        Total assets          ROA                           ROE
             Sustainability   N    Average      St. Dev.     Average            St. Dev.   Average    St. Dev.
             Low              90    8,182        28,213       7.54                8.02      10.89      20.61
             High             90    8,591        22,230       7.86                7.54      11.17      16.15
             p-value diff             0.914                     0.781                         0.919

                                    Leverage                 Turnover                       MTB
            Sustainability    N     Average      St. Dev.    Average            St. Dev.   Average     St. Dev.
            Low               90      0.57         0.19        1.05               0.62      3.41         2.18
            High              90      0.56         0.18        1.02               0.57      3.44         1.88

                                                            30
!
           p-value diff                     0.726                       0.703                       0.927
Panel A: Frequency tabulation of sector membership for the 180 companies in the sample.
Panel B: All measures are calculated at the end of fiscal year in 1993. Averages and standard deviations across the High
Sustainability and the Low Sustainability group are presented. Each group includes 90 companies. ROA is net income plus net
interest expense after tax over total assets. ROE is net income over shareholder’s equity. Leverage is total liabilities over total
assets. Turnover is sales over assets. MTB is stock price over book value of equity per share. p-value is derived from a test of the
equality of the means across the two groups.

                                            Table 2: Corporate Governance
                                                                                      Sustainability          Difference
         Governance                                                                  Low        High           p-value
         Board
         Formal Board Responsibility / Corporate Citizenship                        21.6%         52.7%         <0.001
         Sustainability committee                                                   14.7%         40.9%         <0.001
         Compensation
         Variable Compensation Metrics / Social Metrics                             21.6%         35.1%          0.022
         Variable Compensation Metrics / Environmental Metrics                       8.1%         17.6%          0.011
         Variable Compensation Metrics / External Perception Metrics                10.8%         32.4%          0.004
This panel reports the frequency of governance practices across the two groups, low and high sustainability. p-value is derived
from a test of the equality of the frequencies across the two groups. “Formal Board Responsibility / Sustainability” is the
percentage of companies that the board of directors explicitly assumes formal responsibility over corporate social responsibility
or sustainability. “Sustainability committee” is the percentage of companies with a separate sustainability board committee.
“Variable Compensation Metrics / Social Metrics” is the percentage of companies with pre-defined corporate social indicators
(e.g. corporate Health & Safety figure) relevant for the variable compensation of Executive / Top Management. “Variable
Compensation Metrics / Environmental Metrics” is the percentage of companies with pre-defined corporate environmental
indicators (e.g. corporate Emission reduction) relevant for the variable compensation of Executive / Top Management. “Variable
Compensation Metrics / External Perception Metrics” is the percentage of companies with pre-defined corporate external
perception indicators (e.g. reputational risks, customer satisfaction, feedback from stakeholder engagement) relevant for the
variable compensation of Executive / Top Management.

                                           Table 3: Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                        Sustainability          Difference
                      Stakeholder Engagement                           Low        High           p-value
                      Prior
                      Opportunities Risks Examination                  2.7%         31.1%         <0.001
                      Stakeholder Identification                      10.8%         45.9%         <0.001
                      Training                                         0.0%         14.9%         <0.001
                      During
                      Concerns                                         2.7%         32.4%         <0.001
                      Grievance Mechanism                              2.7%         18.9%         <0.001
                      Common Understanding                            13.5%         36.5%         <0.001
                      Scope Agreement                                  8.1%         36.5%         <0.001
                      Targets                                          0.0%         16.2%         <0.001
                      After
                      Board Feedback                                   5.4%         32.4%         <0.001
                      Result Reporting                                 0.0%         31.1%         <0.001
                      Public Reports                                   0.0%         20.3%         <0.001
This panel reports the frequency of stakeholder engagement practices across the two groups, low and high sustainability. p-value
is derived from a test of the equality of the frequencies across the two groups. “Opportunities Risks Examination” is the
percentage of companies that undertake an examination of costs, opportunities and risks prior to a particular stakeholder
engagement. “Stakeholder Identification” is the percentage of companies that identify issues and stakeholders that appear to be
most important for long-term success. “Training” is the percentage of companies with local managers getting training in
stakeholder engagement. “Concerns” is the percentage of companies for which the process of engagement ensures that all
stakeholders can rise their concerns. “Grievance Mechanism” is the percentage of companies where grievance mechanisms are
agreed upon by all involved parties. “Common Understanding” is the percentage of companies which formally pursue a

                                                                31
!
development of a common understanding of issues relevant to the underlying problem, such as technical terms. “Scope
Agreement” is the percentage of companies that pursue mutual agreement on the type of engagement (type of meetings such as
group meetings, one-on-ones, frequency of meetings, exchange of information, roles of each party etc.) “Targets” is the
percentage of companies with stakeholder engagement that targets are set and agreed upon by all involved parties. “Board
Feedback” is the percentage of companies for which feedback from stakeholders is provided to board/supervisory board and/or
senior directors and/or compliance and/or communication department. “Result Reporting” is the percentage of companies with
results of the engagement process being reported to the stakeholders involved. “Public Reports” is the percentage of companies
that make the results of the engagement process publicly available.

                                            Table 4: Long-term Orientation
                                                                          Sustainability            Difference
                Measures of long-term orientation                      Low           High            p-value
                Long-term vs. Short-term Investors                     -5.31        -2.29            <0.001
                Long-term vs. Short-term Discussion                     0.96         1.08             0.030
This table reports the average long-term orientation of the two groups, low and high sustainability. p-value is derived from a test
of the equality of the means across the two groups. “Long-term vs. Short-term Investors” is the percentage of shares outstanding
held by dedicated investors minus the percentage of shares held by transient investors. This investor classification is based on the
one used in Bushee (2001). “Long-term vs. Short-term Discussion” is the ratio of long-term over short-term keywords included
in transcripts of discussions between the management and sell-side analysts in conference calls.

                               Table 5: Measurement of Nonfinancial Information
                                              Panel A: Employees
                                                                               Sustainability           Difference
             Employees                                                        Low        High            p-value
             HR Performance Indicators / Nonfinancial                        16.2%      54.1%            <0.001
             KPI Labor / EHS Fatalities Tracking                             26.3%      77.4%            <0.001
             KPI Labor / EHS Near Miss Tracking                              26.3%      64.5%            <0.001
             KPI Labor / EHS Performance Tracking                            89.5%      95.2%             0.871
This table reports the frequency of stakeholder engagement practices across the two groups, low and high sustainability. p-value
is derived from a test of the equality of the frequencies across the two groups. “HR Performance Indicators/Nonfinancial” is the
percentage of companies that use HR Performance Indicators / Nonfinancial (e.g. number of hours spent in trainings, company-
specific skills categorization) to measure execution of skill mapping and development strategy. “KPI Labor/EHS Fatalities
Tracking” is the percentage of companies that use fatalities tracking to follow labor relations issues. “KPI Labor/EHS Near Miss
Tracking” is the percentage of companies that use near miss tracking to follow labor relations issues. “KPI Labor/EHS
Performance Tracking” is the percentage of companies that use health and safety performance tracking to follow labor relations
issues.
                                                     Panel B: Customers
                                                                       Sustainability            Difference
                    Customers                                       Low           High            p-value
                    Customer Lifestyle                              2.7%          5.4%             0.461
                    Geographical Segmentation                      10.8%         18.9%             0.101
                    Potential Lifetime Value                        2.7%          8.1%             0.164
                    Customer Generated Revenues                     8.1%         18.9%             0.041
                    Historical Sales Trends                         8.1%         16.2%             0.100
                    Products Bought                                 8.1%         14.9%             0.194
                    Cost Of Service                                 2.7%          6.8%             0.279
This table reports the frequency of stakeholder engagement practices across the two groups, low and high sustainability. p-value
is derived from a test of the equality of the frequencies across the two groups. “Customer Lifestyle” is the percentage of
companies that use customer lifestyle to segment customers in the company’s CRM database. “Geographic Segmentation” is the
percentage of companies that use geographic segmentation to segment customers in the company’s CRM database. “Potential
Lifetime Value” is the percentage of companies that use the potential lifetime value to business to segment customers in the
company’s CRM database. “Customer Generated Revenues” is the percentage of companies that use the revenues generated by
customers to segment customers in the company’s CRM database. “Historical Sales Trends” is the percentage of companies that
use historical sales trends to segment customers in the company’s CRM database. “Products Bought” is the percentage of
companies that use products/services bought to segment customers in the company’s CRM database. “Cost of Service” is the
percentage of companies that use the costs of services to segment customers in the company’s CRM database.


                                                                32
!
                                                    Panel C: Suppliers
                                                                       Sustainability          Difference
                   Suppliers                                          Low        High           p-value
                   Environmental
                   EMS                                               18.2%        50.0%          <0.001
                   Environmental Production Standards                25.7%        45.6%          <0.001
                   Environmental Data Availability                    0.0%        12.3%           0.018
                   Environmental Policy                               0.0%        17.4%          <0.001
                   Product LCA                                        0.0%         6.6%           0.052
                   Social
                   Human Right Standards                              5.7%        17.4%          <0.001
                   OHS Standards                                     25.7%        62.9%          <0.001
                   Grievance Process                                  0.0%         8.1%           0.039
                   Labor Standards                                    8.1%        18.6%           0.020
                   Standards
                   International Standards Compliance                 0.0%        12.3%          <0.001
                   National Standards Compliance                      8.1%        14.9%           0.057
This table reports the frequency of stakeholder engagement practices across the two groups, low and high sustainability. p-value
is derived from a test of the equality of the frequencies across the two groups. “EMS” is the percentage of companies that use
EMS in their certification/audit/verification process. “Environmental Production Standards” is the percentage of companies that
use environmental production standards to select and evaluate the company’s key suppliers and services providers.
“Environmental Data Availability” is the percentage of companies that use environmental data availability to select and evaluate
the company’s key suppliers and services providers. “Environmental Policy” is the percentage of companies that use
environmental policy to select and evaluate the company’s key suppliers and services providers. “Product LCA” is the percentage
of companies that use product lifecycle impact assessment to select and evaluate the company’s key suppliers and services
providers. “Human Rights Standards” is the percentage of companies that use human rights standards (such as forced, slave
labor, child labor) to select and evaluate the company’s key suppliers and services providers. “OHS Standards” is the percentage
of companies that use occupational health & safety to select and evaluate the company’s key suppliers and services providers.
“Grievance Process” is the percentage of companies that use grievance process implementation to select and evaluate the
company’s key suppliers and services providers. “Labor Standards” is the percentage of companies that use labor
standards/requirements to select and evaluate the company’s key suppliers and services providers. “International Standards
Compliance” is the percentage of companies that use international standards compliance to select and evaluate the company’s
key suppliers and services providers. “National Standards Compliance” is the percentage of companies that use national
standards compliance to select and evaluate the company’s key suppliers and services providers.

                                                    Panel D: Assurance
                                                                          Sustainability         Difference
                 Assurance                                              Low        High           p-value
                 Sustainability report external audit                   1.4%      11.1%            0.017
                 Assurance Provision Process
                 Information Collection Review                          5.4%        14.9%           0.058
                 Data Aggregation Review                                5.4%        14.9%           0.058
                 Document Review                                        5.4%        14.9%           0.058
                 Relevant Management Interviews                         5.4%        12.2%           0.089
                 Mapping against Standards                              2.7%        16.2%           0.031
                 Auditor Competency Disclosure                          2.7%         5.4%           0.589
                 Relevant Management Discussions                        5.4%        14.9%           0.058
                 Sample Site Visits                                     2.7%        12.2%           0.058
                 Stakeholder Consultation                               0.0%         5.4%           0.131
                 Distribution Network Quality
                 External Audits                                        8.1%        12.2%           0.221
                 Standardized External Audits                           5.4%        12.2%           0.058
                 Internal Audits                                        5.4%        13.5%           0.046


                                                              33
!
 This table reports the frequency of stakeholder engagement practices across the two groups, low and high sustainability. p-value
 is derived from a test of the equality of the frequencies across the two groups. “Sustainability report external audit” is the
 percentage of companies with a public sustainability report that is assured by a third party. “Information Collection Review” is
 the percentage of companies that use a review of internal processes of information generation and collection as an element in the
 company’s assurance provision process. “Data Aggregation Review” is the percentage of companies that use a review of data
 aggregation processes as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “Document Review” is the percentage of
 companies that use a review of documents as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “Relevant Management
 Interviews” is the percentage of companies that conduct interviews with management responsible for the information gather
 process at the corporate level as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “Mapping Against Standards” is the
 percentage of companies that map against relevant external standards and programs, including AA1000 and the Global Reporting
 Initiative, as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “Auditor Competency Disclosure” is the percentage of
 companies that use disclosure of competencies of assurance providers as an element in the company’s assurance provision
 process. “Relevant Management Discussions” is the percentage of companies that incorporate relevant management discussions
 as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “Sample Site Visits” is the percentage of companies that conduct use
 sample site visits as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “Stakeholder Consultation” is the percentage of
 companies that consultations with stakeholders as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “External Audits” is
 the percentage of companies that use external audits as an element in the company’s assurance provision process. “Internal
 Audits” is the percentage of companies that use internal audits as an element in the company’s assurance provision process.

                                               Table 6: Nonfinancial Disclosure
      Nonfinancial disclosure                                            Low Sustain.        High Sustain.         Diff. (p-value)
      Quantity
      ESG Disclosure – Bloomberg                                             17.86                29.90                <0.001
      ESG Disclosure - Thomson Reuters                                       36.91                46.38                <0.001
      Coverage
      Sustainability report covers global activities                         8.3%                 41.4%                <0.001
      Integration
      Nonfinancial vs. Financial Discussion                                  0.68                  0.96                <0.001
      Social Data Integrated in Financial Reports                            5.4%                 25.7%                 0.008
      Environmental Data Integrated in Financial Reports                    10.8%                 32.4%                 0.011
 “ESG Disclosure – Bloomberg” is the average disclosure score across the two groups, low and high sustainability. Bloomberg
 calculates this score based on the percentage of sustainability datapoints each company discloses. The measure ranges from 0 to
 100. “ESG Disclosure – Thomson Reuters” is the average disclosure score across the two groups, low and high sustainability. We
 calculated this score based on the percentage of sustainability datapoints each company discloses, using Thomson Reuters
 ASSET4 data. The measure ranges from 0 to 100. “Sustainability report covers global activities” is the percentage of companies
 in each group that publishes a sustainability report that covers the global operations of the company. “Nonfinancial vs. Financial
 Discussion” is the ratio of nonfinancial over financial keywords included in transcripts of discussions between the management
 and sell-side analysts in conference calls. The higher this number the more emphasis on nonfinancial topics a management
 places. “Social Data Integrated in Financial Reports” is the percentage of companies in each group that integrated social KPIs
 and narrative information in their financial reporting. “Environmental Data Integrated in Financial Reports” is the percentage of
 companies in each group that integrated environmental KPIs and narrative information in their financial reporting.

                                            Table 7: Stock Market Performance
                   !                 Value-weighted                                                Equal-weighted
                   !    Low Sustainability     High Sustainability                    Low Sustainability     High Sustainability
Parameter              Estimate    p-value   Estimate      p-value                   Estimate    p-value    Estimate     p-value
Intercept               0.0059     <.0001      0.0096      <.0001                     0.0039      0.004      0.0057      <.0001
MKTRF                   0.9839     <.0001      0.9360      <.0001                     0.9977     <.0001      0.9557      <.0001
SMB                    -0.2076     <.0001     -0.1776       0.002                     0.1598      0.001      0.0366       0.367
HML                     0.1982      0.001     -0.2727      <.0001                     0.4053     <.0001      0.2204      <.0001
UMD                    -0.0156      0.642     -0.0266       0.427                    -0.1436     <.0001     -0.1239      <.0001
N                         216        216         216         216                        216        216         216         216
Adj R-squared           85.6%                  86.6%                                  88.9%                  91.0%
 This table provides the estimates from a Fama-French four-factor model augmented by the Carhart momentum factor. The dependent
 variable is the monthly portfolio stock return for low or high sustainability minus the risk-free rate for that month. MKTRF is the value-
 weighted market return minus the risk-free rate for that month. SMB is the monthly return on a hedge portfolio that mimics the stock
 returns of small minus large companies. HML is the monthly return on a hedge portfolio that mimics the stock returns of low MTB


                                                                    34
 !
minus high MTB companies. UMD is the monthly return on a hedge portfolio that mimics the stock returns of high prior returns minus
low prior returns companies. The intercept represents the abnormal stock return for the average month. We estimate the model for the
period 1993-2010.

                          Table 8: Stock Market Performance and Sector Membership
                              Parameter                            Estimate          p-value        Estimate        p-value
           Intercept                                                    0.0118         <.0001          0.0124         <.0001
           High Sustainability                                          0.0019          0.014         -0.0008          0.584
           High Sustainability x B2C                                                                   0.0040          0.031
           High Sustainability x Brand                                                                 0.0038          0.044
           High Sustainability x Natural Resources                                                     0.0018          0.100
           Sector fixed effects                                           Yes                             Yes
           Adj R-squared                                                32.5%                          35.9%
           N                                                              180                             180
This table presents estimates from OLS models where the dependent variable is the alpha for each company from a Fama-French four-
factor model augmented by the Carhart momentum factor. “High Sustainability” is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if a
company is included in the High Sustainability group. “B2C” is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for companies that
operate in sectors where the customers are individual people instead of companies or governments. “Brand” is an indicator variable that
takes the value of one for companies that operate in sectors that rank at the fourth quartile of market-to-book ratios in 1993. “Natural
resources” is an indicator variable that takes the value of one for companies that operate in sectors that require the extraction of large
amounts of natural resources. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity.


                                                   Table 9: Forecast Errors
                                                                SUE                         %FE
                           Parameter                     Estimate   p-value          Estimate   p-value
                           Intercept                         0.860    0.008              0.082    0.000
                           High Sustainability               0.245    0.007              0.008    0.068
                           Size                             -0.022    0.526             -0.006    0.006
                           MTB                               0.899    0.003              0.011    0.429
                           Sector f.e.                         Yes                         Yes
                           Year f.e.                           Yes                         Yes !
                           N                                  2406                        2680 !
                           Adj R-squared                     2.8%                        3.7% !
This panel reports coefficient estimates and the statistical significance of these coefficients from OLS models where the
dependent variable is the difference between actual earnings and the mean estimate over the standard deviation of the estimates
(SUE) or the difference between actual earnings and the mean estimate over the mean estimate (%FE). “High Sustainability” is
an indicator variable that takes the value of one if a company is included in the High Sustainability group. “Size” is the natural
logarithm of market capitalization at fiscal year-end. “MTB” is stock price over book value of equity per share at fiscal year-end.
Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered at the company level.




                                                                   35
!
                                                                                                      Appendix
Name                                                  Description                                                                                                                             High Sustainability         Low Sustainability
Bonus Plan for Employees/Employees                    Does the company provide a bonus plan to most employees?                                                                                                      21%                         3%
Community/Policy I                                    Does the company have a policy to strive to be a good corporate citizen or endorse the Global Sullivan Principles?                                            76%                        20%
Community/Policy II                                   Does the company have a policy to respect business ethics or has the company signed the UN Global Compact or follow the OECD                                  81%                        34%
Diversity and Opportunity/Policy                      guidelines?
                                                      Does  the company have a diversity and equal opportunity policy?                                                                                              44%                         9%
Emission Reduction Policy Elements/Emissions          Does the company have a policy to reduce emissions?                                                                                                           65%                        11%
Emission Reduction/CO2 Reduction                      Does the company show an initiative to reduce, reuse, recycle, substitute, phased out or compensate CO2 equivalents in the production                         33%                         2%
Emission Reduction/T ransportation Impact Reduction   process?
                                                      Does the company have initiatives to reduce the environmental impact of transportation of its products or its staff?                                          25%                         1%
Employee welfare                                      Does the company have a work-life balance policy?                                                                                                             44%                         9%
Employment Quality/Policy I                           Does the company have a competitive employee benefits policy or ensuring good employee relations within its supply chain?                                     20%                         3%
Employment Quality/Policy II                          Does the company have a policy for maintaining long term employment growth and stability?                                                                     26%                         6%
Environmental Supply Chain Management                 Does the company use environmental criteria (ISO 14000, energy consumption, etc.) in the selection process of its suppliers or                                26%                         3%
Generous Fringe Benefits                              sourcing
                                                      Does  thepartners?
                                                               company claim to provide its employees with a pension fund, health care or other insurances?                                                         17%                         2%
Health & Safety /Policy                               Does the company have a policy to improve employee health & safety within the company and its supply chain?                                                   92%                        46%
Human Rights Contractor                               Does the company show to use human rights criteria in the selection or monitoring process of its suppliers or sourcing partners?                              24%                         2%
Human Rights/Policy I                                 Does the company have a policy to guarantee the freedom of association universally applied independent of local laws?                                         29%                         7%
Human Rights/Policy II                                Does the company have a policy for the exclusion of child, forced or compulsory labour?                                                                       33%                        11%
Internal Promotion                                    Does the company claim to favour promotion from within?                                                                                                       13%                         3%
Management T raining                                  Does the company claim to provide regular staff and business management training for its managers?                                                            23%                         0%
Positive Discrimination                               Does the company promote positive discrimination?                                                                                                             30%                         2%
Product Impact Minimization                           Does the company design product features and applications/services that promote responsible, efficient, cost-effective and                                    18%                         1%
Product Innovation/                                   environmentally
                                                      Does the companypreferable use? procedures and recycling programmes to reduce the potential risks of products entering the
                                                                        have take-back                                                                                                                              20%                         3%
Product Responsibility/Policy I                       environment?
                                                      Does the company have a policy to protect customer health & safety?                                                                                           66%                        27%
Product Responsibility/Policy II                      Does the company have a products and services quality policy?                                                                                                 66%                        27%
Resource Efficiency/Energy Efficiency Policy          Does the company have a policy to improve its energy efficiency?                                                                                              60%                         7%
Resource Efficiency/Water Efficiency Policy           Does the company have a policy to improve its water efficiency?                                                                                               50%                         3%
T raining and Development/Policy                      Does the company have a policy to support the skills training or career development of its employees?                                                         73%                        20%
Waste Reduction T otal                                Does the company have initiatives to recycle, reduce, reuse, substitute, treat or phase out total waste?                                                      50%                         3%


This Appendix includes all environmental and social policies that are used to construct the Sustainability Policies index. Moreover, it shows the frequency of
adoption of each policy in the early 1990s by each group.
