                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                DISCONTINUITIES IN PENSION BENEFIT
                   FORMULAS AND THE SPOT MODEL
                       OF THE LABOR MARKET:
              IMPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ECONOMISTS




                         James E. Pesando




                      Working Paper No. 1795




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




I am indebted to Jeremy Bulow, Richard Ippolito, Dan McGill, Samuel
A Rea, Jr., and Jack VanDerhei for helpful comments, to Stan Zin
for programming assistance and to the Social Sciences and
Human-ities Research Council of Canada for financial support. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and project in Taxation
and Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1795
                                                    January 1986



 Discontinuities in Pension Benefit Formulas and. the Spot Ivbdel of the
          Labor Market: Irrlications for Financial Economists


                                ABSTPACT




      When analyzing tax and related issues, financial economists typically

invoke the simplest and the most tractable model of the labor market. This is

the spot model, in which the worker's cash wage plus accruing pension benefit

must equal the value of the worker's marginal product in each and every

period. This paper first identifies the discontinuities in a worker's cash

wage that must occur under the spot model if the pension plan has typical

"cliff" vesting and early retirement provisions. The paper then calculates

the pension benefits actually accrued, at and around the dates of eligibility

for these benefits, by members of five pension plans in Canada. Both

exercises serve to discredit the spot model. The paper reviews the

underfunding puzzle, the measurement of pension liabilities, and the recapture

of surplus assets in overfunded plans in light of these findings.




                                                   Jaires   E. Pesando
                                                   Institute   for Policy Inalysis
                                                   University of Toronto
                                                   140 St. George Street
                                                   Suite 707
                                                   Toronto, Ontario
                                                   CPNZ\DA M5S 1A1
 1. Introduction



      The predisposition of financial economists is to view the corporate

pension plan primarily as a vehicle for tax—sheltered saving.   In the United

States, trie corporate pension plan may also be viewed as a vehicle for gaming

against the interests of the third party insurer of pension benefits, the

Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC). Financial economists recognize,

of course, that pension benefits also represent an integral part of the

workerts total compensation package. Yet because of their primary interest in

tax and related issues, financial economists typically invoke tie simplest and

the most analytically tractable model of the labour market. This is the spot

model, in which workers are tied to the firm but for a single period. As a

result, workers must receive total compensation — cash wages plus accruing

pension benefits — equal to the value of trieir marginal product in each and

every period. Black (1980) and Tepper (1981), for example, invoke the spot

model to derive their well—Known funding and asset allocation theorems, and

Sharpe (1976) uses it in his analysis of strategic issues pertinent to the

insurance provided oy the PBGC.

      Somewhat ironically, researchers have now begun to realize that

corporate pension plans provide a perhaps unique opportunity to assess the

empirical validity of the spot model. Feldstein—Seligman (1981), Bulow—

Scholes (1983) and Pesando (1984a) have noted the presence of discontinuities

in most pension benefit formulas, and conjectured that these discontinuities

make it unlikely that a worker's cash wage will internalize the value of the

worker's accruing pension benefits on a period—by—period basis. These

discontinu-ities occur at the dates that (1) the worker's beneiits vest (i.e.,

the worker becomes legally entitled to a nonforfeitable benefit under the
                                      2



terms of the plan) and (2) the worker qualifies for an early retirement

benefit.

      This paper undertakes two main tasks. The first is to illustrate the

time path of a worker's wage if the spot model is valid and the pension plan

to which the worker belongs has typical vesting and early retirement

provisions. Under any reasonable assumption about the time path of the (non—

observable) value of the worker's marginal product, the implied

discontinuities in tne worKers cash wage are so abrupt that the spot model is

severely discredited. The second task is to calculate the pension benefits

actually accrued by workers on and around the dates that they qualify br

vested or for early retirement benefits, using data from five pension plans in

Canada. These calculations indicate that discrete jumps in a worker's pension

wealth (and thus in the worker's accruing pension benefits) do occur,

especially at the date that the worker qualifies for an early retirement

benefit. The paper then assesses tne relevance of these findings for the

unoerfunciing puzzle, for the measurement of pension liabilities, and for the

recapture of surplus assets from overfunded plans. A summary section

completes the paper.




2. The Time Path of Cash Wages Under the Spot Model in a Pension Plan With

    "Cliff" Vesting and Early Retirement Provisions



      Most members of corporate pension plans in Canada and the United States

belong to final earnings plans.1 In a typical plan, the member reLeives — for

each year of service — pension benefit equal to x percent of his (her)

earnings during the latest   years of his (her) employment. In both Canaaa
                                       3



 and the United States, "cliff" vesting provisions are common.2 Unoer these

provisions, a worker becomes 100% vestea after meeting a service or an age and

service requirement. More than 50% of plan members dre in plans in which the

worker must complete 10 years of service before the worker become legally

entitled to a nonforfeitable pension benefit. Virtually all plan members in

Canada, and the vast majority in the United States,3 belong to plans in which

workers may opt to retire in advance of their normal retirement ages. The

most common condition that a worker must meet to qualify for an early

retirement benefit is the attainment of age 55 and the completion of 10 years

of service. The benefit provided on early retirement is typically the pension

earned up to the date of early retirement based on the benefit formula of the

plan, reducea by a specified amount. A common provision is that the pension

benefit be reduced by 1/4 of 1% for each month that early retirement precedes

the normal retirement age, which is usually 65. In spite of the reduction

formula, the early retirement benefit is more than "actuarially fair". For a

terminating worker, the present value of the expected stream of payments under

the early retirement provision exceeas the present value of the expectea

stream of payments under the normal retirement provision. In effect, early

retirement is subsidized. This subsidy is most apparent in the many plans

which provide for unreduced early retirement benefits if the member meets a

more stringent age and service requirement.

      If the features of the pension plan are known, the time path of the cash

wages that must be paid to a worker under the spot model is readily

determined. First, one postulates a hypothetical time path of the (non—

observable) value of the worker's marginal proauct. One then calculates the

cash wage that satisfies the conciition that the worker's total compensation,

inclusive of the pension benefit, equals the value of the worker's marginal
                                      4


 product in each period. Of particular interest are discontinuities in the

wage path tnat may exist arouna the dates that the worker's benefits vest or

the worker qualifies for an early retirement beneift. If these

discontinuities are large, they are likely to have no empirical counterpart.

If so, they would provide prima facie evidence against the spot model.

      Illustrative wage paths are shown in Tables 1 and lA for a male worker

who belongs to a "generous" and a "less generous" final earnings plan. In the

generous plan, the pension benefit is equal to 2% of the worker's average

earnings during the past 5 years for each year of service. In the less

generous plan, the corresponding benefit is only 1%. These figures bracket

the range of benefits provided by corporate pension plans in Canada. In all

other dimensions, the plans are the same. The pension benefits is nominal;

that is, the annuities due under the terms of the plan receive no inflation

protection. Benefits vest in full once the worker has completed ten years

service. If the worker quits the firm prior to this time, he receives no

pension benefit at all. An employee who reaches age 55 and has completed ten

years of service becomes eligible for an early retirement benefit. Tne early

retirement pension equals the accrued pension that the worker would otherwise

receive at the normal retirement age of 65, less 3% for each year by which his

actual retirement age precedes age 65. If the worker retires at age 55, he

receives 70% of the pension that would otherwise commence at age 65; at age

56, 73%; and so on. An employee whose benefits have vested, but who quits the

firm without meeting both of the requirements for early retirement, is

entitled only to a deferred pension commencing at the normal retirement age.4

     To calculate the wage path under the spot model, one must make

assumptions regarding the tenure at the firm of the representative employee as

well as the economic environment. The robustness across different sets of
                                         5



 assumptions can be readily assessed. In Tables 1 and 1A, a representative

 male worker is assumed to begin work (and join the pension plan) when he is

 age 30. The assumed inflation rate is 9% and the nominal interest rate is

 12%.    (These assumptions accord roughly with market conditions in Canada in

 1982, which is the year for which actual benefit accruals are calculated in

the next section of the paper.) The nominal value of the worKer's marginal

product is assumed to grow at an annual rate of 11%. Most large firms in

Canada and trie United States have granted ad hoc cost—of—living adjustments to

retired workers, and one of the plans examined later in this Study provides

for fully indexed pensions. It is thus useful to examine the case in which

the annuities due under the terms of the plan are real. Following Pesando

(l984b), the risk—free real interest rate used to value these annuities is set

equal to one percent.

        The time paths of real wages, for both plans, are shown for the case in

which pension benefits are purely nominal and for the case in which pension

benefits are fully indexed for inflation. The discontinuity associated with

the cliff vesting rule is noticeable, especially when the pension benefit is

real. However, the discontinuity is not dramatic. Even when the plan is

generous and the pension benefit is real, a real wage reuuction of slightly

less than 10% in the employee's 10th year of service is sufficient to equalize

the worker's total compensation with the value of his marginal product. If a

"looser" restriction is associated with the spot model, such as the equality

of total compensation and the value of the worker's marginal product over a

two— or three—year horizon, this discontinuity would be smaller and of even

less consequence.

        By contrast, the discontinuity which occurs at the date the worker

qualifies for the early retirement benefit is dramatic. Even when the pension
                                      6


benefit is nominal and the plan is less generous, the worker's real wage must

fall by almost 50% in the year in which he qualifies for the early retirement

benefit.5   If the pension benefit is real, under either plan, the worker's

cash wage in the year that ne qualifies for the benefit must be negative. The

worker must actually make a cash payment to his employer Declines in a

worker's cash wage of this order of magnitude nave no empirical counterpart,

even if a "looser" restriction is associated with the spot model. The real

wages required by the spot mocel oegin to fluctuate sharply after the worker

has qualified for the early retirement benefit. These fluctuations simply

reflect the 5—year averaging in the benefit formula, together with the

dramatic reduction in the worker's cash wage in the year that he qualifies for

the early retirement benefit. In addition, real wages grow on average more

rapidly after the worker has qualified for the early retirement benefit. This

more rapid growth reflects the compensation needed to offset the decline in

the value of the early retirement option each year that the worker chooses not

to exercise it.6

      The size of the discontinuities associated with cliff vesting and early

retirement provisions in different economic environments is also worthy of

note. In Table 2, the interest rate, inflation rate and growth rate of the

worker's marginal product are first set equal to 4%, 1% and 3%, and then to

6%, 3% and 5%. In the case in which pension benefits are nominal, which is

the one filustrated in Table 2, the discontinuity associated with the cliff

vesting rule assumes much greater importance. Real wages must decline by 58%

on the vesting date if the interest rate is 4%, and by 44% if the interest

rate is 6%. Note, however, that the discontinuities associated with the early

retirement provisions are still greater. Real wages must decline by 65% if

the interest rate is 4%, and by 75% if the interest rate is 6%.
                                       7


      To sum up, cliff vesting rules provide what is the more apparent

discontinuity in a worker's accrual of pension benefits. Prior to the date

that a worker's benefits vest, the worker's pension benefit is worth nothing

according to the spot model. Vet when nominal interest rates are at double—

digit levels, the discontinuity associated with cliff vesting rules is not

likely to be large. By contrast, the discontinuity associated with early

retirement provisions is dramatic in both the hiyh and tre low interest rate

environments.




3. Discontinuities in the Accrual of Pension Benefits: Some Evidence



      The pension benefits actually accrued by plan members represent a

potentially important source of evidence regarding the empirical validity of

the spot model. Suppose, for example, that a discrete jump in pension wealth

occurs at the date that a worker satisfies a delayed vesting rule or qualifies

for an early retirement benefits. Unless there is a commensurate wage

reduction, a discrete jump will also occur in the worker's total compensation.

If this is large, it is unlikely to correspond to a like increase in the (non—

observable) value of the worker's marginal product.

      This insight is not new. Feldstein—Seligman (1981), Bulow—Scholes

(1983) and Pesando (1984a) have conjectured that discontinuities associated

with delayed vesting rules and/or early retirement benefits make it unlikely

that cash wages will internalize accruing pension benefits on a year—to—year

basis. By implication, all have suggested that a study of pension benefit

accruals would bear usefully on the empirical validity of the spot model.

Wise and Kotlikoff (1984) have actually uncertaken such an investigation.
                                       8


 Unfortunately, Wise and Kotlikoff (W—K) do not have data that would permit

 them to link the cash wages paid to an individual worker to the specifics of

 the pension plan to which the worker belongs. W—K, like Lazear (1983) before

 them, are forced to postulate hypothetical wage paths for a representative

worker. W—K thus calculate a worker's pension wealth and benefit accruals on

the assumption that the cash wages paid to a worker are independent of the

features of the pension plan to which the worker oelongs. As W—K readily

acknowledge, this is an unsatisfactory assumption if the purpose of the

research is to evaluate the empirical validity of the spot model.

      In order to monitor their pension costs, most firms conduct actuarial

vdluations of their plans on a periodic basis, often annually. To conduct

these valuations, firms must compile data on a worker's sex, wage history, age

and years of service. In effect, firms must compile the data necessary to

calculate the value of the worker's pension wealth at each point in time, and

thus the value of the benefit that he accrues between two points in time.

Unfortunately, actuaries typically do not calculate the worker's pension

wealth in the manner required by the spot model. The spot model requires that

a worker's pension wealth (and the firm's pension liabilities) be calculated

on a wind—up basis; that is, asif the plan were terminated and the sponsoring

firm purchased the annuities necessary to discharge its pension obligations.

It is thus necessary to calculate pension wealth and benefit accruals on a

wind—up basis, using the data compiled in the normal course of these actuarial

valuations.

      GBB Associates Ltd., an employee benefit consulting firm, has made such

data available for a sample of five Canadian pension plans. From these data,

one is able to calculate the pension wealth at the end of 1981 and 1982, and

thus the pension benefit accrued in 1982, for a representative male worker in
                                       9



 each age or service cohort. The major provisions of each of the five plans

 are detailed in Table 3. All of the plans link the member's pension benefit

 to his earnings during his final years of employment, all are integrated with

government social security plans, and all have delayed vesting and early

retirement provisions. One plan is unusual in that it provides during the

members retirement for the full indexing of his pension benefits to movements

in the consumer price index. Two of the plans have a policy of pi"oviding ad

hoc cost—of--living adjustments to pensions in pay, in spite of the fact that

the contractual benefits provided by the plans are purely nominal. In this

regard, they are representative of the majority of large plans in both Canada

and the United States.'

      The objective is to calculate the pension benefit accrued by a

representative member of each age or service cohort, with attention to any

discontinuities which occur at the dates that the cohort meets the vesting

requirement or qualifies for an early retirement benefit. When the

eligibility criterion is age or years of service, one can identify the exact

age or service cohort that is just qualifying for the benefit. If the vesting

requirement is 10 years of service, for example, then it is the benefit

accrued by a representative member of tne 10—year service cohort that will

reflect any discontinuity associated with this delayed vesting rule. In order

to calculate this benefit accrual, one must postulate an age for the

representative member of the service cohort. One can, however, really

determine the robustness of the calculation across the feasible range of age

distributions, guided by the cross—tabulations described below.

      Complications do arise when the eligibility condition consists of both

age and years of service. Most of the plans, for example, provide an early

retirement benefit when the member has attained age 55 and completed 10 years
                                      10


of service. Ideally, one would like to solve this problem by working with

data on individual workers or with data on cohorts with a fixed age and a

fixed number of years of service. Unfortunately, such data are not available.

For each plan, cross—tabulations on age and years of service are available,

but only for 5—year groupings. For example, one can identify for the cohort

aged 48 to 52 the fraction that have 8 to 12 years of service, 13 to 17 years

of service, and so on. Inspection of these cross—tabulations indicates that

virtually all plan members who have attained age 55 have completed 10 or more

years of service. One is thus comfortable in assuming that it is the 55—year

age cohort that is just qualifying for the early retirement benefit. To

calculate the benefit accrued by a representative member of this age cohort,

one must choose a representative number of years of service. Again, it is

straightforward to calculate the robustness of any discontinuity so identified

with regard to this assumption.



Early Retirement Provisions



      The wage paths illustrated in Tables 1, 1A and 2 highlight the potential

importance of early retirement provisions. These are examined first in the

present section. One plan in the sample provides for early retirement at age

50 if the plan member has completed 25 years of service. The others provide

for early retirement at age 55 if the member has completed 10 years of

service. In Table 4, the benefits accrued by a representative member of each

service cohort are presented for the first plan. Inspection of the relevant

cross—tabulation indicated that the majority of those completing 25 years of

service had attained age 50, and thus that the majority of the members of this

service cohort were just qualifying for the early retirement benefit. To the
                                       11



extent that there are workers who complete 25 years of service without

 attaining age 50, the benefit accrued by a representative member of this

cohort is overstated. By implication, the benefit accrued by a representative

rneniber of a cohort completing 26 or more years of service is understated,

since some members of these cohorts are just qualifying for the early

retirement benefit. In Table 5, benefit accruals are reported by          cohort

for the remaining four plans. As previously noted, virtually all members who

attain age 55 have completed 10 years of service.

      The interest rate used to calculate the present value of nominal pension

benefits is 12 percent. This is equal to the interest rate prevailing at

year—end 1982 on long—term Government of Canada bonds. Its use is tantamount

to assuming that workers in these plans treat their accruing pension benefits

as risk free. Note that no turnover assumptions are necessary when pension

wealth and benefit accruals are calculated on a wind—up basis. The

calculations mirror those sketcheci in footnote 5, except that explicit

consideration is given to integration provisions. Under these provisions,

pension benefits provided by a private plan are typically reduced by some

fraction of the benefits provided by public pension programs (the
                                                    8
Canada/Quebec Pension Plan and Old Age Security).

      For all five plans, the discontinuity in the accrual of pension benefits

that occurs when the worker qualifies for an early retirement benefit is

dramatic. In the first plan, where early retirement is available at age 50,

the pension benefit accrued by a representative member of the 25—year service

cohort is equal to 140 percent of his cash wage. For the other four plans,

where early retirement is available at age 55, the pension benefit accrued by

a representative member of the 55—year old cohort ranges from 85 percent to

122 percent of his cash wage. These latter figures are even greater if
                                       12


 allowance is made, where appropriate, for the ad hoc cost—of—living

 adjustments made by plan sponsors, or for the fact that at least some plan

members who attain age 55 also qualify for unreduced early retirement

benefits. In Plan 2, the benefit accrued by the representative member of the

55—year old cohort rises from 122 percent to 199 percent of his cash wage when

consideration is given to the plan sponsor's announced policy of making cost—

of—living adjustments to offset one—half of the impact of inflation. In Plan

4, members qualify for an unreduced early retirement benefit after they have

attained age 55 and completed 30 years of service. If a member of this 55—

year old cohort has completed 30 years of service, as one—half of them have,

the benefit he accrues in this year of eligibility is actually 249 percent of

his cash wage.

      To sum up, the results reported in Tables 4 and 5 indicate that wages do

not internalize the discontinuity associated with the existence of early

retirement provisions.9 As previously noted, early retirement provisions are

prevalent, and they appear to represent a quantitatively important

discontinuity in the accrual of pension benefits.



Delayed Vesting Rules



      Due in large part to the high level of nominal interest rates prevailing

in 1982,10 discontinuities associated with delayea vesting rules are not large

for the members of the sample plans. The benefits accrued at and around the

date at which an age or service cohort satisfies the vesting requirement are

presented in Table 6. Not surprisingly, in light of the level of interest

rates, nominal pension benefits accrued 20 or more years prior to the date at

which payments are scheduled to corrinence have relatively little value. For
                                        13


 Plan One, the worker whose benefits have vested is entitled to a deferred

 annuity which is fixed in real terms after the worker has attained the normal

 retirement age of 65. The benefit accrued by a member of this plan who

 attains age 45, if he has completed 20 years of service, is equal to 29.9

 percent of his cash wage. The results for Plans 2 and 3, however, are more

 representative. At the date that a representative employee meets the vesting

standard, he receives a benefit equal to about 4% of his cash wage. Plans 4

and 5 are contributory, so that both the firm and the employee make

contributions. As a result, the figures reported in Table 6 seriously

overstate the benefits that the worker actually accrues on the date that his

benefits vest. This is because the calculations ignore the fact that a

terminated worker whose benefits have not vested will receive back the

accumulated value of his own contributions. Indeed, crude calculations

suggest that the accumulated value of the member's own contributions may well

exceed the present value of the deferred annuity to which the vested employee

is entitled. If so, there is no increase in the worker's pension wealth on

the date that the worker's benefits vest.




4. Implications of These Preliminary Findings



      The results presented in the two preceding sections serve to discredit

the spot model. Indeed, the very existence of early retirement provisions is

prima fade evidence against this model, given the extraordinary reduction in

a worker's cash wage that is necessary to internalize this benefit in the year

in which the worker qualifies for it.
                                      14


     There is, of course, no paucity of alternatives to the spot model.

Following Becker (1964), labour economists have devoted considerable attention

to the complications that arise when workers have firm—specific human capital.

Of particular interest in the present context, however, are equilibrium models

which focus on market—clearing in incentive—oriented, lifetime contracts.

Only large firms tend to sponsor defined benefit plans, and their size may

serve in the present context as a proxy for their expected longevity. Smaller

firms, where the probability of failure is high, may find it difficult to

enter into lifetime contracts with their employees.

      In a series of papers, Lazear (1979, 1981, 1983) argues that workers and

firms are likely to enter into implicit contracts which provide for older

workers to receive total compensation in excess of the value of their marginal

product, and conversely for younger workers. The purpose of these incentive—

oriented, lifetime contracts is to increase productivity and to discourage

shirking. Salop and Salop (1976) argue that the deferral of part of a

worker's total compensation to the worker's later years serves, through self—

selection, to screen out workers who are likely to quit, and thus to reduce

the firm's training costs. Medoff and Abraham (1980, 1981) have provided

evidence, drawn from the personnel files of major corporations in the United

States, to suggest that more experienced workers do receive total compensation

in excess of that which would be projected on the basis of the performance

evaluations conducted by their immediate supervisors.

      The purpose of this section of the paper is to assess the implications

of the rejection of the spot model for three topical issues that are of

concern to financial economists. These are:   (1) the optimal degree of

pension funding; (2) the measurement of a firm's pension liabilities; and

(3) the controversy surrounding the recent acceleration in the termination of

overfunded plans with the reversion of the surplus assets to the employer.
                                         15


 The Optimal Degree of Pension Funding



       The tax treatment of pension plans in both Canada and the United States

 permits pension funds to earn the before—tax rate of return. If there is no

 probability that the sponsoring firm will go bankrupt, its optimal strategy is

 to fully fund the plan (Black (1980), Tepper (1981)).   In the United States,

where the PBGC is a third party insurer of pension benefits, a different

extreme solution may prove optimal. This is to fund the plan to the minimum

extent permitted by regulation, while investing in only the most risky assets.

This strategy maximizes the value of the put option held against the PBGC

(Sharpe (1976), Harrison and Sharpe (1983)).   In Canada, plan termination

insurance exists only in Ontario, and the liability of the sponsoring firm

extends to 100% of its equity in the event of a claim on the province's

Guarantee Fund. There is no opportunity for strategic behaviour against the

third party insurer of pension benefits that is comparable to the one that

exists in the United States.

      In both Canada and the United States, there is evidence to suggest that

pension plans are often underfunded, at least if consideration is given to

implicit pension liabilities.'2 Equally important, there is no evidence that

pension plans are overfunded to the maximum extent permitted by law. The

obvious question is whether this failure to exploit fully the tax shelter

provided corporate pension plans is evidence of non—optimizing behaviour on

the part of firms.

      Among the first financial economists to stress the incentive effects of

pensions is Logue (1979). In the present context, he argues that unfunded

pension liabilities may have an important incentive effect on management, thus

reducing monitoring costs to the firm's non—pension creditors as well as
                                          16


promoting effort. In a recent paper, Ippolito (1985a) sets forth a similar

hypothesis, that underfunded pension plans represent a means by which a firm

can bond its unionized work force and thus pre—ernpt behaviour that might

threaten the firm's long—term viability. The emphasis on the role of a

unionized work force as an unsecured bondholder is tied to the empirical

observation that flat benefit or pattern plans, which exist only in the union

sector, are typically the least well funded of pension plans.

      In general, once the spot model with its exclusive focus on a single

period is abandoned, it is possible to construct models which may provide a

more credible explanation of the underfunding puzzle. Although a critical

review of such alternatives is beyond the scope of the present paper, one

general point raised by Ippolito merits continued emphasis. Unless a large

number of firms are not acting rationally, there must be some advantages to

shareholders which offset the tax disadvantages of maintaining an underfunded

plan. To search for such advantages, it seems fruitful —     both analytically
and empirically —   to   abandon the restrictive framework of the spot model.



The Measurement of Pension Liabilities



      Bulow (1982) is the first to emphasize the fact that the wind—up measure

of a firm's pension liabilities is tied to the spot model of the labour

market. If neither the employer nor the worker looks beyond the current

period when the worker's total compensation is being determined, then the

appropriate measure of the firm's pension liabilities can have no forward—

looking component. Under the wind—up measure, the pension liabilities of an

on—going firm equal the value of the annuities that the firm would have to buy

in order to discharge its obligations if the pension plan were terminated or
                                        17


 if its workers were dismissed. In actuarial terms, this involves the use of

the accrued benefit method without salary projection. Whenever economists use

this method to calculate the pension liabilities of the firm, they are

implicitly (if not explicitly) invoking the spot model of the labour market,

at least if workers are presumed to negotiate individually with the firm.13

Such is the case, for example, when Feldstein and Morck (1983) use the wind—up

measure in their study of the capitalization of unfunded pension liabilities

into share prices.

      Any evidence which casts doubt on the validity of the spot model thus

casts doubt on the usefulness of the wind—up measure of a firm's pension

liabilities. The rejection of the spot model does not, of course, necessarily

point to a unique alternative to the wind—up measure. In a recent paper

(Pesarido (1985)), I argue that the wage/age profiles of members of final

earnings plans suggest that the wind—up measure is likely to understate a

firm's true pension liabilities. Whether the accrued benefit method with

salary projection or a projected benefit method is the preferred alternative

is not, however, readily established.

      Clearly, the measurement of pension liabilities is central to many

pension issues that are of interest to financial economists. It should also

be emphasized, however, that the wind—up measure becomes an issue in perhaps

more subtle ways. When interpreting tests of the impact of unexpected

inflation on shareholder wealth, such as those conducted by French, Ruback and

Schwert (1983), it is important to determine whether pension liabilities are

purely nominal as implied by the wind—up measure, or whether they have a

substantial real component. The fact that most large firms grant ad hoc cost—

of—living adjustments to retirees, in spite of the fact that the pensions

legally due under the terms of the plan are purely nominal, suggests the
                                         18



existence of a real component to the firm's pension liabilities. So, too,

does the evidence reported in Pesando (1985), which suggests that older

workers receive wage increases that do not internalize the increasing value of

their accruing pension benefits.



The Termination of Overfunded Plans with Asset Reversions to the Employer



      The termination of an overfunded pension plan, with the reversion of

surplus assets to the employer, is now a contentious and highly visible issue

in the United States. In October of 1984, Edward R. Roybal, chairman of the

House Select Committee on Aging, proposed comprehensive legislation (H.R.

6404) designed to discourage plan terminations that result in asset

reversions. If the termination does not meet a business necessity test, he

proposes that excess assets would revert not to the employer, but to workers

and retirees. In Ontario, the sponsor of an ongoing plan can request the

refund of a plan surplus, so long as a amount equal to two years of the

employer's current service cost is left in the plan. This practice, too, is

controversial. Interested parties in Ontario continue to debate whether the

shareholders of the firm or the members of the plan have the property rights

to surplus plan assets. In Quebec, by way of contrast, no refund of surplus

assets is permitted for ongoing plans.

      How does evidence regarding the validity of the spot model bear on the

present controversy? The answer is tied to the recognition that surplus

assets are calculated using the wind—up measure of the firm's pension

liabilities. As noted repeatedly, this is a valid measure if and only if the

spot model is supported empirically; that is, if workers actually accept

compensation packages under the premise that their employment might be severed
                                      19


at any time. If the spot model were correct, workers would value their

pension wealth on a wind—up basis and grant the appropriate wage concessions.

If the spot model is not true, then workers presumably grant wage concessions

in excess of those implied by the spot model, in return for pension benefits

which exceed those implied by the wind—up measure.

      If the spot model were valid and thus pension liabilities were

appropriately valued on a wind—up basis, then the termination of an overfunded

plan with the reversion of excess assets to the employer would impose no

windfall losses on employees. Because the empirical validity of the spot model

is very much in doubt, the possibility does exist that employees suffer

windfall losses in these overfunded terminations, at least if they are not

appropriately compensated in other ways. Yet an on—going firm which

unilaterally severs such an implicit contract would also suffer costs, in the

form of its inability to enter into such contracts in the future. If the

termination occurs in a division which is being spun off by a parent, or —

more generally — where the goodwill of the affected workers is of less concern

to the corporation, the probability that the affected workers suffer windfall

losses presumably rises. A detailed examination of the case for a legislative

initiative is beyond the scope of the present paper. Such an examination

would, however, usefully proceed along the lines sketched above.



5. Summary and Conclusion



      This paper provides evidence which discredits the spot model of the

labour market. Labour economists, with their interest in firm—specific human

capital and incentive—oriented compensation arrangements, might find it

surprising that financial economists have —   in   effect — placed so much
                                      20


reliance on the spot model. Yet, for many purposes, this assumption might

have remained satisfactory if the predictions of the resulting models of

financial behaviour were supported by the data.

      In this light, it is important to note that empirical studies have

provided only modest support for the model of the corporate pension plan

favored by financial economists; that is, as an integrated part of the

corporation's overall financial strategy. Friedman (1983) concludes that

there are systemmatic differences in the way in which corporations manage

their pension funds, but that these differences are often inconsistent with

hypotheses put forward in the finance literature. He observes, for example,

that less profitable corporations with more volatile earnings hold less —   not
more — common stock in their pension funds. He finds no significant

relationship between the degree of funding of the pension plan and the

allocation of assets within the fund. In short, Friedman finds no evidence to

support the extremal solutions (full funding/all bonds or minimum funding/all

stocks) that have been put forward by financial theorists. Bodie etal.

(1984) do find evidence that the level of pension funding is linked positively

to the corporation's long—run profitability. Yet they conclude, on balance,

that tax considerations and the put option held by the plan sponsor against

the PBGC "do not leave strong traces" in the data.

      The rejection of the spot model implies that pension plans do provide

incentive effects. The suggestion must be that richer, incentive—oriented

models of the labour market might shed light on a number of issues that puzzle

financial economists, including the fact that plan sponsors do not fully

utilize the tax shelter represented by the corporate pension plan. In

addition, the empirical validity of such models is central to the resolution

of one of the most fundamental of problems, that of obtaining the most

appropriate measure of the pension liabilities of the firm.
                                      21


                                   Footnotes



1. For details on pension benefit formulas in Canada, both by number of

     plans and plan membership, see Statistics Canada (1979). Detailed

     information on pension plans in the United States may be found in

     Kotlikoff and Smith (1983).



2.   In the United States, ERISA requires that vesting provisions be at least

     as liberal as the following. A worker who completes 10 years of service

     must be at least 50% vested, and those who are only 50% vested must

     receive a 10% annual increase in their vested rights until full vesting

     is achieved. In Canada, the minimum vesting provision established by

     statute is 10 years of service plus attainment of age 45. This is likely

     to be liberalized in the near future.



3.   In Canada, 96% of plan members in 1978 were in plans with early

     retirement provisions. In the United States, the corresponding figure in

     1977 was 82%. See the references in footnote one for further details.



4. This is the usual, but not universal, practice in Canada. A worker who

     has met the service requirement for early retirement, but who quits the

     firm before meeting the age requirement, is entitled only to the benefit

     due at the normal retirement age unless the plan explicitly provides

     otherwise. The exact extent of such provisions has not been clearly

     established. None of the five plans examined in this paper contain the

     provision. Richard Ippolito of the U.S. Department of Labor has provided

     me with the Summary Plan Descriptions of 25 plans in the United States.
                                       22


   In virtually all of these plans, terminated vested workers can qualify

   for early retirement benefits on the same terms as employees who actually

   retire early. A terminated vested worker who has met the service

   requirement subsequently qualifies for an early retirement benefit when

   the worker meets the age requirement. The worker thus benefits from any

   subsidized early retirement factors that apply to still active employees.

   In this case, which is the one illustrated by Wise and Kotlikoff (1984),

   the existence of a subsidized early retirement benefit creates a

   discontinuity at the date that the worker meets the service requirement

   for this benefit, so long as the worker has met (or is just meeting) the

   vesting requirement. In general, the myriad of pension plan provisions

   in both Canada and the United States suggests that discontinuities in

   benefit accruals — and thus in the wage path under the spot model —   are

   likely to have important plan—specific components.



5. Let [(55) denote the worker's average earnings during the past 5 years,

   inclusive of his 55th year. Let d(55) be the discount applied via the

   reduction formula for early retirement. Let A(r,55) be the present

   value at the nominal interest rate r of a life annuity commencing at

   age 55. If the 55—year old worker has completed 25 years of service and

   if the nominal pension benefit is 2% of final average earnings for each

   year of service, then the worker's pension wealth at age 55 Is:



             W(55) =   25 *   .02*   d(55) *   E   (55)* A(r,55)         (Fl)




      A year earlier when the worker was 54, and had not yet qualified for

   the early retirement benefit, his pension wealth is readily calculated.
                                         23


Assume, for simplicity, that if a worker dies between the date of his

termination and the date that he would begin to receive his deferred

pension, his estate receives a death benefit equal to the then present

value of the deferred annuity. One can then treat the worker as if he

would live with certainty to the age at which he begins to draw his life

annuity, and his pension wealth is simply:



             W(54) =   24 * .02* E (54) *     A(r,65)   *
                                                            (l÷r    (F2)




Thus the benefit B that the worker accrues in his 55th year is:



                                         * W(54)
             B(55) =   W(55) —   (l+r)                              (F3)




Since the value of W(54) rises at the interest rate r even if the

worker leaves the firm, it is not a part of the pension benefit that he

accrues during his 55th year.

     One can solve (Fl), (F2), and (F3) for the worker's cash wage w in

his 55th year under the spot model of the labor market. The sum of this

wage and the worker's accruing pension benefit must equal the value of

his marginal product (VMP):



            w(55) ÷ B(55)   =    VMP(55)                            (F4)




     If the worker's pension benefit is real and if the real interest rate

is   i ,   then (Fl), (F2) and (F3) become:
                                         24


               W(55) =   25 *   .02* d(55)*E(55) * A(i,55)
               W(54) =   24 *   .02*   E(54)* A(i,65) *   (1+r)—ll       F(2)'

               B(55) =   W(55) — (1+r) * W(54)                           F(3)'



    Note that (F2)' arid (F3)' imply that if the worker leaves the firm before

    qualifying for his early retirement benefit, then the real value of his

    pension benefit is eroded by inflation until he begins to draw his

    pension at the normal retirement age of 65. This is the case for the one

    plan in the sample that provides for fully indexed annuities.



6. Bulow (1981) points out that the decline in the value of this option

    provides the plan sponsor with a method of reducing the total

    compensation of older workers without reducing their salary. Clark arid

    McDermed (1985) emphasize that the cash wages paid to a worker must —

    under the spot model — accelerate after the date that the worker become

    eligible for a normal retirement benefit, assuming that the pension is

    not actuarially increased if the worker elects to defer retirement and

    thus its receipt. They provide some evidence from the Retirement History

    Study that this is the case, thus providing some support for the spot

    model.



7. See Pesando (1984a) and Allen, Clark and Sumner (1984) for evidence

    regarding the payment of ad hoc cost—of—living adjustments in Canada and

    the United States, respectively.



8. One first calculates the worker's pension wealth, which is the discounted

    (by interest and mortality) payments due him under the terms of the plan.
                                     25


    One then calculates the present value of the reduction in these payments

    that occurs as a result of the integration provisions. To do this

    calculation, I assume that public pension benefits will remain constant

    in real terms. The integration offset is then subtracted from the

    worker's private pension wealth, and benefit accruals are then derived

    from the net pension wealth figures. For a more elegant treatment of

    integration provisions in a contingent claims framework, see Merton,

    Bodie and Marcus (1984).



9. The only qualification to this conclusion is linked to Plan 5, and it

    does not appear to be important. About 20 percent of the 25—year service

    cohort have not yet attained age 50 and thus have not yet qualified for

    the early retirement benefit. These individuals do not, under the spot

    model, require large wage reductions in their 25th service year. For the

    majority of workers who are completing their 25th service year, a

    significant wage reduction is required under the spot model. The fact

    that the average salary of this service cohort rose by 13.4 percent in

    1982 effectively rules out the possibility that dramatic wage reductions

    for the qualifying group are being masked by the appropriate (to the

    value of their marginal product) wage increases of the non—qualifying

    group. For this to be the case, the wage increases granted the non—

    qualifying group would have to be so large as to be unfeasible on a prima

    fade basis.



10. The worker's pension wealth equals the present value of the expected

    stream of payments that the worker would receive if the worker quit the

    firm. Unanticipated fluctuations in interest rates thus produce
                                     26


    corresponding fluctuations in the value of a worker's pension wealth. An

     increase in interest rates, for example, reduces the cost of purchasing

    the annuity to which the worker is entitled, thereby reducing the

    worker's pension wealth.



11. For a discussion of termination insurance in Ontario, see Pesando (1982).

    In the United States, a number of bills have been introduced in the House

    and the Senate (for example, H.R. 3930 and S.1227), to limit the ability

    of ongoing firms to impose claims on the PBGC.



12. For a discussion of the funded status of pension plans in the United

    States, with particular attention to the role of implicit pension

     liabilities, see Ippolito (1985b). For an analysis of the funded status

    of pension plans in Canada, see Ezra (1983). With the recent rally in

    the stock market and the continuing high level of long—term interest

    rates, most plans are fully funded on a wind—up basis.



13. Bulow—Landsman (1983) draw attention to the possibility that the wind—up

    measure of pension liabilities may nonetheless be valid if the tradeoff

    between wages and accruing pension benefits takes place at the level of

    the employee group as a whole. If an unusually large number of employees

    qualifies for an early retirement benefit, this may be offset by

    unusually large wage concessions from the employee group as a whole.

    This type of behaviour is, one might conjecture, more likely to

    characterize the total compensation packages negotiated formally in the

    union sector. Among non—unionized employees, where earnings—related

    pension plans are typically found, the a prior case is less convincing.
                                        27


                                      References



Allan, Steven G., Clark, Robert L. and Daniel A. Sumner (1984). "Post—

     Retirement Adjustments of Pension Benefits". National Bureau of Economic

     Research, Working Paper No. 1364, June.

Becker, Gary S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoreticaland Empirical Analysis

     with Special Reference to Education. (New York: Columbia University

     Press.)

Black, Fischer (1980). "The Tax Consequences of Long Run Pension Policy".

     Financial Analysts Journal 36 (July—August): 3—10.

Bodie, Zvi, Light, Jay, Morck, Randall and Robert A. Taggart, Jr. (1984).

     "Funding and Asset Allocation in Corporate Pension Plans: An Empirical

     Investigation". National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.

     1315, March.

Bulow, Jeremy (1981). "Early Retirement Pension Benefits". NBER Working

     Paper No. 654, April.

________ (1982).    "What are Corporate Pension Liabilities?" Quarterly Journal

     of Economics 97(August): 435—52.

________ and Wayne Landsman (1983). "The Relationship Between Wages and

     Benefits". Paper presented at National Bureau of Economic Research

     Conference on Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice, Dorado Beach, Puerto

     Rico.

________ and Myron Scholes (1983). "Who Owns the Assets in a Defined—Benefit

     Pension Plan?". In Zvi Bodie and John Shoven, eds., Financial Aspects of

     the United States Pension System (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Clark, Robert and Ann McDermed (1985). "Earnings and Pension Compensation,

     the Effect of Eligibility". Mimeograph, North Carolina State University.
                                       28


 Ezra, Don (1983). The Struggle for Pension Fund Wealth (Toronto: Pagurian

      Press Limited).

 Feldstein, Martin and Randall Morck (1983). "Pension Funding Decisions,

      Interest Rate Assumptions, and Share Prices". In Z. Bodie and J.Shoven,

     eds. Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System (Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press).

________ and Stephanie Seligman (1981). "Pension Funding, Share Prices and

     National Savings". Journal of Finance 35 (September): 801—24.

French, Kenneth R., Ruback, Richard S. and G. William Schwert (1983).

     "Effects of Nominal Contracting on Stock Returns". Journal of Political

     Economy 91: No. 1 (February): 70—96.

Friedman, Benjamin (1983). "Pension Funding, Pension Asset Allocation and

     Corporation Finance: Evidence from Individual Company Data". In Z.

     Bodie and J. Shovens, eds. Financial Aspects of the United States Pension

     System (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Harrison, 3. Michael and William Sharpe (1983). "Optimal Funding and Asset

     Allocation Rules for Defined—Benefit Pension Plans". In Z. Bodie and 3.

     Shovens, eds. Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System

     (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Ippolito, Richard (1985a). "The Economic Function of Underfunded Pension

     Plans". Journal of Law and Economics, XXVIII: No.3 (October): 611—652.

________ (1985b).   "The Labor Contract and Real Economic Pension Liabilities".

     American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Kotlikoff, Laurence and Daniel Smith (1983). Pensions in the American

     Economy. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Lazear, Edward (1981). "Agency, Earning Profiles, Productivity and Hours

     Restrictions", American Economic Review 71: No. 4 (September): 606—

     6210.
                                         29


 ________ (1983).   "Pensions as Severance Pay°. In Z. Bodie and   J.   Shoven,

      eds. Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System (Chicago:

      University of Chicago Press).

________ (1979).    "Why is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political

      Economy 87: No. 5 (December 1979): 1261—84.

Logue, Dennis (1979). Legislative Influence on Corporate Pension Plans.

      (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute).

Medoff, J. and K. Abraham (1981). "Are Those Paid More Really More

     Productive?". Journal of Human Resources XVI No. 2 (Spring): 186—216.

________ (1980).    "Experience, Performance and Earnings". Quarterly Journal

     of Economics XCV: No. 4 (December): 703—736.

Pesando, James (1982). "Investment Risk, Bankruptcy Risk and Pension Reform

     in Canada". Journal of Finance, 37: No.3 (June: 341—349.

________ (1984a).    "Employee Valuation of Pension Claims and the Impact of

     Indexing Initiatives". Economic Inquiry 22 (January): 1—17.

________ (1984b).    "Valuing Pensions (Annuities) with Different Types of

     Inflation Protection in Total Compensation Comparisons". Canadian

     Journal of Economics 17 (August): 569—87.

________ (1985).    "The Usefulness of the Wind—Up Measure of Pension

     Liabilities: A Labor Market Perspective". Journal of Finance, 40: No.3

     (July): 927—940.

Salop, J. and S. Salop (1976). "Self—Selection and Turnover in the Labor

     Market". Quarterly Journal of Economics (July), pp.619—27.

Sharpe, William (1976). "Corporate Pension Funding Policy". Journal of

     Financial Economics 3 (June): 1983—93.

Statistics Canada (1979). Pension Plans in Canada 1978 (Ottawa: Government

    of Canada).
                                      30


Tepper, Irwin (1981). "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy". Journal of

     Finance 36 (March 1981): 1—14.

Wise, David A. and Laurence Kotlikoff (1984). "Labor Compensation and the

     Structure of Private Pension Plans: Evidence for Contractual Versus Spot

     Labor Markets". National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.

     1290, March.
                                               31
                                             Table 1

             Wage Paths Under the Spot Model of the Labour Market:   Generous
                 Plan with Typical Vesting and Early Retirement Provisions

                            Nominal Benefit                        Real Benefit
Employment            Level of      Growth Rate of      Level of         Growth Rate of
   Year              Real Wages     Real Wages (%)     Real Wages        Real Wages (%)

                       10, 183                           10,183
         2             10,370            1   .83         10,370               1   .83
         3             11,560            1.83            11,560               1.83
     4                 10,754            1.83            10,754               1 .83
     5                 10,951            1 .83           10,951               1 .83
     6                 11,152            1 .83           11,152               1 .83
     7                 11,357            1 .83           11,357               1.83
     8                 11,565            1 .83           11 ,565              1.83
     9                 11,777            1 .83           11,777               1.83
    10                 11,339           —3.72            10,614             —9.88
    I'
    11
                       12,066            b.'lI           II ,9Ub             I. 18
    12                 12,262            1 .62           12,073               1 .40
    13                 12,457            1 .59           12,234              1 .34
    14                 12,651            1 .55           12,390              1 .27
    15                 12,828            1 .40           12,474              0.68
    16                 13,026            1.55            12,657              1 .46
    17                 13,209            1 .40          12,779               0.97
    18                 13,386            1 .34          12,889               0.85
    19                 13,557            1 .27          12,983               0.73
    20                 13,719           1.19            13,054               0.55
    21                 13,872           1.12            13,116               0.48
    22                 14,013           1.02            13,152               0.28
    23                 14,141           0.91            13,166               0.11
    24                14,254            0.80            13,156              —0.08
    25                 2,481          —82.59            —8,149            —161 .95
    26                14,363          478.86            12,999            —259.51
    27                15,202            5.85            14,125               8.66
    28                16,125            6.07            15,389               8.95
    29                17, 162           6.43            16,843               9.45
    30                15,420          —10.15            10,179             —39.56
    31                20,064           30.12            21,549             111.70
    32                21 ,905           9.17            24,737              14.79
    33                24, 198          10.47            28,486              15.16
    34                26,582            9.85            32,769              15.04
    35                28,442            7.00            34,795               6.18

Notes: The pension benefit is 2% of the worker's average earnings during the
past 5 years for each year of service. Benefits vest after 10 years of service
and the worker is eligible for an early retirement benefit at aye 55. If he
elects to retire at age 55, he receives immediately a life annuity equal to 70
percent of the benefit due him at age 65; at age 56, 73 percent; and so forth.

The worker is presumed to enter the plan at age 30. The interest rate is 12%,
the inflation rate is 9%, and the nominal value of the worker's marginal
product grows at 11% per year. The initial value of the worker's marginal
product is $10,000 and it grows in real terms at an implied annual rate of
1.83%. The risk free real interest rate used to value the indexed annuities is
one percent. If the worker terminates prior to qualifying for an early
retirement pension, his benefit remains fixed in nominal terms until he reaches
normal retirement at age 65, and is then indexed to the inflation rate.
                                                32


                                          Table 1A

     Wage Paths Under the Spot Model of the Labour Market: TMLess Generous
            Plan with Typical Vesting and Early Retirement Provisions


                          Nomi nal   Benefit                    Real Benefit
Employment      Level of             Growth Rate of    Level of       Growth Rate of
   Year        Real Wages            Real Wages (%)   Real Wages      Real Wages (%)

                 10,183                                 10, 183
         2       10,370                   1.83          10,370            1.83
         3       11,560                   1 .83         11,560            1.83
     4           10,754                   1.83          10,754            1 .83
         5       10,951                   1 .83         10,951            1 .83
     6           11,152                   1 .83         11,152            1 .83
     7                                    1.83          11,357                .83
     0
     0            I   I                   I .0.)
                                          1
                                                        II , 3O           I   .öi
     9           11,777                   1.83          11,777            1 .83
    10           11, 664                —0.96           11,294           —4.11
    11           12, 139                 4.07           12,056            6.75
    12           12,349                  1 .73          12,250            1.61
    13           12,560                  1.71           12,443            1.57
    14           12,772                  1 .69          12,634            1.54
    15           12,982                  1 .64          12,806            1.36
    16           13, 1 98                1 .66         13,003             1.53
    17           13,411                  1 .61         13,182             1.38
    18           13,623                  1 .58         13,354             1.31
    19           13,833                  1.54          13,520             1 .24
    20           14,041                  1 .50         13,676             1.15
    21           14,245                  1 .46         13,822             1.07
    22           14,445                  1 .40         13,956             0.97
    23           14,639                  1 .34         14,075             0.86
    24           14,826                  1 .28         14,179             0.74
    25            7,669                —48.28          —1,521         —110.73
    26           15,140                 97.42          14,334       —1,042.26
    27           15,836                  4.60          15,478            7.98
    28           16,598                  4.81          16,746            8.19
    29           17,441                  5.08          18, 169           8.50
    30           17,291                 —0.86          15,334          —15.61
    31           19,618                 13.46          22,259           45. 16
    32           20,916                  6.61          24,917           11.94
    33           22,492                  7.54          27,937           12.12
    34           24,088                  7.10          31 ,252          11.86
    35           25,643                  6.45          33,999            8.79



Notes: Same as in Table 1, except that pension benefit is now 1% of the
worker's average earnings for each year of service.
                                       33


                                    Table 2

     The Impact of Different Economic Environments on Wage Paths Under the
               Spot Model: uGenerousu Plan with Nominal Benefit


                      Interest Rate = 4%               Interest Rate = 6%
Employment      Level of       Growth Rate of     Level of      Growth Rate of
   Year        Real  Wages
               ___________     Real Wages (%)    Real Wages     Real Wages (%)

                 10, 198                           10,190
     2           10,399            1.98            10,392            1   .94
     3           11,605            1 .98           10,593            1 .94
     4           10,815            1 .98           10,799            1 .94
     5           11,030            1 .98           11,009            1.94
     6           11,248            1 .98           11,223            1 .94
     7           11,471            1.98            11 ,441           1.94
     o           11,698             I .ö           I I,00i
     9           11,930            1 .98           11 ,   889       1.94
    10            4,979          —58.26             8,190         —31.11
    11           11,531            3.56            11,764          43.63
    12           11,727            1.70            11,946            1 .55
    13           11,926            1 .70           12,129            1.53
    14           12,128            1.70           12,312             1.51
    15           10,918           —9.98           12,043           —2.19
    16           12, 281          12.46           12,578            4.44
    17           12,460            1 .46          12,742             1.31
    18           12,640            1.45           12,904            1.27
    19           12,822            1 .44          13,064            1.23
    20           12,604           —1.70           13,136            0.55
    21           13,097            3.91           13,349             1 .63
    22           13,266            1 .29          13,493             1.07
    23           13,435            1 .27          13,631             1.03
    24           13,604            1 .26          13,764            0.98
    25            4,799          —64.72            3,379          —75.45
    26           14,174          195.34           14,244          321 .52
    27           14,152           —0.16           14,605            2.53
    28           14,366            1.51           14,996            2.67
    29           14, 785           2.92           15,650            4.36
    30           10,641          —28.03           11,929          —23.78
    31           15,984           50.20           17,477           46.52
    32           16,746            4.77           18,690            6.94
    33           18,049            7.78           20,331            8.78
    34           19,242            6.61           22,133            8.86
    35           18,406           —4.34           22,164            0.14



Notes: Same as in Table 1, except for different economic assumptions. When
the interest rate is 4%, the inflation rate is 1% and the nominal value of the
worker's marginal product grows at 3% per year. When the interest rate is 6%,
the inflation rate is 3% and the nominal value of the worker's marginal
product grows at 5% per year.
                                                                                               Table 3

                                                                            of Final Earnings Plan:           Sw.ary of   Features
                                                                  Sale

         Benefit for Each                                                                                       Integration with Government
Plan     Year of Service                 Vesting                 Early Retirement                               Pension Plans                                     Inflation    Adjustments

 1       2% of average of                10 years service        age 50 and 25 years service;                   reduced by 2.5% of (C/QPP + OAS) for each         fully indexed to the
         final (best) 5 years            and age 45              d(50)   .35, d(51) =        .38...             year of service, with reduction starting          consumer    price index
                                                                 d(55) = .50, d(56)   .55...                    at normal retirement age of 65 and
                                                                                                                inclusive of cost-of—living increases in
                                                                                                                government benefits

 2       1-2/3%   faverage of            10 years service        age 55 and 10 years service;                   reduced by 1.25% of (C/QPP + OAS) for each        policy of ad hoc
         final (best) 5 years                                    d(55) =    .70,   d(56) =   .73...             year of service, with reduction starting          adjustments to offset
                                                                                                                at normal retirement age of 65                    50% of inflation

 3       1.6% of average of              10 years service        age 55 and 10 years service;                   reduced by 1.5% of (C/QPP + 04S) for each         no contractual nor         (h.)
         final (best) 3 years                                    d(55)      .70, d(56)       .75...             year of service, with reduction starting          stated policy of ad
                                                                                                                at date of early retirement                         adjustments
 4       2% of average of                10 years service        unreduced if age 55 and 30 years               reduced by 1/33rd of (C/QPP + OAS) for            policy of ad hoc
         final (best) 5 years            and age 45              of service; otherwise, age 55                  each year of service with reduction               adjustments
                                                                 and 10 years of service,                       starting at normal retirement age of 65
                                                                 d(55) = .50, d(56)    .55...

 5       1-2/3%    of   average   of      10   years service     age 55 and 10 years of service;                reduced by 1/80th of C/QPP benefits for           no contractual nor
         final    (best) 5 years         and age 40              d(55) = .70, d(56) = .73...                    each year of service, with reduction              stated policy of ad
                                                                                                                starting at date of early retirement              hoc adjustments



Notes:    1.     d(55) =   .70    indicates that the early retirement benefit,        if taken at age 55, equals 70%        of   the accrued benefit otherwise due at the normal
                 retirement age     of 65.
          2.     C/QPP is the Canada/Quebec        Pension Plan, and OAS is Old Age Security.            In   1982, maximum C/QPP plus OAS benefits   equalled $6,584.

          3.     Plans 4 and 5 are contributory; i.e., employees           as well as employers make contributions           to the plan.   For employees, this is usually
                 a fixed percentage of their salary.
                                       35


                                    Table 4


            Benefit Accruals in 1982: Plan with Early Retirement

                        at Age 50 and 25 Years of Service



             Service                 Benefit                Accrual!
             Cohort
             ________                Accrual
                                     ________                    Wage


               21                      2,826                 0.07
               22                      3,174                 0.08
               23                      4,318                 0.09
               24                      4,066                 0.10
               2c                     65,149                 1    in
               26                     16,356                 0.35
               27                     16,305                 0.36
               28                     17, 196                0.36
               29                     16,231                 0.33
               30                     13,348                 0.31
               31                     20,678                 0.47
               32                     18,839                 0.42
               33                     23,172                 0.53
               34                     21,748                 0.49
               35                     13,058                 0.28




Notes:

1. This is Plan No. 1 in Table 3.

2. A cross—tabulation of male workers by age and years of service indicates
    that the majority of workers with 25 years of service have attained age
    50. The calculations presume that a worker who completes his 25th year of
    service also attains age 50 and thus qualifies for an early retirement
    benefit.

3. The pension benefit is an indexed life annuity which is valued at a real
    interest rate of 1%.
                                            36
                                           Table 5

                  Benefit Accruals in 1982: Plansa
                                                      with Early Retirement
                               at Age 55 and 10 Years of Service


              Plan No.    2
  Age          Benefit        Accrual!                 Age     Benefit        Accrual!
 Cohort        Accrual          Wage                 Cohort    Accrual          Wage
      51        11,164                                 51                     0.046
                                                                 1,714
      52         1,553         0.047                   52                     0.055
                                                                 2,170
      53         1,584         0.049                   53                     0.063
                                                                 2,351
      54         2,827         0.073                   54                     0.072
                                                                 2,718
      55        44,944         1.225                   55                     0.959
                                                                37,236
      56         1,108         0.038                   56        5,853        0.155
      57         1,037         0.034                   57                     0.144
                                                                 6,278
      58         1 ,942        0.059                   58                     0.160
                                                                 6,475
      59        6,649          0.126                   59                     0.169
                                                                 7,l79
      60           113         0.004                   60                     0.169
                                                                 6,380


              Plan No. 4.
     Age       Benefit        Accrual!                 Age    Benefit     Accrual!
 Cohort        Accrual          Wage                 Cohort   Accrual       Wage
     51         1,488         0.049                    51                     0.042
                                                                1,280
     52         1,435         0.053                    52                     0.036
                                                                1,081
     53         1,780         0.064                    53       1,680         0.052
     54         2,261         0.075                    54       2,034         0.059
     55        29,079         0.853                    55                     1.001
                                                               32,850
     56         8,636         0.192                   56                      0.084
                                                                2,824
     57         4,465         0.123                   57                      0.095
                                                                2,837
     58         5,211         0.150                   58                      0.114
                                                                5,096
     59         1,194         0.058                   59          539         0.014
     60        20,324         0.739                   60                      0.027
                                                                1,066


Notes:

a. See Table 3 for plan details. Calculations assume that workers who are
    age 55 have completed 25 years of service.

b. The sponsor of Plan No. 2 provides, as a matter of policy, cost—of—living
    adjustments designed to offset the impact on pensions in pay of 50% of the
    increase in inflation as measured by the consumer price index. Terminated
    workers entitled to deferred annuities receive such adjustments only after
    they attain normal retirement age of 65. Discounting at an interest rate
    of 6% is a crude attempt to allow for such adjustments. At this interest
    rate, the benefit accrued at age 55 rises to $72,932 or to 1.989 times the
    average cash wage paid to this age cohort.

c.     If the plan member has completed 30 years of service at age 55, as more
       than 50% have, he qualifies for an unreduced early retirement benefit.
       For such members, the benefit accrued at age 55 is actually $84,923 or
       2.492 times the average cash wage paid to this age cohort. At age 60, a
       member is assumed to have completed 30 years of service and thus qualifies
       for an unreduced benefit. This explains the discontinuity at age 60.
                                                       37


                                                   Table 6

                   Benefit Accruals for Service/Age Cohorts at Time of Vesting



          Plan No. 1a
                                                          b
(10 Years Service and age 45) Plan No.2 (10 Years Service) Plan No.3 (10 Years Service)b

   Age     Benefit      Accrual! Service        Benefit Accrual!       Service       Benefit   Accrual!
 Cohort    Accrual        Wage   Cohort         Accrual      Wage      Cohort        Accrual     Wage

   44         0             0          9           0           0             9          0         0
   45       12,229       0.299        10         1,171      0.035           10        1,256     0.038
   46        2,793       0.066        11           639      0.012           11          371     0.010
   47        3,439       0.077        12           781      0.013           12          898     0.026


                      i-ian rio. '                                   'ian    rio.

           (10 Years Service and Age 45)                    (10 Years Service and Age 40)

              Age       Benefit      Accrual!                 Age      Benefit      Accrual!
            Cohort      Accrual        Wage                 Cohort     Accrual        Wage

              44           0               0                  39             0          0
              45         3,018        0.086                   40        1,600        0.041
              46           648        0.022                   41             164     0.005
              47           678        0.025                   42             705     0.018



Notes:

a. If a plan member terminates before qualifying for an early retirement benefit, his
    deferred pension is fixed in nominal terms until he reaches normal retirement age of
    65, and then rises at the inflation rate. A terminated worker entitled to a deferred
    pension is presumed to receive a death benefit equal to the present value of the
    deferred pension at the date of his death.

b. Assumes that those completing 10 years of service have attained age 40. For Plan 2,
    benefit accrued by 10—year service cohort rises to $1,793 if the deferred annuity is
    valued at an interest rate of 6%, to reflect the sponsor's policy of providing ad hoc
    cost—of—living adjustments for pensions in pay equal to 50% of the inflation rate.

c. Assumes that those attaining age 45 have 15 years of service. If they have 20 years
    of service, the benefit accrued by this age cohort rises to $4,024.

d. Assumes that those attaining age 40 have completed 10 years of service. If they have
    completed 15 years of service, the benefit accrued by this age cohort rises to $2,400.

Plans 4 and 5 are contributory, and terminated workers whose benefits have not vested
receive the accumulated value of their own contributions. This fact is not reflected in
the calculations reported above, and the calculations significantly overstate the benefit
accrual associated with vesting in these two plans on this account.
