                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             EXPLAINING RECENT TRENDS IN THE U.S. TEEN BIRTH RATE

                                     Melissa Schettini Kearney
                                         Phillip B. Levine

                                        Working Paper 17964
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17964


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2012




The authors thank Kelleen Kaye for helpful comments and Lisa Dettling for very capable research
assistance. Any views expressed are those of the authors alone. We acknowledge financial support
from the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned pregnancy. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Melissa Schettini Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Explaining Recent Trends in the U.S. Teen Birth Rate
Melissa Schettini Kearney and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 17964
March 2012, Revised December 2013
JEL No. I28,J13

                                            ABSTRACT

We investigate trends in the U.S. rate of teen childbearing between 1981 and 2010, giving particular
attention to the sizable decline that has occurred since 1991. Our primary focus is on establishing the
role of state-level demographic changes, economic conditions, and targeted policies in driving recent
aggregate trends. We offer three main observations. First, the recent decline cannot be explained by
the changing racial and ethnic composition of teens; in fact, all else equal, a rising share of Hispanic
teens would have led to an increase in teen childbearing. A temporary increase in the share of teens
aged 18-19 can account for nearly half of the transitory increase in teen childbearing around 1991.
Second, the only targeted policies that have had a statistically discernible impact on teen birth rates
are declining welfare benefits and expanded access to family planning services through Medicaid.
However, the combined effect of these two policies is estimated to account for only 12 percent of the
observed decline in teen childbearing from 1991-2010. Third, weak labor market conditions, as measured
by the unemployment rate, do appear to lead to lower teen birth rates and can account for 28 percent
of the decline in teen birth rates since the Great Recession began.


Melissa Schettini Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu

Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        Over the past two decades, the teen birth rate in the United States has exhibited a

stunning decline. It peaked at 61.8 in 1991, before falling 49 percent, reaching a low of 31.3 in

2011. Over one-third of that decline took place in just the last four years of that period. The

longer term decline for black, Non-Hispanic teens has been even more dramatic, falling from a

rate of 118.9 in 1991 to 51.5 in 2010, a 57 percent decline. These trends can be seen in Figure 1,

which plots the number of births to women between the ages of 15 and 19.1 Understanding the

factors that have contributed to these aggregate trends is an important question for economic

demography; it is critical in developing a better sense of what drives rates of teen childbearing.

        This paper empirically investigates the role of state-level demographic changes,

economic conditions, and targeted policies in driving aggregate teen birth rate trends over the

past few decades. It is crucial to understand the factors that lead teens to alter their decisions and

behaviors in order to inform policy discussions about how to alter teen childbearing outcomes.

Policy observers offer many potential explanations for the recent decline, with advocates across

the political and policy spectrum making competing claims. Some analysts have cited the Great

Recession as a potential cause of the decline in the last few years.2 Others reference the success

of newer types of sex education programs,3 abstinence only education programs,4 and improved




1
   Aggregate teen birth rates are obtained from the National Center for Health Statistics. Estimates by race and
ethnicity are provided in bound volumes of Vital Statistics of the United States: Volume I, Natality, for years up
through 1993. After that, they are available electronically from annual reports, Report (or Advance Report) of Final
Natality Statistics, for 1994 through 1996 and from Births: Final Data beginning ever since 1997. Race and
ethnicity are not separately identified in birth data prior to 1989.
2
  Carl Haub of the Population Reference Bureau told CBS News: “I don’t think there’s any doubt now that it was the
recession. It could not be anything else” (Jaslow, 2011)
3
   Leslie Kantor, Vice President of Education for the Planned Parenthood Federation of America takes this view,
stating: "Whether it's in the public school system or community-based venues, we've really learned over the last 20
years what kinds of programs help young people to really change their behavior." (Tulumello, 2011)
4
  Valerie Huber, executive director of the National Abstinence Education Association in Washington, states "The one
thing we know for certain is more teens are waiting to have sex, which tells us ‘abstinence only’ is a message that's
resonating with them" (Tulumello, 2011).
                                                         2
access to contraception.5 While casual observers and advocates are content to make such claims,

to date there is a lack of rigorous research verifying the empirical importance of these factors in

explaining changes in teen birth rates.

         Our investigation of the role of state-level factors in driving aggregate trends is built

conceptually on the recognition that environmental and policy factors shape individual’s

decisions and behaviors. This conceptualization is ubiquitous in the economics of fertility

literature, which models fertility decisions within a cost/benefit framework of a utility

maximizing individual. This focus stands in contrast to the focus on “mechanical” or

“proximate” drivers of teen birth rates among many who work in public and reproductive health

circles. We present descriptive information about trends in sexual activity and contraceptive use

over the relevant period, which leads to the observation that teenagers have achieved lower birth

rates through a combination of less sex and more contraceptive, and not through increased

reliance on abortion. But, we emphasize that these facts inform us only about the mechanisms

through which teens achieved lower birth rates, and by themselves do not speak to the relevance

of various policies.

         Our paper leads to the following conclusions. First, the observed decline in teen

childbearing over the past twenty years is even more surprising given the demographic changes

that have taken place. A growing share of Hispanic teenagers – who have higher rates of teen

childbearing – would, all else equal, have led to a substantial rise in the aggregate rate of teen

childbearing. Second, we find little evidence that targeted policies played much of a role in the

decline. Declining welfare benefits and expanded access to family planning services through the

Medicaid program each had a statistically discernible, albeit small, effect. Our analysis yields no


5
  Kathryn Kost of the Guttmacher Institute states: “The recent declines in teen pregnancy rates are great news … It
is time to redouble our efforts to ensure that all teens have access to the information and contraceptive services they
need to prevent unwanted pregnancies” (Guttmacher Institute press release, 2/8/2012, available at:
http://www.guttmacher.org/media/nr/2012/02/08/index.html, accessed 3/14/2012.
                                                          3
evidence suggesting that other policies, including abstinence only education or mandatory sex

education, had any role in driving aggregate teen birth rates over this period. Third, our results

indicate that the dramatic rise in the level of unemployment since 2007 can explain a sizeable

portion of the lower teen birth rates lately. This impact, however, should be viewed as transitory

since labor market conditions will ultimately rebound, making this factor unlikely to contribute

to long term reductions in teen childbearing.

II. BACKGROUND: TRENDS IN TEENAGE SEXUAL ACTIVITY AND CONTRACEPTIVE USE

         It is a matter of biology that a fall in the teen birth rate has to be mechanically driven by a

decline in sexual activity, greater contraceptive use, or an increase in the use of abortion

(assuming that miscarriages are reasonably fixed in their likelihood). For descriptive purposes, it

is useful to know the role that each of these factors played in the historical trend experienced in

the United States over the past several years. It is critical to note, however, that an exercise along

these lines does not inform us directly about whether particular policies are effective at leading

teens to change their behaviors. To know that teenagers used contraception at higher rates, for

example, does not tell us anything about whether policies that promote contraception are

effective. Teenagers might have made different choices with regard to contraception for reasons

having nothing to do with particular policies around contraception at that time. 6

         The data rule out abortion as a contending explanation for the decline in teen childbearing

rates. Historical statistics reported by Kost and Henshaw (2012) on pregnancies, abortions, and

births indicate that abortions among teens have dropped considerably, largely because




6
  Yet previous authors have made such claims. Boonstra (2002, p. 8) provides an example: “If recent declines in
teen childbearing are the result of fewer teens getting pregnant in the first place, the obvious next question is: why?
Are fewer teens avoiding pregnancy by abstaining from sex, or are those who are having sex using contraception
more successfully? Not surprisingly, the answer is: both. But deconstructing that answer is critical, because it goes
to the heart of a number of relevant and timely public policy questions, among them the debate over public funding
for abstinence-only education and for more-comprehensive approaches.” Santelli et al. (2007) express similar
views.
                                                           4
pregnancies have fallen. In 2008 (the most recent year for which abortion data are available), 26

percent of teen pregnancies were aborted, down from 32 percent in 1991.

        We plot historical trends in sexual activity and contraceptive use among teens using two

sources of data: the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) and data from the Youth Risk

Behavior (YRBS) system. The NSFG includes data on all women between the ages of 15 and 44,

but we restrict our attention to those who are unmarried and between 15 and 19. The YRBS

focuses on those still enrolled in high school and who are mostly between the ages of 14 and 18.

        First, as seen in Figure 2, both sources of data indicate that teenage girls were less likely

to report sexual activity in the three months preceding the survey over the past two decades. 7 In

the YRBS, the rate of sexual activity fell from 40.4 percent in 1995 to 34.2 percent in 2011. In

the NSFG, it fell from 37.9 percent in 1995 to 30.6 percent in the 2006 through 2010 period.8

Second, the data also show an increase in the likelihood of contraceptive use among “sexually

active women” (i.e. those who engaged in sexual activity in the past three months). In the NSFG,

the percentage using some form of contraception at last intercourse among sexually active

women rose from 79.9 percent in 1988 to 85.6 percent in 2006-2010 (Abma and Sonenstein,

2002; and Martinez, et al., 2011).9 In the YRBS, the data show an increase from 81.9 percent in

1991 to 84.9 percent in 2011. These data suggest that reductions in teen childbearing over the

past two decades reflects both a decrease in the rate of sexual activity and an increase in the use

of contraception.




7
  Sources for these data are Abma and Sonenstein (2001) and Martinez, et al. (2011) for the NSFG and Youth
Online: High School YRBS, available at http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/youthonline/App/Default.aspx, and accessed on
10/29/2012.
8
  In 2006, the NSFG switched from including larger samples being surveyed once every several years to smaller
samples being surveyed annually. Using the more recent approach, data across years are aggregated to generate
larger sample sizes.
9
  The NSFG value for 1995 is 70.7 percent, which appears to us to represent an unrealistically large change between
this and the values in 1988 and 2002 of 79.9 and 83.2 and inconsistent with the trends in the YRBS. Because of our
uncertainty in interpreting the 1995 value, we have chosen to rely on the 1988 estimate (which seems more plausible
in historical context and in reference to YRBS estimates) as a starting point for our comparisons over time.
                                                        5
        Another potential contributing factor is that contracepting teenagers switched to more

effective methods of contraception. Newer methods including Depo Provera and emergency

contraception (“Plan B”) have become available over this period. Indeed, some advocates point

to the introduction of newer, more reliable methods as one reason for the falling teen birth rate

(cf. Guttmacher 2011). Table 1 presents detailed data from the NSFG on contraceptive methods

used among sexually experienced teen women. The top panel of the table presents the methods

that teens have ever used. Almost all of them report having used some method at some point;

indeed 96 percent report having used condoms. Pill use is the next most common form, with 56

percent of teens reporting having used the pill. A roughly comparable share report having used

the withdrawal method.

        Newer methods – including the contraceptive patch, contraceptive ring, and emergency

contraception (EC) – appear to be gaining some users. In 2002, 8 percent of teens report use of

EC and 1.5 percent report having used the contraceptive path; these numbers are up to 14 percent

and 10 percent by the latest round of data. These are still relatively small shares of this

population, as compared to pill and condom use.10

        To investigate whether there were substantial rates of switching to more reliable forms of

contraception in the aggregate, it is useful to focus on the choice of method used at last

intercourse among those who are sexually active (intercourse in the past three months), which is

displayed in the bottom panel of the table. This is a more reliable indicator of “usual” form of

contraception. By this measure, condoms are still the most popular form of “usual”

contraception, and increasingly so. In 2006-10, 52 percent of sexually active respondents report

using the condom at last intercourse, as compared to 38 percent in 1995. Pill use rose from 25
10
   Existing studies suggest that the introduction of and expanded access to emergency contraception (EC) has
generally not led to discernible changes in pregnancy, abortion, or birth outcomes. Girma and Paton (2011, 2006),
report such findings in the context of England. Durrance (2012) examines county-level data from Washington State
and finds that access to EC is associated with increased rates of STD but no change in abortion or birth rates.
Raymond et al. (2007) review 23 studies of emergency contraception access and conclude that the evidence points
against there being an effect of EC on pregnancy or abortion rates.
                                                       6
percent in 1995 to 34 percent in 2002 before falling back to 31 percent in 2006-2010. That fall

in pill use in the most recent period was completely compensated by the use of other hormonal

methods, which rose from 9 to 12 percent.

       Our interpretation of these data is that older, highly effective methods of contraception

(the pill) were being substituted for new, very highly effective methods of contraception (i.e.

Depo Provera) over the past decade. Between 1995 and 2002, however, the increased use of

condoms and the pill is commensurate with the increase in the share using any method (as

opposed to dual methods), suggesting this is more likely to represent new users. This period also

witnessed a large advance in the share reporting dual methods: from 8.4 percent in 1995, up to

roughly 20 percent in the latter two surveys. The impact of dual use depends on what women

would have used otherwise. Obviously the largest impact would have been realized if these

women otherwise would have used no method of contraception, a moderately effective method,

such as the condom, versus a highly effective method such as the pill.

       In previous work we conducted a regression analysis to mechanically decompose the

reduction in teen childbearing over this period into changes in rates of sexual activity and

changes in contraceptive use (Kearney and Levine, 2012). We constructed a pooled cross-

section, time-series dataset, link state data on teen birth rates over time to YRBS data sexual

activity and contraceptive practices. That analysis yielded the conclusion that both reduced rates

of sexual activity and increased use of contraception make substantive contributions to falling

teen birth rates.11 This leads us to underlying question of why those behaviors changed.




11
   Santelli, Lindberg, Finer, and Singh (2007) use a simulation approach -- incorporating
assumptions about rates of sexual activity and contraceptive use along with their associated
probabilities in terms of pregnancy and birth outcomes -- to investigate this same question. They
come to roughly the same conclusion.
                                                7
III. DEMOGRAPHIC COMPOSITION AND THE TEEN BIRTH RATE

       In this section we consider the role of (a) demographic composition changes and (b)

differential rates of change across demographic subgroups. If behavior remained constant for

individuals in different demographic groups, but the relative size of those groups changed over

time, that could affect aggregate level outcomes. On the other hand, if all groups remained in

constant proportion but one group experienced a particularly large decrease in birth rates that

would have an effect on aggregate level outcomes. We consider two features of the composition

of the female teen population: the racial/ethnic composition and the specific age distribution of

the teen population.

       The share of the teenage population that falls into a minority racial/ethnic category has

increased steadily between 1980 and 2010. Figure 3 shows the upward trends in the share of the

female teen population that is Hispanic and the share that is “other race” and non-Hispanic (this

group includes American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, or Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

– Asian is the subgroup that is driving this increase). Using statistics from the U.S. Census

Bureau, we calculate that the percentage of women between the ages of 15 and 19 who are white,

non-Hispanic decreased from 76 percent in 1980 to 56 percent in 2010. This trend is largely

attributable to a growing Hispanic population: the percentage of the female teen population that

is Hispanic rose from 8 percent to 20 percent over this period. An increasing share of other race,

non-Hispanic women (again, mostly Asian) from 2 percent to 8 percent explains most of the

remainder of the drop among white, non-Hispanic teen women. The relative size of the black

population has not appreciably changed over this period.

       Based on the rise in the Hispanic share of the teenage population, all else held constant,

the counterfactual trend in teen childbearing would have been a rising birth rate. The Hispanic

teen birth rate has been consistently around 2.5 to 3 times the rate of the white, non-Hispanic

birth rate. The black, non-Hispanic teen birth rate is 2.2 to 2.7 times the white, non-Hispanic
                                               8
birth rate over this time period, but since the black share of the teen population has not changed

that much, this difference is not instrumental to explaining trends.

         Another important component of demographic change is the precise age distribution of

the female teen population. Birth rates to women between ages 15 and 17 are one-third the level

of that for women who are 18 or 19 years old (Martin, et al. 2011). As broader population trends

move through the teenage years, this could have a sizeable impact on the overall teen birth rate.

In particular, Figure 3 shows a blip in the share of teens age 18-19 around 1990.12 This pattern

may be relevant to explaining at least some of the increase in teen childbearing that took place

around 1990.

         We conduct a straight-forward econometric analysis relating state/year level variation in

teen birth rates, measured in natural logs, to the demographic shares of the teenage population.

This exercise is not meant to be an exhaustive exploration of factors affecting teen birth rates.

This is simply intended to provide an econometric exploration of the relationship between the

demographic trends seen in Figure 3 to the overall birth rate trend seen in Figure 1.

         We estimate a regression model on pooled cross-section, time series data of teen birth

rates using standard panel data methods. The dependent variable is the teen birth rate, measured

as a natural log, in a particular state and year. The independent variables represent shares of the

teen population that are: (1) age 18-19, (2) black, non-Hispanic, (3) other race, non-Hispanic,

and (4) Hispanic. We also include state and year fixed effects to capture long-term, fixed

differences in outcomes across states as well as national trends in outcomes.

         Teen birth rates are calculated from Vital Statistics natality files (the numerator) and

intercensal population estimates of women age 15-19 (the denominator) were obtained from the
12
   Abortion legalization in the early 1970s is an important contributor to this pattern (Levine, et al., 1999). Birth
rates in the mid to late 1960s were reasonably flat, but then fell considerably during the early 1970s as abortion was
legalized throughout the United States. As birth rates fell starting around 1971, the fraction of 15 year olds in the 15-
19 age group would begin to decline around 1986. By 1988, the fraction of teens who were 15-17 year olds would
be relatively low. This “disequilibrium” would continue until birth rates stopped falling, which took place by, say,
1975. These earlier demographic trends would explain the age pattern in Figure 3.
                                                           9
U.S. Census Bureau.13 These Census data are also used to construct the explanatory variables.

The equation is estimated using 30 years of data, from 1981 to 2010 inclusive. The regression is

weighted by the size of the female population age 15-19 in each state. Reported standard errors

are adjusted for clustering at the state level.

        Table 2 reports the results of this exercise. A one percentage point rise in the share of the

teenage population age 18-19 leads to a statistically significant 1.61 percent increase in the teen

birth rate. The results in Table 1 indicate that a one percentage point increase in the share of the

female teen population that is Hispanic results in a 1.72 percent increase in the teen birth rate.

        We combine these estimated coefficients with data on what actually happened to

population shares over this period to get an estimate of what would have happened to the teen

birth rates based only on changing demographics. This is a standard method of decomposition in

economic analyses (see, for example, Sullivan and Rosenbaum, 2001). The percentage of teens

age 18 or 19 who are 18 or 19 dropped from 42 percent to 40 percent between 1984 and 1986. It

then rose to 44 percent in 1989 and 1990 before returning to steady state around 40 by 1993. The

estimated relationship implies that the 4 point increase in this percentage leading up to 1990

would be associated with a 6.4 percent increase (4*.016) in teen birth rates. With a baseline teen

birth rate of around 52 leading up to this period, a predicted 6.4 percent increase around 1990

would lead to a 3.3 unit increase in the teen birth rate. The actual level rose by around 10 units,

meaning that this one component of demographic change can explain about one-third of the

spike in teen birth rates around 1990. It can also explain virtually the entire drop in the teen birth

rate of 61.8 to 58.2 between 1991 through 1994. To the best of our knowledge, this is the only

factor that has been identified which can explain any portion of this spike. We view this is a very

useful new insight to come out of this simple analysis of demographic factors.


13
  These data are available at http://www.census.gov/popest/data/historical/index.html, last accessed March 14,
2012.
                                                        10
        With a rapidly growing Hispanic population over this period, the teen birth rate should

have risen, not fallen. Consider the period beginning in 1994, after the impact of a changing age

composition ran its course, and running through 2010, a period over which the teen birth rate fell

from 58.2 to 34.3, indicating a drop of 41 percent. As dramatic as that drop is, we should have

expected that rate to rise by around 12 percent over this period if nothing else changed other than

the percentage of Hispanic teens, which jumped from 13 percent to 20 percent. This means that

the teen birth rate actually was cut almost in half to 34.3 from a baseline rate of 65.2 (58.2*1.12)

if we incorporate the higher share of Hispanic teens. In other words, the change in teen

childbearing behavior that needs to be explained is even greater than that indicated by the raw

numbers.

        We now consider another aspect of demographic composition – how teen birth rates

changed for racial/ethnic subgroups. Figure 1 plots the trend in teen birth rates separately for

non-Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks, and Hispanics beginning in 1990, when data by

Hispanic origin became available. The data show very clearly that all groups experienced the

same general downward trends in teen childbearing over the past two decades. This implies that

the factors which caused these movements were not specific to one racial/ethnic group in

particular.14

        That said, the post-1990 rate of decrease in the birthrate among black, non-Hispanic

teenagers was particularly large. U.S. vital statistics data report that the non-Hispanic black teen

birth rate fell from 118.9 in 1991 to 51.5 in 2010; that is a remarkable 67.4 point drop. The

overall teen birth rate fell from 61.8 to 34.5 over these same years, a 27.3 point drop. As shown

in Figure 3, black, non-Hispanic teens account for a roughly steady 15 percent of the population.

This means that the falling teen birth rate among this group can account for a 10.1 drop

14
   This does not preclude subsequent investigation into the particular experience of black, non-Hispanic teens, but
that such an investigation is outside the scope of the present paper. We would encourage others to pursue this issue
further in subsequent research.
                                                        11
(67.4*.15) out of the overall 27.5 point drop, This indicates that black, non-Hispanics -- which

comprise 15 percent of the population - account for 37 percent of the overall decline.

        To summarize the discussion in this section, we highlight four key findings. First, if

nothing else changed, trends in the ethnic composition of the teenage population between 1991

and 2010 would have led to increases in teen childbearing over this period, which leaves us with

an even greater decline to explain. Second, the specific age composition of the teenage

population has roughly been constant over the 1981 to 2010 period, except for a bulge in the

share age 18-19 around 1990. This transitory change in the age structure can explain a large

share of the spike in the overall teen childbearing rate that occurred around 1990. Third, white,

black, and Hispanic teens all saw their rates of teen childbearing decline substantially between

1991 and 2010. Fourth, black teens saw their rates of teen childbearing fall especially rapidly,

and the decrease in the teen birth among this group can account for a disproportionate share of

the decline in the overall teen birth rate.

IV. THE ROLE OF PUBLIC POLICY AND LABOR MARKET CONDITIONS

        In this section, we econometrically investigate the role of state-level policies and

economic conditions in driving state-year variation in teen birth rates. We take guidance from the

existing literature in choosing our set of explanatory policies and variables, with a particular

emphasis on policies directly targeted at affecting teen childbearing outcomes. We draw on the

excellent review by Lopoo and Raissian (2012), which surveys the research on public policies in

the United States relevant to fertility outcomes. Most, if not all, past research has focused on a

single or limited number of factors that may matter. An important contribution of our analysis is

an integrated approach that simultaneously considers the role of a wide array of relevant policies

and economic conditions. To the extent that our findings are consistent with past research, this

will enable us to draw stronger conclusions.

A. Data and Methods
                                                12
         To identify the effect of individual policies and economic conditions on teen birth rates,

we exploit the variation in the timing of policy implementation and movements in economic

conditions across states. This approach allows us to identify the causal relationship between a

policy or economic conditions and teen birth rates provided that we have adequately controlled

for other factors that might be correlated with them. We accomplish this by employing panel data

methods, where the dependent variable is the natural log of the teen birth rate in a particular state

and year and the explanatory variables include all of these policy indicators, economic factors,

and state-level demographic characteristics, along with a vector of year fixed effects and

nonlinear state-specific trends.15 All explanatory variables are lagged one year to better

approximate the conditions that existed at the time of conception.

         We allow state-specific effects to vary nonlinearly by including up to a cubic in state-

specific trends. Figure 1 provides the motivation for this specification. Over the sample period

used in this analysis, national trends in teen birth rates were roughly flat through the 1980s,

spiked in the early 1990s and then have been declining ever since. Year fixed effects would

capture this nonlinear pattern at the national level, but presumably these patterns differed across

states. A cubic is required to capture the two observed turning points.16




15
   The implicit assumption of a difference-in-difference framework that exploits the variation of timing
implementation of policies across states is that the precise timing of the introduction of policies at the state level is
exogenous to trends in teen birth rates in that state. The inclusion of state-specific trends addresses this potential
source of bias.
16
   In his paper on the effect of unilateral divorce laws, Wolfers (2006) makes the point that the inclusion of non-
linear trends in a difference-in-difference framework could capture some of the dynamic effects of a policy in the
post-implementation period. He recommends augmenting the model with indicators for discrete periods of time
post-policy, for example, an indicator for one to two years post policy, three to four years post policy, etc. He also
observes that the problem is exacerbated when there are few years observed pre policy implementation. Our
investigation includes a large set of policies, making it infeasible to put in a full set of post-period time indicators for
each policy. Furthermore, for almost all of the binary policy variables in our analysis, we have many years of pre
implementation data. And finally, unilateral divorce laws are likely to have dynamic effects on marital churn. The
effects of the types of policies we consider are much less likely to be dynamic or cumulative.
                                                            13
         Our analysis uses birth data from the Vital Statistics Natality files between the years of

1981 and 2010 aggregated to the state/year level.17 We combine these data with the intercensal

population estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau to construct teen birth rates. We augment

these birth rate data with a large set of state-year level policies and two measures of state-year

economic conditions. The specific policies and economic conditions that we consider are

described in the following section. A data appendix describes the sources used to construct these

policy variables and an appendix table displays the years in which the relevant policies were

introduced in each state.

         Our regression models also include control variables for the demographic composition of

the state female teenage population in each year using data from the U.S. Census Bureau, as

described above for the analysis reported in Table 2. These controls include the percent of the

population that is white/non-Hispanic, black/non-Hispanic, percent that is Hispanic, and percent

that is age 18-19. We also include broader measures of the state population that might affect

general social norms and therefore have an indirect effect on teen childbearing rates. These

variables are constructed from Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Group files. These

controls includes the percent of the state population that is: age 15-19, of childbearing age (15-

44), married, and with a college degree.

         We estimate this model first for all teen births. We then estimate these models separately

for females age 15-17, females age 18-19, nonwhite teens, Hispanic teens, unmarried teens,

married teens, and for first births.18 Our motivation for doing this is twofold. First, it is

informative to see if the estimated impact of policies varies across population subgroups to think


17
   We restrict our sample period to this window because of the difficulty of documenting variation in some of the
policies in earlier years. In models focusing on Hispanic fertility, we are restricted to using data beginning in 1990,
when Vital Statistics data began separately identifying births to Hispanic women, regardless of race. In models
focusing on nonwhite women, we use the full set of data going back to 1981, so Hispanic ethnicity is not separately
identified.
18
   The denominator in constructed birth rates by marital status and birth order is the total number of women between
the ages of 15 and 19.
                                                         14
about whether there are important differences in treatment effectiveness. Second, it is often

useful to check whether the estimates vary in expected ways in order to determine whether the

statistical estimates we obtain can be interpreted as causal. For example, some policies, like

parental consent for abortion for instance, should only affect younger teens and unmarried teens,

so if we obtain estimates that indicate an impact of these laws that are not concentrated on these

groups, then it is likely that those results are spurious, not causal.

B. Policies Considered

         We begin with policies that directly target proximate determinants. First, we consider

whether a state accepts federal Title V-510 abstinence education funding. This provision was

passed as part of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996

(PRWORA) and expanded federal funding for programs that emphasize abstinence curricula,

mentoring, counseling, and adult monitoring to promote abstinence from sexual activity outside

of marriage. States that accept these funds are required to match 75 percent of the federal

funding. Past research has had difficulty finding much of an impact of programs like these (cf.

Trenholm, Devaney, Fortson, Clark, Quay, and Wheeler, 2008).

         We also include two measures of state-level policies on sexual education programs – an

indicator for whether the state requires sexual education programs and an indicator for whether

state law requires contraception education be included in any sexual education program.

Although past research has had difficulty identifying a causal impact of sex ed in any form on

teen births (cf. Sabia, 2006 and Kirby, 2007), we consider this possibility here as well.19

         In terms of contraceptive access, we focus on increases in eligibility for free family

planning services that took place within the context of the Medicaid program. Medicaid has
19
   Kirby (2007) reports evidence that sex ed is found to be effective in reducing aspects of risky sexual behavior
among teens, but that the impact is not large. This may translate into difficulty finding effects on teen childbearing
itself. When we combine a small change in risky behavior with the probability of pregnancy even in the presence of
risky behavior, the expected impact of these programs on childbearing would be small as well. Statistical power in
these analyses then becomes an important issue, as Kirby points out. Nevertheless, the relevant conclusion is that
these programs are unlikely to have a substantial effect on teen childbearing based on this evidence.
                                                         15
traditionally provided comprehensive access to family planning services to its clients, but

participation was largely restricted to mothers who received welfare. For the past two decades or

so, states have had the ability to request waivers from the federal government to provide family

planning coverage to a broader group of women. As of January 2012, 28 states have done so.20

The expanded services have generally applied to the following groups of women: (1) women

whose pregnancy-related care, including post-partum family planning, would otherwise expire;

(2) women who would lose their Medicaid eligibility status for any reason; and (3) women

whose income is below a specified income threshold (typically 185 percent or 200 percent of the

federal poverty threshold), but above the eligibility threshold for the state’s regular Medicaid

program, regardless of whether they meet the categorical requirement of having a child or being

pregnant. Some of these waivers only apply to the population of women age of 19 and over, so

they would presumably have limited effectiveness for the teen population. Kearney and Levine

(2009) found that these income-type expansions led to statistically significant reductions in teen

childbearing, on the order of a four percent reduction.

         Another policy change with a family planning component is the introduction of the State

Children’s Health Insurance Program (S-CHIP), now known as the Children's Health Insurance

Program (CHIP). This federal program provides matching funds to states to provide health

insurance coverage to families whose incomes are low, but too high to qualify for traditional

Medicaid. The program was implemented during the late 1990s, with some variation across

states in exact year of implementation. Adolescents have access to family planning services

through the CHIP program and this could have contributed to a reduction in the teen birth rate, at

least at that time. The take-up rate of this provision among adolescents, however, is observed to

be quite low, perhaps in part because of the lack of confidentiality in their provision (Gold and


         20
            For a list of states that have instituted these policies as of 1/1/2012, see the report by the Guttmacher
Institute, http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_SMFPE.pdf, accessed 1/9/2012.
                                                         16
Sonfield, 2001). This suggests we are unlikely to find a strong relationship between this policy

and teen birth rates.

         Moving away from factors that are directly targeted at proximate determinants, we

explore the role that changing welfare policies may have played. There is a large literature on the

incentive effects of welfare benefit levels on non-marital and teen childbearing. Moffitt (1998,

2003) review the evidence on the link between welfare benefits and non-marital childbearing,

including teen childbearing. His summary view is that the general consensus is that more

generous welfare benefits likely have a modest positive effect on rates of non-marital

childbearing. We include in our analysis a measure of welfare generosity at the state-level: the

maximum AFCD/TANF benefit amount for a family of three (in year $2009, measured in natural

logs).

         Beyond welfare generosity, a substantial literature also examines the role that welfare

reform has played on women’s, and particularly teens’, childbearing decisions. Welfare reform

was implemented at the national level with the passage of the 1996 PRWORA legislation; an

explicit goal was to reduce rates of teen childbearing. Before PRWORA, many states received

waivers from the federal government allowing them to experiment with the rules of welfare.

Many of the changes implemented under these state waivers would become permanent under the

implementation of the state’s TANF policy. Grogger and Karoly (2005) provide comprehensive

reviews of the research on the impacts of welfare reform on a range of outcomes, including birth

rates.

         Some authors have focused explicitly on the impact of welfare reform as a bundle on teen

childbearing rates. Both Kaestner, Korenman, and O’Neil (2003), using the NLSY79 and

NLSY97, and Offner (2005), using March CPS data, suggest that TANF negatively impacted

teen births. But, the results tend to be modest. For example, Offner (2005) finds that TANF is

responsible for a 1.1 to 1.6 percentage point decrease in teen birth rates. In our analysis, we
                                                 17
include indicators for whether a state-year observation has in place a welfare waiver policy or if

it had implemented TANF.

       One type of welfare reform policy directed squarely at childbearing, though not

necessarily teen childbearing, is the so-called family cap. States began to implement family

cap policies under federal welfare waivers beginning in 1992. These policies limit either in part

or completely any additional benefit for having an additional child while participating in the

program. The evidence on family caps is somewhat mixed. Several studies find that the family

cap or incremental increases in benefits have no effect on women’s fertility (Dyer & Farlie,

2004; Grogger & Bronars, 2001; Joyce et al., 2004; Kearney, 2004; Romero & Agenor, 2009).

Horvath-Rose and Peters (2001) and Sabia (2008) suggest otherwise. Our reading of the studies,

taking into account the relative strengths and weaknesses of the various papers, is that at least in

the earliest years of implementation, family cap policies did not lead to a reduction in birth rates

among target populations. But, it is probably most appropriately considered an open question,

especially in terms of what happened in later years post implementation. Our regression analysis

in this paper includes an indicator for whether a family cap policy is in place.

       The welfare reform movement of the 1990s did include a policy targeted directly at

would-be teen moms – Minor Parent Provisions (MPP). These provisions allowed states to use

federal funds to aid teen mothers under age 18 if they were (1) attending secondary school or

another educational forum related to obtaining employment and (2) living with their parents or in

another adult-supervised setting, if the teen mother is not living with her husband (Haskins &

Blank, 2001). Lopoo and DeLeire (2006) use Vital Statistics natality data to investigate the

impact of these provisions on birth rates among teens aged 15 to 17, as compared to birth rates

among 18 year old teens not subject to the provisions. The authors find that younger teens

experience a more rapid decline in birthrates when the MPPs are in effect. However, given that

these provisions were largely implemented simultaneously with other welfare reform policies, it
                                             18
is difficult to determine that it is actually these provisions specifically that were responsible for

any differential trends. Our analysis below includes an indicator variable for the implementation

of an MPP policy.

       Another state-level policy that is potentially relevant to teen birth rates is child support

enforcement. The Child Support Enforcement (CSE) program is a federal program, established in

1974, that recognizes an obligation on the part of nonresident parents to contribute financially to

the care of the child. The program consists of establishing paternity, creating an award

agreement, and enforcing the nonresident parent’s obligation to pay that award. It is well

recognized that greater child support enforcement has theoretically ambiguous effects on non-

marital birth rates, potentially making it less costly for mothers (but not necessarily if it crowds

out more generous informal support) but more costly for would-be non-marital fathers.

       Plotnick et al. (2004) investigate the relationship between CSE using data from the

NLSY97. They, find that CSE strictness reduces the likelihood of nonmarital teenage

childbearing among non-Hispanic, white teenagers. They attribute this mainly to paternity

establishment. Aizer and McLanahan (2006) use natality data from 1985 to 1999 to estimate

difference-in-difference models of the effect of CSE on birth rates, comparing birth rates among

single mothers to those of married mothers, controlling for state and year fixed effects. Their

measure of CSE strictness is a measure of state-year expenditures. They argue that this is a more

appropriate measure to use as compared to state-level policy indicator variables due to (1) data

quality concerns about policy features and (2) state expenditure changes being driven by federal

changes, which lessons policy endogeneity concerns. They find that a one percent increase in

CSE expenditures leads to a decline in single fertility relative to married fertility of 0.09 percent

among low-educated mothers. They do not look in particular at teen births. Following Aizer and

McLanahan (2006), we include total annual state-level CSE expenditures as an explanatory

variable in our analysis.
                                                 19
         Changes in abortion policies also have the potential to alter individual decisions

regarding sexual activity, contraceptive use, and childbearing decisions. There are three general

sets of restrictive abortion policies at the state level – parental notification laws, mandatory delay

periods, and restrictions on Medicaid funding. Parental involvement laws either require minors to

notify a parent or guardian or obtain explicit consent before they can obtain an abortion.

Mandatory delay laws require a specified period of time after her initial inquiry before a woman

can receive an abortion. In some states, these laws require pregnant women to receive abortion

counseling. The policy of restricting federal Medicaid funding for abortions means that federal

Medicaid funds cannot be used to cover abortion services. However, states can pay the full cost

of the abortion, and a number of states have a policy of doing so. Levine’s (2004) summary of

this body of research concludes that these forms of restrictive abortion policies are not found to

be associated with higher rates of teen childbearing.21 We include in our analysis measures of

whether a state’s Medicaid program restricts funding for abortion, along with indicators of the

presence of mandatory delay and parental notification laws.

         In addition to these policy variables, we also consider the role of state-level economic

conditions, focusing mainly on the unemployment rate. Labor market conditions actually have an

ambiguous effect on the teen birth rate. A stronger labor market may lead to higher income,

which would make having a child more affordable. Alternatively, a stronger labor market

increases the opportunity cost of having children, reducing one’s willingness to give birth.

Shaller (2011) provides a recent empirical examination of this issue. She finds that birth rates are

negatively related to the aggregate unemployment rate. Focusing specifically on teens, Colen, et

al.(2006) investigate the relationship between age-specific birth rates and state-specific

unemployment rates from 1990 to 1999 for Black and White females aged 10–29. They find that


21
  Joyce, et al. (2006) is a more recent entry into this literature that provides some evidence of a reduction in births
associated with a parental consent law using a case study approach applied to a Texas law.
                                                          20
falling unemployment rates in the 1990s were associated with decreased childbearing among

black women age 15–24, in particular for women age 18 and 19. This would suggest that

improved labor market opportunities lead to lower rates of young childbearing for older black

teens. But, those authors find no evidence of a relationship between unemployment rates and

fertility for young white women.

         In our analysis, we include standard measures of the state/year unemployment rate from

the Bureau of Labor Statistics to examine this issue ourselves. We also include a state-year

measure of lower-tail wage inequality: the ratio of household income at the 50th percentile versus

the 10th percentile, constructed using CPS data on total household income.

C. Empirical Results

         Table 3, column 1 reports the detailed regression findings for all teens between the ages

of 15 and 19. To summarize these findings, it appears that the unemployment rate is an important

determinant of teen childbearing. A higher unemployment rate leads to lower teen childbearing.22

In addition, we are able to detect a statistically meaningful effect of two public policies.23 More

generous welfare benefits are associated with higher rates of teen births and income-based

Medicaid family planning waivers are associated with lower rates of teen births. The fact that the

impact of welfare generosity on teen births is driven entirely by unmarried women supports a

causal interpretation since welfare eligibility is largely restricted to this group. A finding of a




22
   The discrepancy in these results compared to those in Colen, et al. (2006) may be attributable to the timing link
between teen birth rates and labor market conditions. We associate the unemployment rate in year t-1 to the teen
birth rate in year t. Although it is difficult to say for sure, it appears Colen, et al. link birth rates to contemporaneous
unemployment rates. In fact, when we have estimated models of that form, we also obtain a statistically insignificant
relationship between labor market conditions and teen birth rates. Because of the roughly nine month lag, however,
between the behaviors that lead to a teen birth and the outcome itself, lagging the unemployment rate seems like a
more reasonable approach.
23
   One potential concern with this analysis is that we are considering a large number of factors, potentially lessening
the power of the analysis. We have also estimated the model focusing on subsets of factors and obtained
qualitatively similar results.

                                                            21
discernible effect of these two policy measures is consistent with previous literature. We discuss

the magnitudes of these estimated effects below.

        The absence of statistically significant relationship between some of these measures and

teen births can be just as informative as their presence. Importantly, the data do not support the

claims of those who attribute declining teen births to abstinence only or any type of sex

education programs. Failure to find a statistically significant result is not conclusive evidence

that these programs have no effect for any group or in any context. However, the estimated

coefficients and associated standard errors do rule out any sizable effect in the aggregate. They

are also consistent with past evidence that is also unable to detect much of an impact of these

policies.

        The remaining columns in the table report the results for subgroups. As we move to

smaller groups, the analysis loses statistical precision so some of the estimated effects become

statistically insignificant, even though point estimates remain fairly far from zero. Moreover,

given the large number of parameters being estimated, it would not be surprising to observe a

small number of them that are significantly different from zero just by chance. Our interpretation

of these results is based upon patterns in the results that make sense based on our own intuition

along with findings from past research.

        For instance, we see that welfare generosity is estimated to have a much larger impact on

non-marital teen births as opposed to marital teen births. Based on past research and program

requirements that make it far easier and more generous to obtain welfare benefits if the mother is

unmarried, this finding makes sense and solidifies our interpretation that we have identified a

causal result. For the most part, Medicaid family planning waivers appear to have a similar

impact across all demographic groups, with perhaps a larger impact on married teens (albeit still

a statistically significant impact on unmarried teens). Kearney and Levine (2009) did not


                                               22
separate teens by marital status, and we have no reason to believe that this finding is counter-

intuitive.

    Beyond that, the coefficient estimates tend to be statistically insignificant, with the exception

of a handful that do not necessarily fit any obvious pattern. For instance, the results suggest that

Hispanic teens have higher birth rates when parental consent and Medicaid funding restrictions

are implemented, but lower birth rates when mandatory delay laws are introduced. Our instinct is

to interpret these findings as spurious, but we cannot rule out the possibility that Hispanic

women respond differently to abortion restrictions than others. Findings like this would require

further investigation before drawing any strong conclusions. Taken as a whole, though, we

interpret the subgroup analysis as being supportive of our broader conclusion that the only two

policies that appear to have a causal impact on teen childbearing are Medicaid family planning

waivers and welfare generosity.

D. Magnitude of the Estimated Effects

        Although some policies seem to have an impact on teen childbearing, our back-of-the-

envelope calculations suggest that the magnitude of these effects relative to the total decline in

teen births is rather small. We first consider the role of welfare benefits. The estimate effect as

reported in Table 4 indicates that a 10 percent reduction in welfare benefits reduces the teen birth

rate by 1 percent. In the period between 1991 and 2010, the average fall in the maximum

monthly benefit for a family of three, weighted by state teen population, was 32.9 percent. We

calculate the predicted decline due to this policy variable by multiplying this reduction by the

estimated effect in Table 4 by the realized percent decline (0.010*32.9), yielding an estimated

reduction of 3.3 percent in teen births over this period attributable to average declining welfare

benefits.

        With regard to income–based Medicaid family planning expansions, the regression

analysis finds that the implementation of such a policy leads to an average reduction in teen birth
                                                23
rates of 4.4 percent (an estimate that is quite comparable to that in Kearney and Levine, 2009).

As of 2010, income-based waiver policies that include teenagers had been implemented in 12

states, representing 43.8 percent of the teen population. Based on our regression estimates, this

would lead to a reduction in teen birth rates of 1.9 percent (0.044*43.8). Combined, these two

policies would predict a 5.2 percent decline in teen birth rates between 1991 and 2010. The teen

birth rate fell over this period from 61.8 to 34.3, a decline of 44.5 percent. This means that these

policy changes can account for approximately 12 percent of the decline in teen fertility since

1991.

        The magnitude of the impact of changing labor market conditions is limited over the

longer term, but sizeable over the past few years. From 1991 through 2010, the unemployment

rate rose from 6.8 percent to 9.6 percent. This represents a 2.8 percentage point increase.

According to our regression results, this would generate a 3.1 (=2.8*-1.1) percent decline in teen

childbearing. This only represents 7 percent of the 44.5 percent overall decline over this period.

On the other hand, the jump in the unemployment rate associated with the Great Recession,

rising from 4.6 percent in 2007 to 9.6 percent in 2010, would predict a larger share of the actual

decline. The 5 point rise in unemployment would lead to a 5.5 percent reduction in teen

childbearing. This represents 28 percent of the 19.3 percent decline in teen childbearing rates. As

the economy recovers, however, this also means that we may expect a reversal in some of the

recent decline in teen childbearing.

V. DISCUSSION

        We began this paper by recognizing the stunning decline in the teen birth rate between

1991 and 2011. In terms of the mechanical determinants of the fall in teen childbearing, we

document that the recent decline in teen childbearing is attributable to both reduced sexual

activity and increased use of contraception. The data reveal that teen abortion rates fell along


                                                24
with childbearing rates, so the decline in teen childbearing is clearly not due to an increased

reliance on abortion.

       We argue that it is crucial from a policy perspective to understand the policy and

environmental factors that led to these observed changes in behavior. We first considered the

role of demographic trends in driving this decline, and observed that the changing ethnic

composition of the teen population would have actually led to an increase in teen childbearing

rates, making this drop all the more striking. This is because the Hispanic population has become

a larger share of the population and Hispanic women have higher than average teen birth rates.

The only demographic movement that appears to appreciably explain any recent trend is the

temporary increase in the share of the female teenage population comprised of 18-19 year olds

around 1990, which can potentially explain about half of the corresponding spike in teen births at

that time.

       We have considered a large number of policies, including those that observers have

alleged contributed to the decline. Based on our review of past research along with the results of

the empirical analyses we have conducted here, we find little indication that recently-enacted

targeted policies drove much of the decline. Consistent with past research, we are able to identify

that falling welfare benefit levels and the expansion of family planning services through income-

based waivers to the Medicaid program both appear to be causally linked to a reduction in teen

births. However, combined these factors can account for about 12 percent of the total fall in teen

birth rates from 1991 to 2010. Weaker labor market conditions also appear to make a small

contribution to this longer term decline (albeit a larger one over the past few years), accounting

for another 5.5 percent of the fall. We cannot point to any other policy or environmental factor

that plays a statistically discernible role in the decline, including improved sex education or the

introduction of abstinence only programs.


                                                25
       It is clear that teenagers made a different set of choices in the period 1991 to 2010 with

regard to teen childbearing, as compared to the preceding period. Our findings imply that these

decisions were not made in response to targeted policies. It is important to note that our

empirical analysis is based on an investigation of how policies implemented at different times

across states affected teen birth rates. By design, our analysis cannot identify the forces driving

national rates of teen childbearing. The appropriate way to interpret our findings is that policy

innovations at the state-level did not drive the decline. There appears to be a more general

decrease in the rate of teen childbearing over the past 30 years that reflects a broader cultural

shift away from teen childbearing. A reasonable hypothesis is that this general trend reflects the

combination of expanded educational and labor market opportunities for women. More research

is needed into this question, but identifying causal explanations for broadly experienced trends is

extremely challenging. What we have learned from this analysis is that none of the relatively

easy, policy-based explanations for the recent decline in teen childbearing in the United States

hold up very well to careful empirical scrutiny.




                                                   26
                                              References

Abma, Joyce C. and Freya Sonenstein (2002). “Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Practices
among Teenagers in the United States, 1988 and 1995.” National Vital Statistics Reports.
23(21).

Aizer, Anna & Sarah McLanahan. (2006). The impact of Child Support Enforcement on fertility,
parental investments, and child well being. Journal of Human Resources, 41, 28-45.

Boonstra, Heather (2002). “Teen Pregnancy: Trends and Lessons Learned.” The Guttmacher
Report on Public Policy. 5(1): 7-10.

Colen, Cynthia G., Arline T. Geronimus, and Maureen G. Phipps (2006). “Getting a Piece of the
Pie? The Economic Boom of the 1990s and Declining Teen Birth Rates in the United States.”
Social Science and Medicine, 63(6): 1531-1545.

Durrance, Christine (2012). “The effects of increased access to the morning after pill on abortion
and STD rates,” UNC mimeo.

Dyer, W. T., & Farlie, R. W. (2004). Do family caps reduce out-of-wedlock births? Evidence
from Arkansas, Georgia, Indiana, New Jersey, and Virginia. Population Research and Policy
Review, 23, 441-473.

Girma, Sourafel and David Paton (2011). “The impact of emergency birth control on teen
pregnancy and STIs.” Journal of Health Economics 30(2): 373-380.

Girma, Sourafel and David Paton (2006). “Matching Estimates of the Impact of Over-the-
Counter Emergency Birth Control on Teenage Pregnancy,” Health Economics, 15(9): 1021–
1032.

Gold, Rachel Benson and Adam Sonfield (2001). “Expanding Eligibility and Improving
Outreach Under CHIP” The Guttmacher Report on Public Policy, 4(3).

Grogger, J., & Bronars, S. G. (2001). The effect of welfare payments on the marriage and
fertility behavior of unwed mothers: Results for a twins experiment. The Journal of Political
Economy, 109, 529-545.

Grogger, Jeff and Lynn A. Caroly (2005). Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
Harvard University Press.

Guttmacher Institute (2011). “New Government Data Finds Sharp Decline in Teen Births:
Increased Contraceptive Use and Shifts to More Effective Contraceptive Methods Behind this
Encouraging Trend. New York: Guttmacher Institute.

Haskins, R., & Blank, R. M. (2001). Welfare reform: An agenda for reauthorization. In R. M.
Blank & R. Haskins (Eds.), The new world of welfare. Washington, DC: The Brookings
Institution: 3-32.


                                               27
Horvath-Rose, A. E., Peters, H. E., & Sabia, J. J. (2008). Capping kids: The family cap and
nonmarital childbearing. Population Research and Policy Review, 27, 119-138.

Jaslow, Ryan (2011). “U.S. Birth Rates Decline: Blame Recession?” posted 11/17/2011 at
(http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-504763_162-57326875-10391704/u.s-birth-rates-decline-blame-
recession/ - accessed 1/4/2012.

Joyce, T., Kaestner, R., & Korenman, S. (2003). Welfare reform and non-marital fertility in the
1990s: Evidence from birth records. Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 3, 1-34.

Joyce, Theodore., Robert Kaestner, and Silvie Colman (2006). "Changes in Abortions and Births
and the Texas Parental Notification Law." New England Journal of Medicine, 354 (10):1031-
1038

Kaestner, R., Korenman, S., & O’Neil, J. (2003). Has welfare reform changed teenage
behaviors?Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 22, 225-248.

Kearney, Melissa S. (2004). “Is There an Effect of Incremental Welfare Benefits on Fertility
Behavior? A Look at the Family Cap.” Journal of Human Resources 39(2): 295-325.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine (2011). “Income Inequality and Early, Non-Marital
Childbearing: An Economic Exploration of the Culture of Despair.” NBER working paper
17157.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine (2009). “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and
Sexual Behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 91(1): 137-151.

Kirby, Douglas (2007). Emerging Answers 2007: Research Findings on Programs to Reduce
Teen Pregnancy and Sexually Transmitted Diseases. Washington, DC: National Campaign to
Reduce Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy.

Kost, Kathryn, and Stanley Henshaw (2012). “U.S. Teenage Pregnancies, Births and Abortions,
2008: National Trends by Age, Race and Ethnicity.” New York: Guttmacher Institute.

Levine, Phillip B. (2001) The Sexual Activity and Birth Control Use of American Teenagers” in
Jonathon Gruber (ed.) An Economic Analysis of Risky Behavior Among Youths. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Levine, Phillip B. (2004) Sex and Consequences: Abortion, Public Policy, and the Economics
of Fertility. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Levine, Phillip B., Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, and David J. Zimmerman (1999). "Roe v.
Wade and American Fertility." American Journal of Public Health. 89(2): 199-203.

Lopoo, L. M., & DeLeire, T. (2006). Did welfare reform influence the fertility of young teens?
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25, 275-298.

Lopoo, Leonard M. and Kerri M. Raissian (2012). “Policy Retrospective: Natalist Policies in
the United States.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 31(4): 905-946.
                                               28
Martin, Joyce A., Brady E. Hamilton, Stephanie J. Ventura, T.J. Mathews, and Michelle J.K.
Osterman, Sharon Kirmeyer, T.J. Mathews, and Elizabeth Wilson (2011). “Births: Final Data
for 2009.” National Vital Statistics Reports. 60(1).

Martinez, Gladys, Casey E. Copen, and Joyce C. Abma (2011). “Teenagers in the United States:
Sexual Activity, Contraceptive Use, and Childbearing, 2006-2010 National Survey of Family
Growth.” National Vital Statistics Reports. 23(31).

Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbuam (2001). “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1063-1114.

Moffitt, Robert (1998). “The effect of welfare on marriage and fertility.” In Welfare, the family,
and reproductive behavior, ed. R. Moffitt, Washington DC: National Academy Press: 50-97.

Moffit, Robert (2003). “The Negative Income Tax and the Evolution of U.S. Welfare Policy.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 17(3):119-140.

Offner, P. (2005). Welfare reform and teenage girls. Social Science Quarterly, 86, 306-322.

Plotnick, R. D., Garfinkel, I., McLanahan, S. S., & Ku, I. (2004). Better Child Support
Enforcement: Can it reduce teenage premarital childbearing? Journal of Family Issues, 25,
634-657.

Raymond, Elizabeth G., James Trussell, and Chelsea B. Polis (2007). "Population Effect of
Increased Access to Emergency Contraception Pills: A Systematic Review." Obstetrics &
Gynecology 109(1): 181–188.

Romero, D., & Agenor, M. (2009). US fertility prevention as poverty prevention. Women’s
Health Issues, 19, 355-364.

Sabia, Joseph J. (2006). “Does Sex Education Affect Adolescent Sexual Behaviors and Health?”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25(4): 783-802.

Sabia, J. (2008). Blacks and the family cap: Pregnancy, abortion, and spillovers. Journal of
Population Economics, 21, 111-134.

Santelli, John, Laura Duberstein Lindberg, Lawrence B. Finer, and Susheela Singh (2007).
“Explaining Recent Declines in Adolescent Pregnancy in the United States: The Contribution of
Abstinence and Improved Contraceptive Use. American Journal of Public Health. 97(1): 150-
156.

Shaller, Jessamyn. 2011. "Booms, Busts, and Fertility: Testing the Becker Model Using Gender-
Specific Labor Demand." University of California-Davis mimeo.

Trenholm, Christopher, Barbara Devaney, Kenneth Fortson, Melissa Clark, Lisa Quay, and
Justin Wheeler (2008). “Impacts of Abstinence Education on Teen Sexual Activity, Risk of
Pregnancy, and Risk of Sexually Transmitted Diseases.” (2008) Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management. 27(2):255-276.
                                            29
Tulumello, Jennifer Skalka. “Why the U.S. Teen Birthrate Hit a Record Low in 2010.” The
Christian Science Monitor, posted 12/12/2011 at
http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Society/2011/1212/Why-the-US-teen-birthrate-hit-a-record-
low-in-2010, accessed 1/4/2012.

Wolfers, Justin, “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation and New
Results,” American Economic Review, 96(5) 1802-1820, December 2006.




                                             30
                 Table 1: Methods of Contraception Used by Sexually Active Teens

                                                 1995             2002         2006-2010

                       Methods Ever Used (conditional on ever having sex)

Any Method                                        96.2            97.7             98.9
Condom                                            93.5            93.7             95.9
Pill                                              51.6            61.4             55.6
Withdrawal                                        42.3            55.0             57.3
Injectable                                         9.7            20.7             20.3
Rhythm                                            13.2            10.8             15.0
Emergency Contraception                            ---             8.1             13.7
Contraceptive Patch                                ---             1.5             10.3
Contraceptive Ring                                 ---             ---              5.2
Female Condom                                      1.1             1.7              1.5
Other                                             14.5             9.9              7.1

         Methods Used at Last Intercourse (conditional on having sex in last 3 months)
Any Method                                 70.7                83.2                85.6
Condom                                     38.2                54.3                52.0
Pill or Other Hormonal                     32.0                43.3                42.7
   Pill                                    25.0                34.2                30.5
   Other Hormonal                           7.0                 9.1                12.2
All Other Methods                           9.6                 5.1                11.0
Dual Methods                                8.4                19.5                20.1
Sources: Abma and Sonenstein, 2001; and Martinez, et al., 2011.




                                                      31
                   Table 2: Impact of Demographic Composition on Teen Birth Rate

                                                                              Coefficient           Standard Error
 Variable                                                                      (x 100)                 (x 100)
 % of Teen Population Age 18-19                                                 1.61                     0.71
 % of Teen Population Black, Non-Hispanic                                       0.63                     0.98
 % of Teen Population Other Race, Non-Hispanic                                  1.79                     2.07
 % of Teen Population Hispanic                                                  1.72                     0.66
Note: Estimates are obtained from a regression model where the dependent variable is the natural log of the teen
birth rate and the list of independent variables also includes state and year fixed effects. It is weighted by the size of
the female population between the ages of 15 and 19 in each state. Reported standard errors are clustered at the state
level.




                                                           32
                                Table 3: Impact of Public Policies and Economic Conditions on Teen Birth Rates
                                                        (standard errors in parentheses)
                                                                                                                            First
                                        Age 15-19   Age 15-17   Age 18-19   Nonwhite    Hispanic   Unmarried     Married    Birth

Percentage of All Teen Births              ---       34.9%       65.1%       30.6%       18.9%       72.2%       27.8%     79.1%

Unemployment Rate                         -0.011      -0.011      -0.012      -0.006      -0.011      -0.004      -0.023    -0.012
                                         (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.008)   (0.003)

Abstinence Education Funding              0.000       -0.003      0.000       0.016       0.015       0.002       -0.020    -0.015
                                         (0.010)     (0.014)     (0.009)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.016)     (0.023)   (0.009)

Mandatory Sex Education                   -0.003      -0.005      -0.002      -0.003      -0.007      0.003       -0.009    -0.003
                                         (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.020)   (0.013)

Mandatory Sex Ed with                     0.007       0.010       0.007       -0.018      0.021       0.004       0.023     0.009
Contraception Counseling                 (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.012)     (0.014)     (0.027)   (0.017)

Medicaid Income-Based                     -0.044      -0.037      -0.048      -0.035      -0.006      -0.022      -0.140    -0.057
Family Planning Waiver                   (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.017)     (0.015)     (0.011)     (0.056)   (0.013)

Medicaid Income-Based                     0.019       -0.004      0.030       0.025       0.036       0.028       0.010     0.007
Fam. Plan. Waiver Age 19+                (0.022)     (0.019)     (0.027)     (0.021)     (0.028)     (0.018)     (0.058)   (0.019)

Medicaid Duration-Based                   0.014       0.007       0.018       0.031       -0.019      0.008       -0.017    0.010
Family Planning Waiver                   (0.012)     (0.014)     (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.018)     (0.037)   (0.016)

SCHIP Implemented                         0.008       0.003       0.010       0.003       -0.007      0.008       0.029     0.010
                                         (0.009)     (0.013)     (0.008)     (0.027)     (0.019)     (0.014)     (0.014)   (0.012)

LN(max. AFDC/TANF benefit,                0.100       0.106       0.098       0.046       0.072       0.189       0.029     0.106
family of 3)                             (0.040)     (0.041)     (0.041)     (0.086)     (0.058)     (0.049)     (0.093)   (0.043)

TANF Implemented                          -0.005      0.004       -0.010      -0.008      0.005       -0.027      0.008     -0.017
                                         (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.013)     (0.020)     (0.012)     (0.025)     (0.069)   (0.010)




                                                                      33
                       Table 3 (continued): Impact of Public Policies and Economic Conditions on Teen Birth Rates
                                                     (standard errors in parentheses)
                                                                                                                                                       First
                                         Age 15-19      Age 15-17       Age 18-19      Nonwhite        Hispanic       Unmarried       Married          Birth

Family Cap Implemented                      -0.002         -0.004         -0.001          0.010          -0.008         0.007           -0.035         0.002
                                           (0.009)        (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.015)        (0.010)        (0.012)         (0.022)        (0.011)

AFDC/TANF Minor Parent                      0.011          0.005          0.016           -0.008         0.011          0.010           0.010          0.012
Provisions                                 (0.009)        (0.010)        (0.011)         (0.013)        (0.010)        (0.016)         (0.057)        (0.008)

Parental Consent                            -0.014         -0.014         -0.014          -0.008         0.064          -0.026          -0.019         -0.019
                                           (0.011)        (0.013)        (0.012)         (0.011)        (0.017)        (0.019)         (0.030)        (0.013)

Mandatory Delay                             0.001          0.004          0.000           -0.011         -0.031         -0.024          0.032          0.011
                                           (0.010)        (0.014)        (0.009)         (0.013)        (0.014)        (0.018)         (0.024)        (0.008)

Medicaid Funding Restriction                0.038          0.039          0.038           0.031          0.044          0.046           0.012          0.030
                                           (0.025)        (0.026)        (0.025)         (0.024)        (0.022)        (0.029)         (0.027)        (0.026)

Child Support Expenditures                  0.009          0.006          0.010           0.019          0.003          0.002           0.017          0.002
(in millions, $2011)                       (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.009)        (0.006)        (0.007)         (0.011)        (0.006)

50/10 Ratio                                 0.100          0.096          0.119           0.240          -0.227         -0.064          0.198          0.102
                                           (0.115)        (0.139)        (0.111)         (0.115)        (0.158)        (0.224)         (0.252)        (0.118)

Sample Size                                 1530          1530            1530           1530            1071           1530            1530           1530
Notes: The dependent variable in all regression models is the natural log of the birth rate for the relevant demographic group. All models control for the
demographic characteristics of the state’s population and also include state and year fixed effects along with state-specific linear, quadratic, and cubic trends.
Regressions are weighted by the population for the relevant demographic group. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                               34
                                                             Births per 1,000 Women Age 15-19




                                                                                                100
                                                                                                            140



                                                                                                      120




                                                             20
                                                                      40
                                                                               60
                                                                                        80




                                                         0
                                                  1970
                                                  1971
                                                  1972
                                                  1973
                                                  1974
                                                  1975
                                                  1976




Source: Martin, et al. (2011)
                                                  1977
                                                  1978
                                                  1979
                                                  1980
                                                  1981
                                                  1982
                                                  1983
                                                  1984




                                All
                                                  1985
                                                  1986
                                                  1987
                                                  1988
                                                  1989




                                White
                                                  1990




                                           Year
                                                  1991
                                                  1992
                                                  1993
                                                  1994

                                Black
                                                  1995
                                                  1996
                                                  1997
                                                                                                             Figure 1: Trend in the Teen Birth Rate




                                                  1998
                                                  1999
                                Hispanic




                                                  2000
                                                  2001
                                                  2002
                                                  2003
                                                  2004
                                                  2005
                                                  2006
                                                  2007
                                                  2008
                                                  2009
                                                  2010
                                APPENDIX: DATA SOURCES

   Maximum AFDC/TANF benefit plus food stamps for a family of three. We obtained these
    data from the public-use database of state policies provided by the University of Kentucky
    Center for Poverty Research. These data are available on the Center’s website:
    http://www.ukcpr.org/EconomicData/UKCPR_National_Data_Set_12_16_10_Public(1).xlsx
    That source contains detailed lists of sources that they used to compile these data.

   Welfare reform and “family cap” indicators. Information on welfare reform policies through
    2002 were obtained from three sources: (1) a technical report of the Council of Economic
    Advisers (1999); (2) an Urban Institute report written by Gallagher, Gallagher, Perese,
    Schrieber, and Watson. (1998); and (3) a report by Crouse (1999), prepared for the U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, which summarizes information contained in a
    report of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1997). We updated this series
    for more recent years using information from the Urban Institute Welfare Rules Database.

   Legal abortion restrictions, including parental notification/consent laws and mandatory
    waiting periods. Levine (2004) includes a detailed description of these restrictions and how
    the variables are coded. We updated Levine’s earlier series by comparing changes in legal
    status between 2004 and what is reported by Guttmacher as 2010 law. For the set of states
    with reported changes, we searched the state websites for information about dates of
    implementation: http://prochoiceamerica.org/government-and-you/state-governments/.

   Medicaid funding of abortion. Levine (2004) includes a detailed description of these
    restrictions and how the variables are coded. We updated Levine’s earlier series using
    information from NARAL – “Restrictions on Low Income Women's Access to Abortion”,
    accessed 10/15/10. This website reports when any new legislation was enacted in states:
    http://www.prochoiceamerica.org/what-is-choice/fast-facts/low-income-women.html

   Indicator variables for a poverty-based or duration-based Medicaid family planning waiver.
    Kearney and Levine (2008) provides details about these policies and implementation dates.
    We updated that series for more recent years using information from the CMS website:
    http://www.cms.gov/MedicaidStWaivProgDemoPGI/MWDL/list.asp (Accessed 9/14/10),

   S-CHIP implementation. Information is obtained from public documents of the Centers for
    Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

   State HIV/sex education policies. We use a series of Guttmacher States in Brief reports (ex:
    http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_SE.pdf, January 2011). For those years
    with reports not available on-line, we requested and received hard copy documents directly
    from the Guttmacher Institute.

   Federal abstinence education funding. We create a state level indicator based on whether a
    state accepted Abstinence Education (SS Title V Section 510) funding. These data come
    from the following on-line documents, accessed Jan 2011:
       (1) US Dept Health and Human Services, HRSA, MCHB, 2000 Annual Report for the
           Abstinence Education Provision of US Welfare Reform Law P.L. 104-193 Table 1b
           (July 2002) ftp://ftp.hrsa.gov/mchb/abstinence/annualrpt00.pdf (1998-2002)

       (2) States' Implementation of Title V, FY 1999 (Sonfield and Gold , 1999)

       (3) SIECUS Funding by State 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
           http://www.siecus.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=Page.ViewPage&PageID=1260

       SIECUS Fact Sheet: State by State Decisions: The Personal Responsibility Education
       Program and Title-V Abstinence Only Education
       http://www.siecus.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=Page.ViewPage&PageID=1272


   Minor Parent Provisions (TANF) – we thank Elizabeth Peters and Len Lopoo for sharing the
    coding of these provisions, as used in Lopoo and DeLeire (2006).

   Child Support Enforcement, Total Program Expenditures: Obtained from U.S. Department of
    Health and Human Services, Office of Child Support Enforcement, years 2005-2011:
    http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cse/pubs/2012/reports/fy2009_annual_report/. We thank
    Anna Aizer for providing us with the data for earlier years, as used in Aizer and McLanahan
    (2006).
                                    Appendix Table 1: Year of Implementation of Various Policies, by State

                                                                          Medicaid    Medicaid
                                                                           Family      Family            Accepted
                                      Medicaid                 Abortion   Planning    Planning             Title                Sex Educ      Minor
                Welfare   Welfare      Abortion     Parental    Mand      Waiver,     Waiver,             V-510      Mand       must cover    Parent
                waiver/   Family       Funding      Involve-     Wait      Income     Duration            Abstin.   Sexuality    contra-     Provision
State           TANF       Cap        Restriction     ment      Period     Based+      Based     SCHIP   Funding      Educ       ception      (MPP)
Alabama          1997        -          1981         1987         -        2000   +
                                                                                         -       1999       -         1998        2001         1996
Alaska           1998        -             -           -          -          -           -       2000     2008        2001          -          1997
Arizona          1996      1996         1977           -          -          -         1995      1999       -           -           -          1995
Arkansas         1995      1995         1981         1989       2001       1997          -       1999       -         1998          -          1997
California       1993      1998            -           -          -        1997          -       1999     1998          -         2001         1998
Colorado         1998      1998         1985         1998         -          -           -       1999     2008          -         2007         1997
Connecticut      1996      1996            -           -          -          -           -       1999     2006          -           -          1994
Delaware         1996      1996         1981         1995         -          -         1996      2000     2008        1998        2001         1995
District of
                                                                                                                                               1997
Columbia         1998       --          1998           -          -          -           -       1999     1999        1998        2003
Florida          1997      1997         1981         2005         -          -         1998      1999       -         2001          -          1996
Georgia          1994      1994         1981         1991       2005         -           -       1999       -         1998          -          1997
Hawaii           1998       --             -           -          -          -           -       2001       -         1998        2001         1997
Idaho            1998     1998          1981         2001       1995         -           -       1998     2008          -           -          1997
                          1996/
                                                                                                                                               1997
Illinois*        1994     2004          1981           -          -        2004+       2004      1999       -         1998        2004
Indiana          1996      1996         1981         1986       1997         -           -       1998       -           -           -          1995
Iowa             1994        -          1981         1996         -        2006          -       1999       -         1998          -          1993
Kansas           1997        -          1981         1992       1992         -           -       1999       -         1998          -          1996
Kentucky         1997        -          1978         1994       2000         -           -       1999       -         2001          -          1996
Louisiana        1997        -          1981         1986       1995       2006   +
                                                                                         -       1999       -           -           -          1997
Maine            1997        -          1981         1989         -          -           -       1999     2005        2001        2002         1996
Maryland         1997      1997            -         1992         -          -         1995      1999       -         1998        2001         1996
Massachusetts    1996      1996            -         1986         -          -           -       1998     2008          -           -          1995
Michigan         1993        -          1989         1991       1999       2006   +
                                                                                         -       1999       -           -           -          1992
Minnesota               1998       2003       1981        1986         -        2006        -     1999   2008   1998    -     1997
Mississippi             1996       1996       1981        1993       1992       2003        -     1999    -      -      -     1997
Missouri                1996         -        1981        1986       1986         -        1999   1999    -      -     2001   1995
Montana                 1997         -        1981          -          -          -         -     1999   2007   2006    -     1997
Nebraska                1996       1996       1981        1991       1993         -         -     1999    -      -      -     1996
Nevada                  1997         -        1981          -          -          -         -     1999    -     1998    -     1996
New Hampshire           1997         -        1981          -          -          -         -     1999   1998    -      -     1996
New Jersey              1993       1993         -           -          -          -         -     1999   2007   1998   2001   1997
New Mexico              1998       1998       1981          -          -        1998+       -     2000   2008    -      -     1997
New York                1998         -          -           -          -        2002       2002   1999   2008    -      -     1996
North Carolina          1997       1997       1996        1995         -        2005   +
                                                                                            -     1999    -     1998    -     1996
North Dakota            1998       1998       1978        1986       1994         -         -     1999    -      -      -     1997
Ohio                    1997         -        1981        1986       1994         -         -     1998   2008    -      -     1996
Oklahoma                1997       1997       1981        2001       2005       2005   +
                                                                                            -     1998    -      -      -     1996
Oregon                  1994         -          -           -          -        1999        -     1999    -     2008   2001   1996
Pennsylvania            1998         -        1985        1994       1994       2007        -     1999   2004    -      -     1997
Rhode Island            1998         -        1978        1986         -          -        1994   1998   2007   1998   2001   1997
South Carolina          1997       1997       1981        1990       1995       1994       1994   1998    -     1998   2001   1996
South Dakota            1995         -        1981        1997       1994         -         -     1999    -      -      -     1996
Tennessee               1997       1997       1981        1995         -          -         -     1998   2008   1998    -     1996
Texas                   1997         -        1981        1999       2003         -         -     1999    -      -      -     1996
Utah                    1993         -        1981        1986       1994         -         -     1999    -     1998    -     1996
Vermont                 1995         -          -           -          -          -         -     1999   2007   1998   2001   1994
Virginia                1996       1996       1981        1997       2001       2002       2002   1999   2008    -     2001   1995
Washington              1996         -          -           -          -        2001        -     2001   2008    -     2006   1997
West Virginia           1997         -          -         1986         -          -         -     1999    -     1998   2001   1997
Wisconsin               1996       1996       1981        1986       1997       2003        -     2000   2007    -      -     1997

Wyoming                 1997       1997       1978        1989         -          -         -     2000   2007   2001    -     1996
              Notes:
              + State Medicaid family planning waiver specifically excluded teenagers.
              * Illinois repealed its family cap policy in 2004
