NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLUTION OF THE BLACK-WHITE TEST SCORE GAP IN GRADES K-3:
THE FRAGILITY OF RESULTS
Timothy N. Bond
Kevin Lang
Working Paper 17960
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17960
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012

We are grateful to Henry Braun, Sandy Jencks, Dan Koretz, Sunny Ladd, Ed Lazear, Michael Manove,
Dick Murnane, Sean Reardon and participants in seminars and workshops at Baruch College, Boston
University, Brown, Sciences Po and Stanford for helpful comments and suggestions. The usual caveat
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Timothy N. Bond and Kevin Lang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Evolution of the Black-White Test Score Gap in Grades K-3: The Fragility of Results
Timothy N. Bond and Kevin Lang
NBER Working Paper No. 17960
March 2012
JEL No. C18,I24,J15
ABSTRACT
Although both economists and psychometricians typically treat them as interval scales, test scores
are reported using ordinal scales. Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study and the Children
of the National Longitudinal Survey, we examine the effect of order-preserving scale transformations
on the evolution of the black-white reading test score gap from kindergarten entry through third grade.
Plausible transformations reverse the growth of the gap in the CNLSY and greatly mitigate it in the
ECLS-K during early school years. All growth from entry through first grade and a nontrivial proportion
from first to third grade probably reflects scaling decisions.
Timothy N. Bond
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
timbond@bu.edu
Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu

1

Introduction

Economists who use test scores in their analyses have largely treated them as interval
scales (like temperature). In reality, test scores are measured on ordinal scales (like
utils). As with utility functions, any monotonic transformation of the test score
scale is also potentially a valid scale. Surprisingly, there has been little attention
to this issue among economists although there are some exceptions. Lang (2010)
raises concerns about ordinality in the context of value-added measurement. Cascio
and Staiger (2011) consider how changes in scaling a¤ect estimates of the fade-out
of teacher value-added. In this paper, we show that our conclusion about how the
black-white test score gap evolves between kindergarten and third grade is sensitive
to our choice of scale. We can …nd scale choices that show no increase in the gap
over this period and choices that double the estimated increase compared with the
published scale.
In utility theory, the solution to the absence of an interval scale is to monetize the
scale. We calculate how much money the individual would need to be compensated
to give up some good or the monetary equivalent of receiving some good such that the
individual is indi¤erent between the money and the good. In contrast, economists
have largely ignored the ordinality of test scores.
There are at least three potential responses to this ordinality:
1. Simply accept it and limit ourselves to conclusions that can be reached regardless of choice of scale. Unfortunately, this will often provide us with little
insight into important questions. We do not learn much from concluding that
the change in the black-white test score gap between kindergarten and third
grade is somewhere between 0 and :6 standard deviations. In other cases, this
approach may be adequate: the third grade test score gap is between :5 and :7
standard deviations.
2. Assume that we know a great deal about the distribution of the underlying
latent variable that test scores measure. If we are con…dent that “ability” is
normally distributed, then we can choose the scale that results in a test-score
1

distribution that best approximates the normal. We, at least, do not have
strong priors about this distribution. Of course, the central limit theorem does
explain why many phenomena in the real world have normal distributions. But
many economists equate earnings with skill, and earnings are very skewed, and
the wealth distribution is even more skewed. It is possible that the ability
distribution is similarly skewed or skewed in the opposite direction.
3. Relate the test score to some desired or undesired outcome. If, for example, we
care about the black-white test score gap because it translates into an earnings
gap, then it makes sense, data permitting, to relate test scores to earnings as
in Cunha and Heckman (2008). In general, the children in our sample are too
young to permit us to base our scale on earnings, but we do choose scales which
maximize the ability of earlier scores to predict performance on later tests. In
most cases this approach suggests little growth in the gap between kindergarten
and …rst grade but a signi…cant widening of the gap by third grade. However,
one such scale suggests no growth between kindergarten and third grade.
In this paper, we focus on whether scaling decisions a¤ect how the measured
black-white test score gap evolves as students progress through school.1 Our …ndings
should be placed in the context of the debate over when the black-white test score
gap emerges and how it evolves during the school years. In their in‡uential and
controversial studies, Fryer and Levitt (2004, 2006) challenged the accepted view that
a large black-white test score gap emerged in early childhood (Jencks and Phillips,
1998). Fryer and Levitt found that the gap in kindergarten is both modest and
largely “explained”by a small number of socioeconomic characteristics. Murnane et
al (2006) argue that the di¤erent …ndings re‡ect the use of di¤erent tests. Fryer and
Levitt also …nd that the racial gap widens sharply in the early years of schooling.2
1

Our concerns are in some ways similar to those raised in Koretz and Kim (2007) which focuses
on whether there is a di¤erence in the rate that blacks and whites with similar overall performance
progress on di¤erent skills. They argue that blacks do not fall di¤erentially behind on more advanced
skills or catch-up on less advanced ones.
2
Fryer (2010) …nds that, depending on the measure used, the racial test gap in the ECLS-K
either continues to expand through eighth grade or remains fairly constant from third through
eighth grade.

2

Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) …nd a widening gap in Texas while Clotfelter, Ladd and
Vigdor (2009) …nd in North Carolina that gaps widen among high-performing and
narrow among low-performing students. Both studies, however, look at somewhat
later grades than those used here and in Fryer/Levitt.
While Fryer and Levitt …nd that the gap at kindergarten entry is mostly or
entirely explained by measures of family background, they also …nd that the increase
in the gap is not. The extent to which family background, environmental measures
and parental behaviors can explain the test score gap is controversial. This is in part
because the in‡uence of such factors varies among data sets3 and in part because of
conceptual issues. Jensen (1969) argues that controlling for such factors is subject to
the “sociological fallacy:”family background may include heritable factors. Dickens
and Flynn (2001) argue that the environment is endogenous to ability (for example,
students who appear to have high cognitive ability may be placed in more challenging
classes). Although they use their analysis to explain why environment may be more
important than revealed in prior analyses, their argument also casts doubt on the
interpretation of regression adjusted test score gaps.
Despite these caveats, we also examine the relation between family background
and the test score gap. The inability of family background to explain the growth in
the gap is suggestive evidence that schools play a large role in the widening of the gap.
It is therefore important to determine whether this conclusion is robust to choice of
scale. Most of the scales we derive show similar growth in the adjusted test score gap,
but there is one notable exception which reduces the estimated growth in the gap
between kindergarten entry and third grade. Perhaps most strikingly although our
scales provide quite di¤erent estimates of the unadjusted gaps at entry and in third
grade, there is almost no di¤erence in the adjusted gaps at entry and only modest
variation in the adjusted gaps in third grade. Thus the scales lead to very di¤erent
conclusions about the importance of socioeconomic factors in “accounting for” the
racial test score gap. In the next section, we show numerical examples of how scaling
decisions can be important in interpreting the test gap. We then describe the data
3

See the summary in Rouse, Brooks-Gunn and McLanahan (2005) and the analysis in Duncan
and Magnuson (2005).

3

used for this study (section three) and present our approach (section four). Finally,
we give our results in section …ve and then provide some concluding remarks.

2

Scaling Issues

Suppose that we have a very good test that is able to determine whether an individual
has mastered each of three progressively di¢ cult skills. We assume that the skills
are cumulative either because skills are simply learned in this order or because skill
2 cannot be mastered before skill 1 (two-digit addition requires one-digit addition)
and that there is no partial mastery. Such a test would produce scores of a (no skills
mastered), b (only skill 1 mastered), c (skills 1 and 2 mastered) and d (all three skills
mastered).
It might seem natural to assign the values 0, 1, 2 and 3 to these scores since these
values correspond to the number of skills the individual has mastered. But there is
no reason that the marginal value of all three skills should be equal. Skill 1 might be
the ability to recite the alphabet, 2 the ability to recognize letters and 3 to read. Or
skill 1 might be the ability to read and write English, skill 2 the ability to read and
write Latin and skill 3 the ability to converse ‡uently in Latin. In the latter case,
as economists, we are inclined to view the marginal value of 1 as much greater than
that of 2 which is in turn much greater than 3, but there are surely other admissible
scales.
Suppose we have a sample of twenty blacks and twenty whites. In each case, two
people receive scores of a and two scores of d: Overall, however, blacks do worse than
whites. Of the remaining 16 blacks, 14 get a b and two get a c; while among whites
the …gures are two b and fourteen c:
If we use the naive scale, 0; 1; 2; 3, then the di¤erence in the means is :6 or about
:73 standard deviations.
The theoretical lower limit is reached by making the gap between b and c arbitrarily small or, equivalently, sending a and d to minus and plus in…nity. In this case,
there is no gap since the total number of blacks and whites with a score of either b
4

or c is identical.
At the other extreme, if we treat a and b and c and d as essentially equal, then we
get a gap of 1:20 standard deviations. Without some external reference for determining the proper scale, all we can say is that the test-score gap is somewhere between
0 and 1:20 standard deviations. Of course, in some cases such an external standard
may exist. Cunha, Heckman and Schennach (2010) tie a variety of objective and
subjective measures of cognitive and noncognitive ability to later adult outcomes.
More generally, test scores can be tied to other measures of performance.
The situation becomes, if anything, more di¢ cult when we attempt to determine
whether the gap increases or decreases as children progress through school. We
suppose again that our testing situation is ideal. We have two vertically linked tests
so that a score on one test is fully equivalent to that same score on the other test.
Suppose further that on administering the second test, we observe that within each
race/performance level, half of the individuals advanced exactly one level so that
there is now one black and one white at each of levels a and e:
If we follow the “natural” scale and assign consecutive integers to the levels so
that an e corresponds to a scaled score of 4; then the test-score gap remains at :6; but
declines to :62 within-grade standard deviations because the within-grade variance
has increased. In contrast, suppose that we believe that over the two tests, the score
distribution should be approximately normal. Then we would assign scaled scores
of 1:89; :75; :27; 1:27; 2:34. The scaled-score gap would be virtually unchanged
at roughly :61 in both periods, but because the variance of the scaled scores would
have declined, the gap as a proportion of the standard deviation would grow from
:61 to :72. This is similar to the situation documented in Murnane et al (2006) where
the IRT gap remains constant but the gap as a proportion of the standard deviation
grows.
The scale that minimizes the level of growth in this example is to set the scores
for b, c, d to be approximately equal. Any scale that sets b and c equal creates a gap
of 0 on the …rst test, while any scale that sets b, c, and d equal creates a gap of 0 on
the second test. Alternatively, we can send a and e to minus and plus in…nity, which
would a¤ect the variance of both tests while leaving the un-normalized levels of the
5

gap unchanged. With both gaps equal to 0, there is no growth in the gap between
the two tests. The scale that maximizes the level of growth sets a; b, and c and d
and e as approximately equal. Again, with b and c being approximately equal, we
have no gap on the …rst test, however this arrangement gives the upper bound on
the second test of 1:39. All we can say, therefore, is that the growth of the racial test
gap between the two tests is somewhere between 0 and 1:39 standard deviations.
A frequently proposed solution is to use measures based on percentile ranks as
opposed to test scores since percentiles are invariant to scale. Nevertheless, it should
be recognized that they, too, are a monotonic transformation of the scale, one in
which the value placed between ranks is constant across the distribution.
The most prominent percentile-based measure is the percentile-percentile (PP)
curve.4 This method plots the percentile associated with a given score for one group
(typically the lower performer) against the percentile associated with that score for
the other. If the PP curve does not cross the 45 degree line, the scores of one group
are lower than the other in the sense of stochastic dominance. If one PP curve lies
above another, this approach suggests that the gap is smaller for the comparison
captured by the higher curve. Likewise, if the PP curves are identical, so, it would
appear, is the gap.5
Unfortunately, as the following example shows, the conclusion from analysis of
shifts (or lack thereof) of the PP curve can be misleading. Consider a test with 5
scores which, to emphasize the absence of an interval scale, we denote a; b; c; d and
e: When the test is …rst administered, the three white children initially score a; c;
and e while two black children score a and one black child scores b. One year later
the white children score b; d; and e, while two black children score b and one black
child scores c. It is easy to verify that the PP curve is unchanged. In our example,
one white child improved from a to b and one from c to d. In contrast, two black
children improved from a to b and one from b to c: The test gap is unchanged only if
the value of improvement from c to d for one child equals the value of improvement
4

The earliest reference appears to be Wilk and Gnanadesikan (1968). For examples of test gap
measures based on the PP curve, see Braun (1988), Holland (2002) and Ho and Haertel (2006).
5
See, for example, Ho (2009).

6

from a to b for one child plus the value of improvement from b to c for a second child.
This is neither obviously false nor obviously true and cannot be resolved without
some reference to the “correct”underlying scale.
It is clear from these examples that scaling issues can be of great importance in
theory. We now proceed to explore to what extent they are in practice.

3

Data

We use two data sets: the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(CNLSY) and the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Kindergarten Class of 19981999 (ECLS-K). The principal advantage of the CNLSY is that it features two
separate tests. The …rst, the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, was administered
before school entry and is similar to those on which there are early test score gaps.
The second, the Peabody Individual Achievement Test, served as part of the basis
for the test administered in the ECLS-K, the test on which the early gap is much
more modest. This helps us examine directly the importance of test di¤erences for
the con‡icting …ndings in the literature. On the other hand, unlike the CNLSY, the
ECLS-K sample is nationally representative, and all students take each of the tests
administered and in the same grade. Moreover, it is the data set used by Fryer and
Levitt.

3.1

Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

The CNLSY is a biennial survey of children of women in the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth 1979 cohort (NLSY79). The NLSY79 is a longitudinal survey that
has followed a sample of 12,686 youths who were between the ages of 14 and 21 as of
December 1978. The survey includes a nationally representative sample, as well as
an oversample of blacks, Hispanics, military personnel, and poor whites, the latter
two being dropped from the later surveys.
Beginning in 1986, the children of women surveyed in the NLSY79 were surveyed
and assessed biennially. The assessments included a battery of tests of psychological,
7

socioemotional, and cognitive ability, in addition to questions on the environment in
which the child was raised. Children exit the sample at age 15, and enter a separate
sample of young adults. As of 2008, a total of 11,495 children born to 4,929 unique
female respondents had been surveyed.
Due to the way the sample was created, it is not nationally representative. Children born before 1982, when mothers in the NLSY79 were seventeen to twenty-…ve
years old, will only be partially included in the sample as they were over four years
old in the …rst survey year. Children born before 1972 will not be included at all
although there should be very few such children. Children who were adopted into
and out of the families of the mothers are not sampled. Children born after 1994
will only be partially observed in the sample and will thus be underrepresented.
Our sample consists of children from age three or four through third grade or
roughly age nine and so underrepresents children of older mothers since children
born after 1998, when the mothers would have been thirty-four through forty-one,
will not have reached third grade. It also underrepresents children born before 1982,
when the mothers were seventeen to twenty-…ve, since such children would be older
than four in 1986.
Our focus is on the Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT) Reading:
Recognition and Comprehension subtests and on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test (PPVT). The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test is a test of receptive vocabulary
that is, according to the CNLSY User’s Guide, designed to provide a quick estimate
of scholastic aptitude. The User’s Guide reports that the PPVT was administered
when children were four or …ve and again when they were ten or eleven. It appears
to us that, in fact, the earlier administration occurred between the ages of 36 and
60 months. In order to avoid measuring di¤erences in human capital that could
be caused by di¤erences in kindergarten quality, when we examine young children
we limit the analysis to children who took the exam at less than four years of age.
Further limiting our sample to only black and white youths, we have a total of 1,655
observations of test scores taken between the ages of 3 and 4.6 Each score is unique
6

We dropped one observation that reported being in the third grade at age 3, who had a PPVT
score well above all of the other 3-year-old scores.

8

to the individual; there are no repeat exam takers. In our sample, 1,072 children are
white, and the remaining 583 are black.
The data show a racial test gap within this sample. On average, black children
perform .97 standard deviations worse on the PPVT than do white children, based
on the o¢ cial scale. The highest score is 77 and was attained by one child, while two
children scored 0, the lower bound.
Although not tied to a particular curriculum, the PIAT is designed to measure
the types of skills typically taught in school. It covers a su¢ ciently wide range of
material that the scores are not subject to boundary e¤ects at the top although
this is somewhat of a concern at the bottom. The PIAT was administered at each
survey to all children age 5-14. Because the survey is conducted in alternate years,
we typically observe a child in kindergarten and second grade or in …rst and third
grade but not both.
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for our sample of PIAT test scores. Although
children typically take the test in only two grades, sample size is fairly consistent
across the grades that we analyze, both in terms of total observations and the proportion of test-takers who are black. Since the testing material remains the same, scores
rise steadily over time, from an average score of 17 in kindergarten to an average
score of 39 by third grade. In each grade, the average score is higher among whites
than among blacks, and this di¤erence rises as children progress through school. The
standard deviation of the test scores also rises. While there is at least one child who
scores a 0 in each grade, in the later grades these children are severe outliers. In the
third grade, for instance, the three lowest scores are 0, 2, and 3, while the fourth
lowest score is 15. The highest score rises as children reach higher grades, the highest
score in the sample is 81 achieved by a white child in third grade.
The gap between blacks’and whites’PIAT scores is quite modest in kindergarten,
but expands over the …rst four years of school. Blacks initially perform .25 standard
deviations worse than whites do on the PIAT but by third grade have fallen .61
standard deviations behind. These results are in line with those in Fryer and Levitt
(2006) and our own from the ECLS-K which we describe in the next subsection. On
the other hand, the pre-kindergarten gap on the PPVT is almost a full standard
9

deviation, in line with the results in Jencks and Phillips (1998). These two …ndings
are suggestive of the result in Murnane et al (2006) that the di¤erence between the
results in Fryer and Levitt and the prior literature re‡ects the di¤erences in the tests.

3.2

Early Childhood Longitudinal Study

The ECLS-K is a nationally representative longitudinal survey that follows children
who entered kindergarten in the 1998-1999 school year. Information was collected in
the fall and spring of kindergarten, and the springs of …rst, third, …fth, and eighth
grades.7
The children were surveyed and assessed on a variety of di¤erent dimensions, such
as school experience, motor skill development, height, weight, and direct cognitive
assessments of reading and mathematical skill. In each survey year, the student’s
parents and teacher were interviewed about the child’s background, home, and school
environment. Like Fryer and Levitt, we use the direct cognitive assessments as our
measure of achievement. The tests were designed to measure the student’s ability in
reading, mathematics and general knowledge or science.8 The material covered on
the test remained the same through …rst grade, but was modi…ed in later years to
re‡ect the growing knowledge that should be gained in school. Children were …rst
given a short “routing test”that directed them to a more comprehensive exam, the
di¢ culty of which depended on their answers to the routing test. Overall scores are
calculated using Item Response Theory (IRT), which the User’s Manual states “uses
the pattern of right, wrong, and omitted responses to the items actually administered
in an assessment and the di¢ culty, discriminating ability, and ‘guess-ability’of each
item to place each child on a continuous ability scale.”All scores are updated at each
interview to expand the range to account for improved performance with age, but
the revised scale is then applied to all tests. In principle, a 112 on the kindergarten
entry test represents the same level of accomplishment as a 112 on the third grade
7

An additional subsample includes a set of children who were initially interviewed in the fall of
their …rst grade. These children are excluded from both our and Fryer and Levitt’s analysis, since
they do not have kindergarten test scores.
8
Beginning in the third grade, the general knowledge test was replaced by a science test.

10

test.9 For our analysis, we will focus only on the evolution of the test score gap
through third grade but in some cases also draw on the …fth grade data to scale the
earlier scores. Therefore, we use the scores that were released with the 5th grade
data …le.
Fryer and Levitt (2004, 2006) used the ECLS-K to study the evolution of the
black-white test gap. We mimic their sample construction methods to make our
results comparable. We focus on the reading scores because they show the most
striking growth in the early years in the Fryer/Levitt study. We drop all students who
are missing a valid reading score from kindergarten through third grade, and drop
all students who do not have a valid entry for race. We also use the sampling weights
associated with grades kindergarten through three for child assessment studies, and
drop all children who do not have a valid set of these weights. For much of the
analysis we use only the test score and race data, but in one table we control for
sociodemographic characteristics.
Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for our ECLS-K sample. We have 11,414
observations of whom 62 percent are white and 17 percent are black. The IRT test
score scales show a modest (:4 standard deviations) test-score gap at the beginning
of kindergarten, rising steadily to a gap of three-quarters of a standard deviation
towards the end of third grade. The second column of Table 2 shows the corresponding …gures from Fryer and Levitt. Although our sample is somewhat larger with a
higher proportion of whites and blacks than theirs, the test-score gap evolves in very
similar ways in the two samples.
It is important to recognize that there is only a modest amount of overlap in the
entry and third grade scores of the ECLS-K. About 95 percent of students received
scores on the entry test that were below the lowest score on the third grade test.
Still the remaining 5 percent scored better than at least some third graders and two
students entering kindergarten scored above the third grade mean using the original
test score scale.
9

The scores are supposed to be an estimate of the number of questions the test taker would
have answered correctly had she taken the entire test, rather than just the section to which she was
routed.

11

4

Methods

We de…ne the test score gap at a given grade or age as the di¤erence between the
mean test scores of whites and blacks divided by the standard deviation of test scores
in that grade or at that age.
We begin by searching for the monotonic transformations of the original scale
that maximize and minimize the growth of this gap. We impose the transformation
T (t + 1) = T (t) + a2t+1

(1)

where t is the original scale, T is the transformed scale and t+1 is a real number.
Since the gap is unchanged by a linear transformation, we must normalize two of
the parameters. We set T (0) equal to 0 and T (tmax ) equal to tmax where tmax is the
highest score observed in that grade.10 De…ne Gg to be the test gap in grade g.
X

Nw 1

T (tig )

Nb

i2white

Gg = r

N

1

X

1

X

T (tig )

i2black

T (tig )

N

1

X

2

(2)

T (tig )

where Gg is the gap in grade g, Nw ; Nb and N are the sizes of the white, black
and total sample. We choose the remaining values of a using Newton-Raphson to
minimize the objective function given by
Dmin = min (G3
a

Ge )

(3)

where D is the di¤erence between the test gap in grade 3 and the test gap in kindergarten, and a refers to the vector of coe¢ cients. We de…ne Dmax similarly for the
maximum. In practice, not all of the possible scores are observed each year in the
data. We normalize at+1 to 0 if no member of the sample in that grade is observed
to have an initial test score of t + 1:
10

In practice, our program sometimes converged faster (or only) when we normalized the two
lowest scores, and then transformed the data afterwards to range from 0 to tmax .

12

This nonparametric approach is useful for …nding the bounds on the gap, but it
produces scales that are typically step functions with one or two steps and likely implausible. Additionally it cannot be used when the test score is a continuous variable,
as the ECLS-K assessment approximately is. Therefore, we focus on transformations
that are both monotonic and smooth. We look at the path of the gap that can be
formed by varying parameters in a sixth degree polynomial
T (t) =

0+

1 (t

c) +

2 (t

c)2 +

3 (t

c)3 +

4 (t

c)4 +

5 (t

c)5 +

6 (t

c)6 (4)

where 0
6 and c are constants. This type of function is very ‡exible and can
be used to approximate a wide array of continuous functions. This transformation,
however, is not guaranteed to be monotonic. Our algorithm checks for monotonicity
and rejects attempts to choose parameters that violate this condition. Needless to
say, not all monotonic functions will be well approximated by even a monotonic
six-degree polynomial. We therefore cannot rule out the possibility that some other
transformation could generate results outside the range we present here.
Again, G is unchanged by linear transformations. When showing the density of
the test scores, we normalize the standard deviation of test scores to equal 1 and
choose 0 so that the mean of the test score distribution is 0: Note that the test
score distribution is not required to be symmetric so that the median need not be
0. However, it is easiest to show the transformations on a scale similar to the one
used for the original test scores. Therefore when showing the relation between the
two scales, we …x the highest and lowest scores to be equal across scales.11
If the test score distributions on entry and in third grade were disjoint, then
(subject to a minor caveat about the ability of a six-degree polynomial to simultaneously approximate two di¤erent distributions), we would …nd Dmax by minimizing
the test-score gap at entry and maximizing it in third grade. Conversely, to …nd
Dmin we would maximize Ge and minimize G3:
In practice, because the two test score distributions overlap, we cannot do the
11

In practice, it was easier to do the estimation by setting the constant term to 0 and constraining
the linear term and only subsequently transforming the estimated coe¢ cients.

13

maximizations and minimizations separately.12 Nevertheless, because there is not
much overlap, the process of selecting the transformations comes close to mimicking
this approach.
As we will see, in both data sets, the implications of Dmin and Dmax are very
di¤erent. In the former case, the black-white gap is trivial when children …rst enter
school but grows to be substantial by the end of third grade. In contrast, in the latter
case, the black-white gap in the ECLS-K is modest but not trivial when children enter
school and changes little over the next four years. In the CNLSY the gap under Dmin
actually shrinks.
These bounds are not very helpful. Therefore, to help us select among the possible
transformations, including less extreme ones, we choose the transformations that
have the most predictive power for future test scores. For the CNLSY, we maximize
the correlation between the PPVT at age 3 and the PIAT reading test administered
during school. For the ECLS-K, we maximize the correlation between the entry and
third grade tests.

5
5.1

Results
Maximizing and Minimizing the Growth of the Gap

The …rst column of Table 3 shows the evolution of the black-white test gap in the
PIAT, using the original scale provided with the exam. The gap shows a large
increase over the …rst four years of education, beginning at a modest .25 standard
deviations in kindergarten and rising to .61 standard deviations by third grade.
We can …nd the boundaries of the evolution of this gap by assigning a new set
of monotonically increasing test scores chosen to either maximize or minimize the
di¤erence between the third grade and kindergarten test gap. Under the growthminimizing scale, the black-white test gap shrinks by .18 standard deviations during
12

It is not entirely obvious that we should treat the di¤erence between getting exactly the …rst
six and the …rst …ve questions right as identical regardless of when the student took the test, but
we impose this assumption.

14

the …rst four years of education. Column (2) of Table 3 shows the evolution under
this minimizing transformation. The test gap in kindergarten is similar to that of
the baseline at .24 standard deviations. In contrast with the baseline, the gap immediately begins to decline to .17 standard deviations in …rst grade and .07 standard
deviations in second grade. The gap remains roughly constant in third grade, ending
at .06 standard deviations.
The evolution under the growth-maximizing scale is shown in the third column
of Table 3. This transformation reduces the gap at kindergarten substantially to just
.12 standard deviations. After kindergarten the evolution is similar to that in the
baseline model, with blacks performing .64 standard deviations worse than whites in
third grade, only slightly worse than they perform using the baseline scale. With this
transformation, the gap grows by .52 standard deviations over the …rst four years of
school.
The two extreme transformations produce test scales that di¤er noticeably from
the baseline scale. The transformed scales are essentially step functions, with scores
that are almost constant within tiers separated by large jumps. Though this may
not be intuitively appealing, it is not unlike tests which have “pro…ciency” cuto¤s.
Suppose for instance that kindergartners only di¤ered in their possession a few meaningful skills such as the ability to recognize letters, the ability to recognize words,
and the ability to read for comprehension. Then this could be an appropriate scale
to use at that grade. In fact, the PIAT reading test is designed somewhat like
this. Students must pass a reading recognition test in order to advance to questions
on a reading comprehension test. The modal score in both our kindergarten and
…rst grade sample is 18, which is the highest score a student could achieve without
advancing to the reading comprehension section.
Turning our attention to the ECLS-K, because the IRT scoring method produces
an essentially continuous variable, we use a sixth-degree monotonic polynomial transformation on the entire IRT scale. This means that we apply the same transformation to each grade. Table 4 shows how the achievement gap on the ECLS-K reading
assessment evolves from the beginning of kindergarten through the spring of third
grade. The …rst column repeats the baseline pattern from Table 2. The second col15

umn shows the choice of transformation that minimizes the estimated growth in the
gap. At kindergarten entry the gap is :46, only slightly higher than in the baseline.
As discussed above, the scale that minimizes the growth in the test score gap should
comes close to maximizing the entry gap. Thus it appears that the scale used in
the ECLS-K comes close to maximizing that gap. The minimum possible growth in
the gap is quite small. Using this scale, in third grade the gap is only :51 and thus
noticeably less than the gap in the baseline. And the growth between entry and third
grade is only :05: Note that, in principle, minimizing growth between entry and third
grade could still generate large swings in the …rst grade gap. However, this does not
occur. There is no noticeable change in the gap between any pair of tests when this
scale is applied.
Column (3) of Table 4 shows the results of choosing the transformation that maximizes the growth of the gap between kindergarten and third grade. The transformed
gap at the beginning of kindergarten is now only :11 standard deviations, which is
:29 less than in the baseline. The transformed gap increases by :10 standard deviations to :21 between the fall and spring kindergarten tests and then rises a further
:22 standard deviations by the spring of …rst grade so that the estimated gaps are
similar to the baseline for the …rst and third grades. The end result is a growth of :62
standard deviations in the racial test gap in the …rst four years of education, almost
twice that using the baseline scale. Note that the gap at the end of third grade is
almost unchanged from the baseline, suggesting that the baseline scale comes close
to maximizing the black-white gap at this stage.
Figure 1 shows the density function of test scores associated with each choice
of scale for the ECLS-K at kindergarten entry. Note that in the baseline case, it
is skewed with a long right tail. In contrast, visually, the resulting test score distribution from the minimizing transformation more closely approximates a normal
distribution. The density associated with the maximizing transformation is somewhat aesthetically displeasing and possibly unattractive on other grounds. Most of
the weight of this distribution is in a narrow band around its mode, and there are
no scores substantially below this mode. Nevertheless, we do not …nd this representation of the scores altogether counterintuitive. It is plausible that most children
16

do not have much in the way of reading, math and general knowledge skills and
that the modest di¤erences over much of the range are uninformative. On the other
hand, there are a small number, best represented by the two who are already operating solidly at the third grade level, who are truly distinct from the rest of the
pack. Moreover, in some respects the density of the growth-maximizing transformation is more aesthetically pleasing than the income or wealth distribution in the
United States. It is less skewed than either. The 50-10 spread (measured in standard
deviations) is plausibly larger than it is in the wealth distribution.13
How do these transformations a¤ect the test score distributions in third grade?
As previously noted, the transformation that minimizes the growth in the gap will
be close to the one that minimizes the third grade gap while the choice of T (t) that
maximizes the growth of the gap produces a third-grade gap very close to the one in
the baseline. Figure 2 shows the density of the test score distribution for the baseline
scale and the two transformations. As in the case of the kindergarten scores, the key
to minimizing the third grade gap, and thus growth, is compressing the middle of
the distribution so that most students appear quite similar and spreading out the
di¤erences among very high and among very low scores. In contrast, the growthmaximizing transformation leaves the distribution of test scores looking similar to
that associated with the baseline.
As already discussed, we should not necessarily dismiss distributions that primarily distinguish the very high and very low performers from everyone else. While
the large spike at the mode when using the growth-minimizing transformation initially appears problematic, the implied distribution is not obviously more implausible
than the U.S. earnings, income and wealth distributions. However, it is perhaps more
problematic that the growth-minimizing transformation requires this large spike to
appear between school entry and third grade.
The relation between the original and transformed scales is shown in …gure 3.
We can see that the growth in the test score gap is minimized if we believe that
di¤erences in very low scores (roughly 15 to 40) and very high scores (roughly those
13

This is based on our imputation from Kennickell’s (2009) calculations based on the 1989-2007
Survey of Consumer Finances.

17

over 140) are very informative but those in between are relatively uninformative. The
transformation that maximizes the growth of the test score gap does the opposite, at
least at the bottom of the scale. It treats most di¤erences among the very low scores
as uninformative. This would be appropriate if we believed that most children arrive
in kindergarten knowing very little of the material covered by the ECLS and that
throughout most of the distribution di¤erences in performance should be viewed as
relatively unimportant and that only children with very high scores should be viewed
as di¤ering substantially from the mass of kindergarten entrants.
The results in this subsection bring out the fragility of any conclusion about the
extent to which the test score gap increases between school entry and the end of third
grade. The bounds permit conclusions ranging from “there is essentially no gap when
students begin school and a very sizeable gap by the end of third grade” through
“there are modest gaps at entry and at the end of the third grade and essentially
no growth in the gap over this period.” There are even scales for the PIAT from
which one could conclude "black children moderately lag behind white children in
achievement when they enter school, but overtake them by third grade." As is often
the case with bounding exercises, the range of possible results is too large to be
helpful.
It is thus evident that determining the right scale is important in determining
how the gap between blacks and whites evolves. We could attempt to choose scales
that produce “aesthetically appealing”distributions of test scores, but this is unsatisfactory. There is no consensus on what the distribution of childhood ability should
look like. Well accepted childhood tests, including the PIAT and the ECLS-K assessments, produce widely varying distributions of achievement. And as discussed
before, there are reasons to think that unintuitive distributions of ability could be
plausible, both for young children and adults. In the next subsection we consider a
more formal approach to choosing the appropriate transformation.

18

5.2

Selecting Transformations

We would not expect kindergarten or …rst grade performance to perfectly predict
third grade performance. There is randomness in performance on each test. Moreover, students make varying academic progress. Indeed the point of the current
exercise is to ask whether blacks and whites progress academically at di¤erent rates
during the …rst four years of school.
Nevertheless, tests measure related skills. Students who perform well on one
test would generally be expected to perform well on the other tests. A reasonable
criterion for selecting a transformation is to ask which transformation allows us to
best predict future performance using information from previous tests. We therefore
choose transformations which maximize the correlation between test scores. If the
tests measure a common underlying latent variable, this approach maximizes reliability. If not, it merely maximizes the ability of an earlier test to predict performance
on a later test.
For the CNLSY we have access to scores on an early childhood cognitive achievement test, the PPVT. We construct a sample of children who took both the PPVT
before age 4 and the PIAT while in kindergarten. This sample consists of 398 white
and 253 black children. The racial test gaps in this subsample are very similar to
those of the full sample. Blacks perform .97 standard deviations worse on average on
the PPVT than whites, and .2 standard deviations worse than whites on the PIAT.
The correlation between the untransformed test scores is .32.
We use monotonic sixth degree polynomial transformations to …nd the set of
scales which maximizes the correlation between individuals’ PPVT and PIAT test
scores. The resulting scales increase the correlation between these two tests only
moderately, to .35 and do not noticeably alter the racial test gaps. The test gap on
the PIAT falls to .24 and that on the PPVT increases to .98.
In Figure 4, we plot the correlation-maximizing transformations over the range
of our sample, normalizing each scale to have the same range as the baseline. The
transformed PPVT is similar to the original except that it compresses the highest
scores. Interestingly, the PIAT transformation magni…es di¤erences among the high-

19

est test scores, while compressing the scores somewhat below the highest. While this
suggests that a high PIAT test score may be a more important predictor of performance than a high PPVT test score, it is important to remember that inferences on
the highest range are based on only a few observations.
Column (4) of Table 3 shows the evolution of the PIAT test gap under this scale.
Surprisingly given the modest transformation, the pattern di¤ers substantially from
the baseline. The kindergarten gaps are similar, but the gap drops to .19 in third
grade for a decrease from kindergarten through third grade of approximately .05
standard deviations. One caveat for this result is that roughly 18% of the third
grade sample scored above the highest kindergarten score. This is much less of a
problem for the …rst and second grade tests. Yet, the gap using the transformed
scale is essentially constant from kindergarten through second grade while it grows
substantially from year to year using the original scale.
In the ECLS-K we do not have data on test scores outside of the cognitive assessments. We therefore maximize the correlation across the reading assessments.
First we examine the transformation that maximizes the correlation between the
tests taken at the beginning of kindergarten and the spring of third grade. This new
scale substantially increases the correlation between the two scores. The correlation
when using the transformation is :62 (R2 = :39) compared with only :54 (R2 = :29)
using the baseline scores. This approach produces a kindergarten gap that is very
close to the potential maximum gap at kindergarten entry and a third grade gap
that is very close to the maximum gap at this point.
As noted earlier, the scale that maximizes the third grade gap is similar to the
baseline scale and the one that maximizes the entry gap is only moderately di¤erent
from the baseline. Therefore, the overall pattern of the racial test gap using the
correlation-maximizing transformation does not di¤er dramatically from the baseline.
As shown in column (4) of Table 4, the total growth in the gap from the beginning of
kindergarten through the end of third grade is :26 standard deviations, :09 smaller
than the growth seen in the baseline. All of the growth of the gap occurs between
the end of …rst and the end of third grade. This di¤ers from the story told by the
baseline ECLS-K of a steady increase in the gap throughout the …rst four years of
20

schooling.
We additionally choose the scale that maximizes the R2 from a regression of
the third grade score on the scores the student received on the …rst grade and two
kindergarten tests, as well as from a regression of the …fth grade score on the third,
…rst, and kindergarten tests. Both these approaches yield similar results to those of
column 4.

5.3

Controlling for Socioeconomic Factors

One of the surprising results in Fryer and Levitt is that when students …rst enter
kindergarten, the modest black-white test score gap can be accounted for fully by a
small number of socioeconomic characteristics (children’s age, child’s birth weight,
a socioeconomic status measure, WIC participation, mother’s age at …rst birth, and
number of children’s books in the home). In this subsection we ask whether the same
is true for the scales developed in the previous subsections. Of course, when there is
no gap at entry, these characteristics cannot account for the gap, but it is possible
that they could reverse it.
Table 5 shows the results of this exercise. Strikingly the kindergarten entry results
are robust to the choice of scale. Regardless of whether the scale shows an unadjusted
gap of .11 or .47, after controlling for this small number of factors, the remaining gap
is actually reversed and favors blacks by between .03 and .05 standard deviations.
In contrast, the importance of the controls in third grade depends on the choice of
scale. Three of the four scales generate unadjusted test score gaps of approximately
.75 standard deviations. After controlling for the socioeconomic factors, the gap falls
to about .3 standard deviations but still indicates a very substantial deterioration
in the relative performance of black children over the …rst three years of school.
In contrast, the transformation that minimizes the growth of the unadjusted gap
shows a noticeably more modest adjusted gap of .17. In this case two-thirds of the
unadjusted gap is accounted for by the measured characteristics, a somewhat larger
proportion than the little over half accounted for when the other scales are used.
Thus the choice of scale has a signi…cant impact on the magnitude of the increase

21

of the adjusted gap as well as of the unadjusted gap. We note that we have not
chosen the scales on the basis of the adjusted gaps. We have, however, done some
experimentation that suggests that maximizing and minimizing the adjusted gaps
would not signi…cantly alter the results.
Another surprising result in Fryer and Levitt is that the growth of the black-white
test gap is virtually una¤ected by whether or not socioeconomic controls are used.
Both the controlled and uncontrolled test gaps grow by a similar magnitude between
entry and the end of the third grade. We have already shown that this appears to
be an artifact of the scale. Much of the growth in the gap under the maximizing
transformation can be explained by socioeconomic controls. While the raw gap
increases by :64 standard deviations over the …rst four years of education under this
transformation, the controlled gap increases by only :35 standard deviations. Under
the minimizing transformation, the socioeconomic controls actually have negative
explanatory power. While the raw gap under this transformation grows by only :05
standard deviations, the adjusted gap increases by :2 standard deviations.
We further analyze the robustness of this result in Table 6. In the …rst two
columns, we …nd the transformation that maximizes the percentage of the growth
in the raw test gap that can be explained by the socioeconomic controls. That is,
we minimize the ratio of the magnitude of the growth in the controlled gap over
the magnitude of the growth in the uncontrolled gap. In this transformation, the
controls explain only slightly more than in the growth-maximizing transformation.
The raw test gap grows by :59 standard deviations from kindergarten through third
grade, while the controlled gap grows by only :32. In columns 3 and 4, we instead
maximize the di¤erence between the growth of the raw test gap and the growth of
the controlled gap. The pattern under this transformation looks similar to that of
the maximizing transformation as well.

5.4

Scale Sensitivity

To some extent, the choice of scale limits the potential magnitude of between-group
di¤erences. An example may clarify this point. Suppose a group of researchers is

22

interested in understanding early racial di¤erences in reading. They administer a
test to a group of 100 children, 50 of whom are black and 50 of whom are white. The
performance of the children can be strictly ranked. They then give the results to two
psychometricians with instructions to scale the results. The …rst reports that in this
group the black-white test score gap is almost exactly two standard deviations. The
second reports that it is about 1:1 standard deviations.
Further investigation reveals that both psychometricians believe that scales should
re‡ect developmental milestones and that di¤erences in performance on a given side
of the milestone are insigni…cant. They also agree that the milestone is passed when
children shift from “learning to read” to “reading to learn,” but they di¤er about
what test performance corresponds to this shift.
The …rst psychometrician set the milestone at a point for which half of the original
sample was judged to be reading to learn. In contrast, the second psychometrician
believes that only the 25 children with the highest scores merit this designation.
Note that because each psychometrician uses a scale with only two points, their
calculations are invariant to the issues we have addressed heretofore.
In our …ctional example, we have allocated the …fty lowest scores to the “blacks”
and the highest …fty scores to the “whites.”In both cases, the reported test gaps are
the largest consistent with the scales and distributions “chosen”by the psychometricians. Thus both gaps are at their maxima, but when the scale sets equal numbers of
0s and 1s, the gap can be bigger than it can be when one one-fourth of the students
receive 1s.
The lower half of the scores in the ECLS-K kindergarten test are all clustered
within one standard deviation of the median. It is possible that this characteristic of
the test and its scaling a¤ects the potential for a large test score gap in kindergarten
To analyze the e¤ect that such clumping may have on the evolution of the racial
test gap in the ECLS-K, we calculate what the test gap would be in each grade
if blacks had all the lowest scores and whites all the highest. Denoting wj as the
weighted number of children with score tj , where j is the rank (from low to high)
of the score, and WB is the weighted number of blacks in the sample, we create a

23

set of weighted test scores B = ftj jj 2 [1; m]g where m solves the problem

m
P

wi =

i=1

WB . We, likewise, assign all the highest scores to whites, based on their weighted
proportion of the sample.14
The …rst column of Table 7 shows the weighted test gaps along with the hypothetical upper boundary for the gap on the ECLS-K assessments. While the observed
black-white test gap increases over time, so does the boundary for that gap. The
theoretical maximum gap based on the distribution at the beginning of kindergarten
is 1:5 standard deviations. This rises to 2:2 standard deviations by the end of third
grade. The result is that the observed racial test-gap, as measured as a percentage
of the possible test gap, hardly changes over time. At the beginning of kindergarten,
the achievement gap is 27% of the maximum possible achievement gap, given the
scale, while the gap is 33% of the maximum gap at the end of third grade. This
raises the concern that part of the large observed increase in the racial achievement
gap in the ECLS-K may be attributable to changes in scale and test sensitivity, as
opposed to changes in the real achievement gap.
The remaining columns of Table 7 look at the boundary of the test gap for our
previously discussed transformations. Columns (2) and (3) show the maximum test
gap for the transformations that simply try to minimize or maximize the growth
of the gap in the …rst four years of education. Interestingly, these transformations
have the opposite e¤ect on the growth of the gap relative to the maximum test
gap. The minimizing transformation yields a test gap 24% the size of the maximum
gap at kindergarten entry, but one that is 53% at the end of third grade despite
virtually no growth in the size of the test gap in terms of standard deviations over
this period. Likewise, in the maximizing transformation the gap as a percentage
of the maximum gap shrinks from 46% at the start of kindergarten to 35% at the
end of third grade despite a nearly 700% increase in the size of the gap in terms
of standard deviations over that same period. Our transformations appear to act
mainly by changing the potential sensitivity of the scale to the racial test gap. The
test gap at third grade can be no larger than :95 standard deviations under the
14

The remaining middle scores are implicitly assigned to Hispanics, Asians, and others, though
we do not look at their hypothetical test gaps in this situation.

24

minimizing transformation, compared to 2:23 standard deviations in the baseline.
The maximizing transformations can have a gap no larger than :24 at kindergarten,
which is not only lower than the maximum in the baseline of 1:5, but lower also than
the actual observed test gap in the baseline of :4 standard deviations. Columns (4)
looks at the boundaries for the test gap under the transformation that maximizes
the correlation across tests. Strikingly, the maximum gap is almost identical at
kindergarten entry and third grade. The increase in the estimated gap as a proportion
of the maximum gap therefore re‡ects changes in the former rather than the latter.
Recall, however, that the increase in the estimated gap with this scale is smaller than
with the base scale.
Rather than look at the boundaries of the test score gap, an alternative approach
is to look at what the gap would look like if the test scale remained constant. Denote
Fg (r) as the function that maps a child’s performance rank to a test score. Panel
A of Table 8 shows the evolution of the test gap if Fg (r) did not vary with g. That
is, we choose an initial grade and then take a child’s rank on each grade’s exam
and reassign to him or her the score given to the child who was at that rank on the
initially chosen exam.15 Both when we impose the fall kindergarten and spring third
grade mapping, we see virtually no growth in the test score gap until the third grade
test, but substantial growth in the test gap at third grade.
Panel B instead supposes that we …x r while varying Fg (i.e. changing the scales
across grades as they do de facto in the ECLS-K.) Even if the rank ordering of students did not change, we would still see growth in the test gap using the baseline
scales in the ECLS-K. If the rank order of children remained what it was in kindergarten throughout the …rst four years, we would observe a :09 standard deviation
increase in the test gap from entry to third grade due simply to changes in the spacing between ranks over time. Likewise, using the third grade rank order we would
observe a :13 standard deviation increase in the test gap. Most of the increase in
15

Since we are using weights, we cannot map rank in one grade directly to rank in the other
grade. Instead we view rank as a continuum and look at masses at each score. This results in some
children receiving a weighted average of two consecutive scores. The results are sensitive to the
way in which ties at scores are broken, but since there are very few ties given the quasi-continuous
nature of the scoring system, this sensitivity is only beyond the fourth decimal point.

25

this gap occurs between the spring …rst grade and spring third grade test. Using the
entry rankings, this increase during this time span is :05 standard deviations, and
using the third grade rankings it is :07.
Table 8 strongly suggests that the growth in the test gap from kindergarten
through …rst grade re‡ects scales and not achievement. Moreover, a signi…cant portion of the growth from …rst to third grade also re‡ects scaling decisions. Taken
together, tables 7 and 8 suggest that when we use the base scale, something on the
order of 8 to 13 percentage points of the growth in the gap between entry and third
grade re‡ects scale sensitivity.

6

Summary and Conclusion

Our …ndings suggest that we should exercise great caution when using test scores to
determine when a black-white test score gap …rst emerges and whether it widens in
the early school years. By choosing the scale appropriately, we can make the initial
gap in the ECLS-K, at kindergarten entry, in reading anywhere from a trivial oneninth of a standard deviation to almost half a standard deviation. Similarly, the third
grade gap varies between half and three-quarters of a standard deviation. Equally
signi…cantly, whether the gap widens after school entry depends on our choice of
scale. Some scales show a decrease in the test gap in the CNLSY.
We use similar methods to choose appropriate scales but …nd strikingly di¤erent
results across data sets. In the ECLS-K, the gap at kindergarten entry is somewhat but not dramatically larger than suggested by the untransformed scale and the
growth in the gap through third grade is correspondingly smaller. Almost all of this
growth occurs between spring of the …rst and third grades. But even this result is
suspect because the third grade test is capable of generating a larger gap than are the
earlier tests. Given this concern, we do not wish to place excessive emphasis on the
…nding that the gap widens between …rst and third grades. In the CNLSY, the gap
in kindergarten is virtually identical in the untransformed and our preferred transformed scales. However while the untransformed scale shows a dramatic increase in
the test gap over the …rst four years, our preferred scale actually implies a decline in
26

magnitude by third grade.
We note that it has become something of a mantra in education circles that third
grade is when students begin the transition from “learning to read” to “reading to
learn.” If the timing implied by our ECLS-K rescaling is correct, this suggests one
avenue to pursue in furthering our understanding of the gap. If the pattern in our
CNLSY rescaling is correct, pre-enrollment interventions may be more important in
reducing the test gap than those that are post-enrollment.
More broadly, our …ndings suggest that economists and other researchers should
be much more circumspect in their use of test scores. While many …ndings will be
robust to scale changes, many will not be.

27

References
Bond, Timothy N. and Kevin Lang, “Test Choice, Scale Choice and the BlackWhite Test Score Gap,”unpublished, 2011.
Braun, Henry I., “A New Approach to Avoiding Problems of Scale in Interpreting
Trends in Mental Measurement Data,” Journal of Educational Measurement, 25:3
(Autumn 1988): 171-191.
Cunha, Flavio and James J. Heckman, “Formulating, Identifying, and Estimating
the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Journal of Human
Resources, 43:4 (Fall 2008): 738-782.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach, "Estimating
the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation," Econometrica, 78:3
(May 2010): 883-931.
Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Douglas O. Staiger, “Skill, Standardized Tests, and
Fadeout in Educational Intervention,”unpublished, 2011.
Clotfelter, Charles T , Helen F Ladd and Jacob L Vigdor, “The Academic
Achievement Gap in Grades 3 to 8,”Review of Economics and Statistics, 91:2 (May
2009): 398-419.
Dickens, William T. and James R. Flynn, “Heritability Estimates versus Large
Environmental E¤ects: The IQ Paradox Resolved,” Psychological Review, 108:2
(April 2001): 346-369.
Duncan, Greg J. and Katherine A. Magnuson, “Can Family Socioeconomic Resources Account for Racial and Ethnic Test Score Gaps?” The Future of Children,
15:1 (2005): 35–54.
Fryer, Roland G., Jr. “The Importance of Segregation, Discrimination, Peer Dynamics, and Identity in Explaining Trends in the Racial Achievement Gap,”NBER
Working Paper No. 16257, 2010.
Fryer, Roland G., Jr. and Steven D. Levitt, “Understanding the Black-White Test
Score Gap in the First Two Years of School,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
86:2 (May 2004): 447-64.
Fryer, Roland G., Jr. and Steven D. Levitt, “The Black-White Test Score Gap
Through Third Grade,”American Law and Economics Review, 8:2 (2206): 249-81.
28

Hanushek, Eric A. and Steven G. Rivkin, S. G. “School Quality and the Black–
White Achievement Gap,”NBER Working Paper No. 12651, 2006.
Ho, Andrew D., “A Nonparametric Framework for Comparing Trends and Gaps
Across Tests,” Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 34 (June 2009):
201-228.
Ho, Andrew D. and Edward H. Haertel. “Metric-Free Measures of Test Score
Trends and Gaps with Policy-Relevant Examples,”CSE Report No. 665, 2006
Holland, Paul W. “Two Measures of Change in the Gaps Between the CDFs
of Test-Score Distributions,” Journal of Education and Behavioral Statistics, 27:1
(Spring 2002): 3-17
Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips, “The Black-White Test Score Gap:
An Introduction,” in Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips, eds. The BlackWhite Test Score Gap, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1998.
Jensen, Arthur R., 1969, “How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?”Harvard Educational Review, 39(1): 1-123.
Kennickell, Arthur B. “Ponds and streams: Wealth and Income in the U.S., 1989
to 2007,”Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-13, Federal Reserve Board,
2009.
Koretz, Daniel and Young-Suk Kim,“Changes in the Black-White Test Score Gap
in the Elementary School Grades,”2007.
Lang, Kevin, “Measurement Matters: Perspectives on Education Policy from
an Economist and School Board Member,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24:3
(Summer 2010): 167-181.
Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, Kristen L. Bub and Kathleen McCartney,
“Understanding Trends in the Black-White Achievement Gaps during the First Years
of School,”Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban A¤airs, (2006): 97-135.
Rouse, Cecilia E., Jeanne Brooks-Gunn and Sara McLanahan, “Introducing the
Issue, School Readiness: Closing Racial and Ethnic Gaps,” The Future of Children,
15:1 (2005): 5-14.
Wilk, M. B. and R. Gnanadesikan, “Probability Plotting Methods for the Analysis
of Data,”Biometrika , 55 (March 1968): 1-17.
29

Figure 1

0

.5

Density
1
1.5

2

2.5

Kindergarten Densities

-2

0

2
4
Standard Dev iations f rom Mean

6

8

Baseline
Growth Maximizing
Growth Minim izing
Outlying values beyond s even s tandard deviations above the mean are not dis played

Figure 2

0

.5

Density
1
1.5

2

Third Grade Densities

-5

0
5
Standard Dev iations f rom Mean
Baseline
Growth Maximizing
Growth Minim izing

Outlying values beyond s even s tandard deviations above the mean are not dis played

30

10

31

32

Table 1: CNLSY Descriptive Statistics
Total Black White
Kindergarten
Mean
17.06 16.21 17.55
(5.33) (4.95) (5.48)
Min
0
0
0
Max
56
46
56
N
2943
1081
1862
First Grade
Mean
24.96 22.89 26.24
(7.94) (6.41) (8.50)
Min
0
0
0
Max
64
50
64
N
2761
1055
1706
Second Grade
Mean
32.89 29.47 35.15
(9.73) (8.57) (9.79)
Min
0
8
0
Max
68
59
68
N
2822
1125
1697
Third Grade
Mean
38.64 35.04 40.98
(9.71) (9.33) (9.24)
Min
0
0
2
Max
81
68
81
N
2833
1057
1716
Source: Children of the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth. Standard deviations in
parenthesis.

33

Table 2: ECLS-K Descriptive Statistics
Bond and Lang Fryer and Levitt
Race
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Female
Black-White Test Gap
Kindergarten Fall
Kindergarten Spring
First Grade Spring
Third Grade Spring
Sociodemographic Controls
Age (in months) fall Kindergarten
SES composite measure
Number of children’s books in home
Mother’s age at …rst birth
Child’s birth weight (in ounces)
WIC participant
Observations

0.62
(0.49)
0.17
(0.37)
0.14
(0.35)
0.02
(0.15)
0.49
(0.50)

0.55
(0.50)
0.15
(0.36)
0.18
(0.38)
0.07
(0.25)
0.49
(0.50)

0.40
(0.03)
0.44
(0.03)
0.49
(0.03)
0.75
(0.04)

0.40
(0.03)
0.45
(0.03)
0.52
(0.03)
0.77
(0.03)

68.5
0.022
76.8
23.6
118.1
0.42
11414

67.0
0.005
61.4
23.6
87.5
0.38
10540

Source: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Kindergarten Class of 1998-1999. Standard
deviations are in paranthesis for variables. Test gaps measured in standard deviations and
standard errors are in parenthesis.

34

Table 3: Evolution of the black-white test gap under various transformations of the
PIAT
Baseline Minimum Maximum Corr Max
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Kindergarten 0.25***
0.24***
0.12***
0.24***
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
First Grade
0.42***
0.17***
0.38***
0.29***
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
Second Grade 0.58***
0.07*
0.57***
0.26***
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
Third Grade
0.61***
0.06
0.64***
0.19***
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
Gaps are average white score minus average black score on the PIAT-RC.
Column 4 represents the transformation that maximizes the correlation
between the PIAT-RC at kindergarten and the PPVT at age 3. Standard
errors are in paranthesis. *p<.1 **p<.05 ***p<.01

Table 4: Evolution of the black-white test gap under various transformations of the
ECLS-K
Baseline Minimum Maximium Corr Max
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Kindergarten - Fall
0.40***
0.46***
0.11***
0.50***
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.04)
Kindergarten - Spring 0.44***
0.50***
0.21***
0.52***
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.04)
First Grade - Spring
0.49***
0.49***
0.43***
0.49***
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
Third Grade - Spring 0.75***
0.51***
0.75***
0.73***
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
Gaps are average white score minus average black score on the ECLS-K reading
assessment. Standard errors are in parenthesis. *p<.1 **p<.05 ***p<.01

35

Table 5: Evolution of the unexplained black-white test gap under various transformations
Transformation
Baseline Minimum Maximum Corr Max
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Kindergarten - Fall
-0.05
-0.03
-0.04*
-0.03
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.04)
Kindergarten - Spring
0.04
0.08**
-0.01
0.10**
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.04)
First Grade - Spring
0.10***
0.10**
0.08**
0.10**
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
Third Grade - Spring 0.31***
0.17***
0.31***
0.30***
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
Gaps are the coe¢ cient on a white indicator variable with black as the excluded
variable. Each regression controls for SES, number of books in the home, gender,
birth weight, indicators for whether the mother was a teenager or over 30 at birth,
and WIC recipiency. Standard errors in parenthesis. *p<.1 **p<.05 ***p<.01

Table 6: Scales which maximize the explanatary power of controls
Percent Di¤erence
Raw Di¤erence
No Controls Controls No Controls
Controls
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Kindergarten-Fall
0.07***
-0.03
0.07***
-0.04
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.02)
Kindergarten-Spring
0.14***
-0.00
0.15***
-0.00
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
First Grade - Spring
0.32***
0.05**
0.34***
0.06**
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.03)
Third Grade - Spring
0.66***
0.25***
0.67***
0.26***
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
Gaps are the coe¢ cient on a white indicator variable with black as the excluded variable.
Standard errors are in paranthesis. *p<.1 **p<.05 ***p<.01

36

Table 7: Black-White Test Gap as a Percentage of Boundary Under Various Transformations
Baseline Minimizing Maximizing Corr Max
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Fall-K Black-White Test Gap
0.40
0.46
0.11
0.47
Fall-K Maximum Test Gap
1.49
1.92
0.24
1.97
Fall-K % of Maximum Gap
27.0%
24.1%
46.3%
23.9%
Spring-3 Black-White Test Gap
0.75
0.51
0.75
0.73
Spring-3 Maximum Gap
2.23
0.95
2.16
1.96
Spring-3 % of Maximum Gap
33.4%
53.5%
34.7%
37.4%
Gaps are average white score minus average black score on the ECLS-K reading assessment.

Table 8: Evolution of Black-White Test Gap Under Fixed Distribution
Fall-K Spring-K Spring-1 Spring-3
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Fixed Scale, Varied Rank
Fall-K Distribution
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.62
Spring-3 Distribution 0.49
0.53
0.51
0.75
Panel B: Varied Scale, Fixed Rank
Fall-K Rank
0.40
0.42
0.47
0.49
Spring-3 Rank
0.62
0.65
0.72
0.75
Gaps are average white score minus average black score on the ECLS-K
reading assessment.

37

