                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               LAYOFFS, LEMONS AND TEMPS

                                       Christopher L. House
                                            Jing Zhang

                                       Working Paper 17962
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17962


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Christopher L. House and Jing Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Layoffs, Lemons and Temps
Christopher L. House and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 17962
March 2012
JEL No. D82,E24,J23

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic equilibrium model of labor demand with adverse selection. Firms learn the
quality of newly hired workers after a period of employment. Adverse selection makes it costly to
hire new workers and to release productive workers. As a result, firms hoard labor and under-react
to labor demand shocks. The adverse selection problem also creates a market for temporary workers.
In equilibrium, firms hire a buffer stock of permanent workers and respond to changing business conditions
by varying their temp workers. A hiring subsidy or tax can improve welfare by discouraging firms
from hoarding too many productive workers.


Christopher L. House
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
chouse@umich.edu

Jing Zhang
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
jzhang@umich.edu
1     Introduction
Labor is often modeled as a variable factor of production which firms are free to vary as they
see fit. In reality, firms do not continually adjust the size of their workforce suggesting that
there are frictions that impede and discourage firms from adjusting too often. One potential
friction which can give rise to inertia in employment is adverse selection. Adverse selection
makes it costly to hire productive new workers and discourages firms from releasing productive
workers already on the payroll. Unlike other costs of adjustment, adverse selection costs are
endogenous. This endogeneity is important for two reasons. First, the degree of the adverse
selection, and therefore, the degree of the adjustment cost, may respond to economic policy.
Second, the adverse election cost may vary systematically over the business cycle and thus
may dynamically influence aggregate employment over time.
    We develop a model for analyzing labor demand in a market subject to adverse selection.
In the model, there are both good and bad workers in the unemployment pool. Firms cannot
ex ante identify which workers are good and which are bad. The lack of information regarding
the worker’s productivity is the source of the adverse selection problem. In this environment,
hiring a worker is an investment decision of sorts. Because they must commit to an initial
evaluation period, firms do not hire unless their current employment level is sufficiently lower
than their desired employment level. Similarly, because replacing productive workers is costly,
firms do not fire workers unless their current employment level is sufficiently higher than their
desired level. Indeed, in the model, many firms make no adjustment to their workforce at all.
    Changes in the degree of adverse selection have two separate effects on labor demand.
First, increasing the average quality of available workers reduces the cost of hiring and gives
firms an incentive to expand employment. We refer to this as the hiring effect. Second, an
increase in the average quality of available workers reduces the incentive to hoard labor and
thus gives firms an incentive to lay off workers when demand is low. We refer to this as the
hoarding effect. Under certain conditions, the hoarding effect can be strong enough to generate
multiple equilibria. If firms perceive adverse selection to be mild then few firms hoard labor.
In this case, there are many good workers in the unemployment pool, rationalizing the firms’
perception. If adverse selection is severe, firms hoard labor causing the pool to have few good
workers, rationalizing the high level of adverse selection.
    While the adverse selection problem causes firms to under-react to labor demand shocks,
it creates a market for temporary workers. In our model, temporary workers are supplied by


                                                2
temp agencies that identify productive workers and then lease them out to firms for a fee.
The temporary workers are more costly to the firms on a flow basis but they do not require
a costly screening process. By providing a form of insurance for firms against temporary
changes in labor demand, temp agencies reduce the severity of the adverse selection problem.
If the agency fee for the temps reflects only the cost of screening productive workers, then the
market for temp workers is so attractive that firms hire only temps and never hire permanent
workers. If the temp fee exceeds the screening costs (say because temp workers sometime
remain idle or because their skills are not a perfect match for the client firms or because they
need to adjust to a new work environment, etc.), then firms hire a buffer stock of permanent
workers and use temp workers to accommodate swings in demand.
   We then use the model to analyze the effects of hiring-taxes or hiring-subsidies. The policy
intervention we consider is a subsidy or tax for hiring new workers and thus is similar in spirit
to the Small Business Jobs and Wages Tax Cut proposed by the Obama administration in
early 2010 and to the New Jobs Tax Credit passed in 1977. The optimal hiring subsidy is
determined by whether firms hire more workers or hoard fewer workers in response to an
improvement in the quality of the labor pool – i.e., the optimal policy depends on whether
the hiring effect or the hoarding effect dominates. In the model, the optimal policy calls for
reducing overall employment to improve the quality of the pool and encourage firms to adjust
their labor force.
   Finally, we use a numerical version of the model to examine how aggregate shocks affect
labor markets with adverse selection. Adverse selection always causes the labor market to
under-react to labor demand shocks. This excessive stability arises because the quality in the
pool of available workers is counter-cyclical. In good economic times, firms have relatively
many productive workers on staff and thus firms that want to expand further are discouraged
because there are few productive workers available. In contrast, the “silver lining” of a re-
cession is that it is relatively easy to hire productive workers for firms that want to do so.
In addition, while temp employment varies with aggregate shocks, the variation in aggregate
temp employment is effectively permanent even though the shocks are transitory.
   The remainder of the paper is set out as follows: Section II analyzes the adverse selection
model when temp workers are not available. In Section III we analyze the model with temp
workers. Section IV considers the welfare effects of hiring taxes and hiring subsidies. Section V
analyzes aggregate shocks. Section VI considers extensions and the related literature. Section
VII concludes.

                                               3
2         The Model without Temps
In this section we present the basic adverse selection model without temporary workers.1
There is a continuum of firms of measure one. Firms differ in terms of their idiosyncratic cost
or demand shocks z, which are i.i.d. over time and distributed according to the distribution
function G (z) with density g (z). The shock z could reflect changes in the firm’s productivity
or changes in the price of the good the firm sells. These shocks are bounded on the interval
[0, Z] where Z < ∞. We assume the probability of drawing z = 0 is zero. Labor is the only
input into production. There are two types of workers: productive workers and unproductive
workers. Unproductive workers have zero productivity so no firm would knowingly employ
them. A worker’s type is private information. Firms do not know whether a given applicant
is productive or unproductive. Instead, a worker’s type is revealed only after working at the
firm for one period. At the end of each period, the firms release the unproductive workers
and begin the next period with only good workers on their payroll.
        Our assumptions on the nature of interactions in the labor market deserve some additional
discussion. First, we assume that firms have no memory of workers they release. We rule out
the possibility of recalling workers when demand picks up. Second, we rule out contracts
which could mitigate the adverse selection problem. For instance, a firm could offer payment
only in the event that the worker is productive. Such contracts could in principle be used to
reduce the level of adverse selection though a firm would always have the incentive to declare
that the workers were unproductive to avoid paying them. This would create a moral hazard
problem on the part of the firm.
        To keep the analysis simple, aggregate labor is supplied perfectly elastically at the exoge-
nous wage w up to a full-employment level L (the labor supply curve looks like a backwards
“L”). The wage can be interpreted as a constant disutility of working for each worker. The
overall fraction of productive workers in the labor force is φ ∈ (0, 1). Let µ be the fraction
of good workers available for hire in the unemployment pool. Because firms keep only good
workers on their payrolls, µ must be less than φ. Importantly, µ is an endogenous variable. In
the model, firms take µ as given when they make their employment decisions. After discussing
firm behavior, we go on to analyze the endogenous determination of µ itself.
    1
    The model in this section is a special case of a “kinked adjustment cost model.” The magnitude of the kink
comes from the severity of the adverse selection problem. Our analysis in this section shares common features
with well known papers in this literature including Bentolila and Bertola (1990), Bertola and Caballero (1990)
and more recently Elsby and Michaels (2008).



                                                      4
       There is no uncertainty for the firm as to how many productive workers it obtains for a
given number of hires. If a firm wishes to raise the number of productive workers on its staff
from n to n0 > n, it must hire          1
                                        µ
                                            (n0 − n) workers.2 On the other hand, since the firm has
only good workers employed at the beginning of a period, if it wishes to reduce the number
of productive workers from n to n0 < n, it simply dismisses n − n0 workers. Let e (n0 − n) be
the additional number of workers a firm must hire to change its employment of good workers
from n to n0 . That is,
                                               
                                                   1−µ
                                   0
                                               
                                                    µ
                                                         (n0 − n) for n0 > n,
                              e (n − n) =                                                                  (1)
                                                0                for n0 ≤ n.

       Each firm’s production function is zF (n) where F (·) is a concave production function with
the usual properties.3 The firm discounts future payoffs according to the constant discount
factor β = (1 + i)−1 where i is a net interest rate.


2.1       Optimal Decisions
We analyze the firm’s optimization problem recursively. At the beginning of a period, the state
of a firm is summarized by its idiosyncratic shock z and the number of productive workers
n on its payroll. The firm takes the wage w and the average quality in the unemployment
pool µ as given. Let v (n, z) be the value of a firm with n productive workers and current
idiosyncratic shock z.4 The firm’s value function v (n, z) satisfies the Bellman equation


                     v (n, z) = max
                                 0
                                    {zF (n0 ) − wn0 − w · e (n0 − n) + βV (n0 )} ,                         (2)
                                 n ≥0


where V (n0 ) is the expected continuation value for a firm that enters next period with n0
productive workers.
    Since we are analyzing a stationary equilibrium with constant w and µ, the only uncer-
tainty the firm faces arises from the idiosyncratic shocks. Thus, V (n0 ) = z0 v(n0 , z 0 )dG (z 0 ).
                                                                           R

Using standard dynamic programming arguments, it is straightforward to show that there is a
   2
     This ‘Law of Large Numbers’ assumption facilitates the analysis greatly but is clearly unrealistic for
smaller firms.
   3
     I.e., F (0) = 0, F 0 > 0, F 00 < 0, limn→0 F 0 (n) = ∞, limn→∞ F 0 (n) = 0.
   4
     The value function and the associated policy functions are themselves functions of the endogenous variable
µ. When there is no loss of clarity, we suppress the dependence on µ and simply write v (n, z) rather than
v (n, z; µ). When it is needed, we include µ as an argument explicitly.



                                                         5
unique value function v which satisfies (2). Both the value function v (n, z), and the expected
continuation value V (n), are continuous, differentiable and concave in n.
       To characterize the optimal choice of employment, we examine the first order condition for
n0 . This is problematic since the function e (·) in equation (2) is not differentiable at n = n0 .
If the firm chooses n0 6= n, however, the term is differentiable. In this case, it hires or fires
to the point at which the marginal benefit of an additional productive worker is offset by
the marginal cost of acquiring, or retaining, this worker. Given each z, we define two critical
employment levels, nL (z) and nH (z), as follows:

                                                                        w
                                   zFn (nL (z)) + βV 0 (nL (z)) =         ,                              (3)
                                                                        µ

and
                                   zFn (nH (z)) + βV 0 (nH (z)) = w.                                     (4)

       The term zFn (n) + βV 0 (n) is positive and strictly decreasing in n so nL (z) and nH (z) are
unique. Clearly, nL (z) < nH (z). These two values define a range of employment for a given
z. If a firm finds itself with employment outside of this range, it makes an adjustment. If the
firm has too few workers then it increases its effective employment to n0 = nL (z). If the firm
has too many productive workers then it reduces its effective employment to n0 = nH (z). If
the firm has a current staff of workers inside the range (i.e., if nL (z) < n < nH (z)) then the
firm simply continues to operate with its current workforce.5 We summarize these results in
Proposition 1. All proofs are in Appendix I.

Proposition 1: Given µ, there is a unique value function v (n, z) which solves the dynamic
programming problem in (2). The value function v(n, z) is continuous, differentiable and con-
cave in n for any z. Moreover, V (n) is continuous, differentiable and concave in n. The
optimal policy function n0 (n, z) for the firm is
                                        
                                         nL (z)      if n < nL (z) ,
                                        
                                        
                             0
                           n (n, z) =       n         if n ∈ [nL (z) , nH (z)] ,                         (5)
                                        
                                        
                                            nH (z)    if n > nH (z) ,
                                        


where nL (z) and nH (z) are given by (3) and (4).
   5
    This form of the firm’s optimal policy – in which many firms make no adjustment – is often referred to as
an (s, S) policy. The range of inaction is often referred to as the (s, S) band.


                                                     6
   To characterize the expected shadow value of an additional worker V 0 (n) we define two
critical values of z for any given n. The first critical value, zH (n) , is the solution to

                                                                     w
                                        zH (n) Fn (n) + βV 0 (n) =     .                            (6)
                                                                     µ

Any firm currently with n workers will increase employment whenever it gets a shock z >
zH (n). The second critical value zL (n) is implicitly defined as the solution to


                                        zL (n) Fn (n) + βV 0 (n) = w.                               (7)


Any firm currently with n workers will decrease employment whenever it gets a shock z <
zL (n). Firms that get shocks between zL (n) and zH (n) make no change to their employment.
   Now consider the term V 0 (n) . This is the expected marginal benefit of an additional
worker to a firm with n employees. If the firm draws a shock greater than zH (n), it increases
its employment of productive workers. Hiring good workers is costly because the firm also
pays the costs of inadvertently hiring unproductive workers. The additional hiring cost is the
difference between the effective cost of hiring a new productive worker (w/µ) and the cost of
paying a productive worker already on staff (w). Thus, in this case, the marginal benefit of an
extra productive worker is w(1 − µ)/µ. If the firm draws a shock less than zL (n), it reduces
employment and so, the marginal benefit of an extra worker is zero. If z is between zL (n) and
zH (n), the firm makes no change to its employment. In this case, the marginal value of an
additional worker is zFn (n) + βV 0 (n) − w > 0 where the inequality follows from z > zL (n).
We can now write the expected marginal shadow value V 0 (n) as

                          zH (n)                                           ∞
                                                                                 w(1 − µ)
                      Z                                               Z
              0                                 0
            V (n) =                (zFn (n) + βV (n) − w)g(z)dz +                         g(z)dz.   (8)
                      zL (n)                                            zH (n)      µ

   The expected marginal shadow value V 0 (n) is an important object in the model. This
object captures the benefits to the firm of retaining productive workers. One can show that
V 0 (n) is decreasing in the average quality µ of the pool of available workers. When µ increases,
the adverse selection problem is less severe and the benefit of hoarding labor decreases. Intu-
itively, as the pool of unemployed workers improves (i.e., as µ increases), the cost of obtaining
another productive worker falls. As a result, the marginal benefit of having an additional
productive worker on staff drops as µ increases.



                                                      7
   If there were no adverse selection (i.e., if µ were 1 and thus V 0 (n) = 0), optimal employment
n∗ (z) would be independent of the firm’s initial employment n and would depend only on the
idiosyncratic shock z. This frictionless employment level is the solution to


                                        zFn (n∗ (z)) = w.                                      (9)


With adverse selection V 0 (n) > 0 and thus the frictionless employment level n∗ (z) is between
nL (z) and nH (z) (it is in the (s, S) band). Because the shadow value V 0 (n) is decreasing in µ,
as the quality in the unemployment pool increases, nL (z) increases while nH (z) falls and the
(s, S) band, [nL (z) , nH (z)] , collapses around the frictionless level n∗ (z). These observations
are summarized in Lemma 1.

Lemma 1 For any n, dV 0 (n)/dµ ≤ 0 and limµ→1 V 0 (n) = 0. For any z, (i) nL (z) ≤ n∗ (z) ≤
nH (z); (ii) dnL (z)/dµ ≥ 0, dnH (z)/dµ ≤ 0 and limµ→1 nH (z) = limµ→1 nL (z) = n∗ (z) .

   Figure 1 shows the determination of nL (z), nH (z) and n∗ (z) for a given µ. The number
of productive workers n is on the horizontal axis. The downward sloping line is the marginal
product curve zFn (n). The upward sloping curves give the effective net cost of hiring addi-
tional productive workers ( wµ − βV 0 (n)) and the effective net benefit of releasing productive
workers (w − βV 0 (n)). These lines slope up and approach w/µ and w since V 00 (n) < 0
and limn→∞ V 0 (n) = 0. The hiring cutoff nL (z) is given by the intersection of the marginal
product curve and the effective net benefit curve. The firing cutoff nH (z) is given by the
intersection of the marginal product with the effective net cost curve. Finally, n∗ (z) is given
by the intersection of the marginal product with the wage (between nL (z) and nH (z)).


2.2    Equilibrium
In the previous section, we considered labor demand for firms taking µ as given. Here, we
extend our analysis to include the endogenous determination of µ. We focus on stationary
equilibria with constant µ. In a stationary equilibrium, given µ, firms make employment
decisions to maximize profits. The employment decisions imply the average quality of workers
in the unemployment pool µ. The equilibrium can be analyzed as the fixed point of a mapping
from perceived µ’s to implied µ’s. Given a perceived µ, the optimal policies are given by
Proposition 1. The optimal policies should imply a distribution of employment across firms
and a total level of employment of productive workers. Given the total number of employed

                                                8
productive workers, we can calculate the implied µ.
   In principle, the mapping outlined above should be relatively straight-forward to construct.
However, if the degree of adverse selection is too severe, the distribution of employment across
firms may be indeterminate. To see this, recall that the firm’s optimal policy entails an upper
and lower adjustment trigger for any z. These cutoffs nL (z) and nH (z) define a range of
inaction for any level of productivity. Lemma 1 says that the range of inaction [nL (z) , nH (z)]
is a decreasing function of µ. That is, when adverse selection is severe, the range of inaction
is wide. If µ is low enough, the range of inaction (for each z) can be so wide that firms never
respond to shocks. This occurs when the upper cutoff for the lowest productivity shock nH (0)
exceeds the lower cutoff for the highest productivity shock nL (Z). In this case, firms with
n ∈ [nL (Z) , nH (0)] never adjust their employment and therefore the stationary distribution
of employment would be indeterminate in this range. To resolve this indeterminacy, we use a
modified version of an otherwise standard stationary equilibrium.
   Our solution concept requires that the equilibrium be robust to a vanishingly small per-
turbation of the policy function. The perturbation we consider calls for firms to follow the
optimal policy function n0 (n, z) with probability 1 − ε but to follow an alternate policy func-
tion, n̂(n, z), with probability ε. The alternative policy we consider is n̂(n, z) = 0, which
could be interpreted as a ε probability that firms “die” or go bankrupt and release all of their
workers. Under this perturbation, there is a unique stationary equilibrium for any µ as ε → 0.
We call this modified equilibrium a stationary ε-equilibrium.

Definition:    A Stationary ε-Equilibrium Without Temporary Workers consists of a value
function v(n, z), a policy function n0 (n, z), a fraction µ, and a distribution of employment
across firms H(n) such that

  1. Given µ, v (n, z) and n0 (n, z) are given by Proposition 1.

  2. The distribution satisfies H (n) = limε→0 Hε (n) for all n where Hε (n) is a solution to
                               Z Z                                         
                                                    0
                    Hε (n) =          [(1 − ε) I (n (s, z) ≤ n) + ε] dHε (s) dG (z)         (10)


     and where the indicator function I (x ≤ n) = 1 iff x ≤ n.




                                                9
   3. The fraction of productive workers in the unemployment pool is

                                                       φL − N
                                                 µ=                                       (11)
                                                        L−N
                                                         R
      where total employment N is given by N =               ndH(n).


   Equation (10) says that the measure of firms with employment less than n consists of two
groups. First, there is the group of firms that follow the optimal policy and choose employment
n0 less than n. Second, there is the group of firms that follow the alternate policy of setting
employment to zero. The total number of firms with employment less than n is the sum of
these two groups. Equation (11) gives the quality in the unemployment pool implied by the
                                                                                         N
optimal behavior. Clearly, 0 < µ < 1. Moreover, it is easy to show that µ = φ − (1 − φ) L−N
and so µ ≤ φ.
   To find a stationary distribution, we follow Elsby and Michaels (2008) and equate inflows
and outflows for each interval [0, n]. The following Lemma establishes the uniqueness of, and
characterizes, the limiting distribution of employment given µ. To reflect this dependence, we
write the distribution as H (n; µ). This Lemma, and its proof, is only a slight modification of
Proposition 5 in Elsby and Michaels (2008).

Lemma 2 (adapted from Elsby and Michaels, 2008) Given µ and the perturbed policy function
n̂ (n, z) = 0, if nH (0; µ) ≥ nL (Z; µ) , then
                                         
                                          0 for n < n (Z; µ)
                                                      L
                              H (n; µ) =                       .                          (12)
                                          1 for n ≥ nL (Z; µ)


If nH (0; µ) < nL (Z; µ) , then

                                                 G(zL (n; µ))
                           H(n; µ) =                                     .                (13)
                                       1 − [G(zH (n; µ)) − G(zL (n; µ))]

   If nL (Z) ≤ nH (0) then the distribution is given by a point mass at nL (Z). This result
is due in part to our modified equilibrium concept. Without the modification, the station-
ary distribution of employment would be indeterminate in the range [nL (Z) , nH (0)]. The
modified equilibrium concept breaks this indeterminacy. With a vanishingly small probability
firms set n0 = 0. Firms that have n = 0 gradually increase employment over time. For each
productivity draw z the firm adjusts to nL (z). Since nH (0) > nL (Z) > nL (z) firms never

                                                  10
adjust down. Employment rises whenever the firms receive higher z’s and, in the limit, this
“ratcheting effect” leads all firms to have employment nL (Z).
   If nH (0) < nL (Z) then the density of firms is determinate and is nonzero only for n ∈
[nH (0) , nL (Z)] . Firms outside this interval move inside and firms inside this interval never
get shocks that move them outside.
   We refer to equilibria with a distribution that is a point mass as complete hoarding equi-
libria and equilibria with a distribution over more than one point as incomplete (or partial )
hoarding equilibria. The following Lemma establishes that there is a critical µ̄ such that there
is complete hoarding if and only if µ is less than or equal to µ̄.

Lemma 3 There exists a unique µ̄ ∈ (0, 1) such that for µ ≤ µ̄ the stationary distribution is
given by (12) (complete hoarding) and for µ > µ̄ the stationary distribution is given by (13)
(incomplete hoarding).

   Intuitively, if the adverse selection problem is severe (so that the average quality of unem-
ployed workers µ is low), firms adopt an extreme form of labor hoarding in which they do not
respond to shocks to the profit function and instead maintain a constant level of employment.
If the adverse selection problem is mild (so that µ is relatively high) then firms respond to the
shocks and there is a non-trivial distribution of employment levels across firms. As adverse
selection falls (µ → 1), the shadow value of retaining workers V 0 (n) falls. In the extreme case
where µ = 1, the value of retaining additional workers is zero. In this case, the firms simply
release workers if z turns out to be low and hire workers at the frictionless competitive wage
w if z turns out to be high.
   To prove the existence of an equilibrium we define a mapping T : [0, 1] → [0, 1] as follows.
Let µ ∈ [0, 1] be given. Let v (n, z) and n0 (n, z) be the solution to the dynamic programming
problem in (2) as given in Proposition 1. Let H (n; µ) be the unique distribution implied from
                           R
Lemma 2 and let N (µ) = ndH (n; µ) be aggregate employment. Then, define T (µ) as
                                         
                                             φL−N (µ)
                                         
                                              L−N (µ)
                                                         if φL > N (µ) ,
                               T (µ) =                                                      (14)
                                               0          otherwise.

Proposition 2 The mapping T : [0, 1] → [0, 1] defined in (14) has at least one fixed point.
The fixed points µ∗ of this mapping and the associated value functions v (n, z), policy functions
n0 (n, z) and distributions H (n) are the stationary ε-equilibria.


                                                    11
2.3    Discussion
The Hiring Effect and the Hoarding Effect: In the model, adverse selection exerts two opposing
forces on overall employment. First, adverse selection increases the effective cost of hiring
good workers. This effect puts downward pressure on employment. We call this first effect the
Hiring Effect. Second, adverse selection increases the benefit of retaining workers for future
production. This effect puts upward pressure on employment. We call this second effect the
Hoarding Effect. The balance of these two forces determines whether overall employment is
higher or lower than in a frictionless equilibrium.
   To find an expression for the change in employment with respect to µ, begin by writing
total employment as
                    "                                                                       #
           Z    Z                                                        Z   nH (z)
      N=                (1 − H (nH (z))) nH (z) + H (nL (z)) nL (z) +                 dH (n) g (z) dz.   (15)
            0                                                              nL (z)


where we have suppressed the dependence of the variables on µ for clarity. The measure of
employment for firms with shock z is made up of three terms. First, firms that began with
n > nH (z) reduce their employment to n0 = nH (z). There are 1 − H (nH (z)) such firms.
Second, firms that began with n < nL (z) increase their employment to n0 = nL (z). There are
H (nL (z)) such firms. Finally, firms that began with nL (z) ≤ n ≤ nH (z) make no adjustment
to their workforce. The last term in the bracket captures total employment for these firms.
   The change in employment with respect to a change in adverse selection is
                           Z   Z   
           ∂N                       H (nL (z)) w
                    =                                                                                    (16)
           ∂µ               0     Λ (z, nL (z)) µ2
                               |         {z          }
                                   The Hiring Effect

                                      1 − H (nH (z)) ∂V 0 (nH (z))        H (nL (z)) ∂V 0 (nL (z))
                                                                                                  
                           +β ×                                      +
                                       Λ (z, nH (z))       ∂µ            Λ (z, nL (z))    ∂µ
                                   |                               {z                              }
                                                            The Hoarding Effect
                              Z nH (z)               )
                                       ∂H (n)
                           −                     dn g (z) dz
                               nL (z)     ∂µ

where Λ (z, n) = − [zFnn (n) + βV 00 (n)] > 0.
   This expression is easiest to understand in the context of Figure 1. When µ changes there
are two separate effects on firms’ employment decisions. Most directly, when µ increases, the
effective hiring wage w/µ falls. The hiring effect corresponds to the decrease in w/µ holding


                                                        12
V 0 (n) fixed. Thus, in Figure 1, the hiring effect would be a downward shift in the curve
w/µ − βV 0 (n) and would naturally lead to an increase in nL (z). The strength of the hiring
effect depends on the number of firms with shock z that are hiring (i.e., H (nL (z))). An
increase in µ also has an indirect effect on labor demand. Specifically, when µ increases, the
marginal shadow value V 0 (n) falls. The hoarding effect corresponds to the decrease in V 0 (n)
holding w/µ fixed. In the figure, the hoarding effect is an upward shift in both w/µ − βV 0 (n)
and w − βV 0 (n) and thus decreases both nL (z) and nH (z). In (16), the hoarding effect is the
sum of the two terms involving ∂V 0 /∂µ. The last term ( [∂H (n) /∂µ] dn) captures additional
                                                        R

changes in employment caused by changes in the overall distribution of employment H. For
details on the derivation of (16) see Appendix II.
   The hiring effect and the hoarding effect determine whether T (µ) is increasing or decreas-
ing in µ. As µ increases (as adverse selection falls), the hiring effect encourages firms to hire
more workers and puts upward pressure on N (µ) . Since T (·) is a decreasing function of N ,
the hiring effect tends to make T a decreasing function of µ. The hoarding effect reduces the
incentive to retain workers and thus tends to make T an increasing function of µ. If T is
decreasing (so that Tµ < 0) we say that the equilibrium has a dominant hiring effect. If
T is increasing then we say that there is a dominant hoarding effect. In complete hoarding
equilibria, the hiring effect always dominates so Tµ < 0.

Multiple Equilibria: If the hoarding effect is sufficiently strong, the model can have multiple
equilibria. If firms anticipate that adverse selection is severe (i.e., that µ is low), they will
be reluctant to release good workers and instead hoard labor. As a result, if this hoarding
incentive is strong enough, the pool of potential workers is relatively low quality in equilibrium.
In contrast, if firms anticipate that adverse selection is mild (i.e., that µ is high), they will be
willing to release good workers when productivity is low. As a result, the pool of potential
workers has many good workers in it and the average quality is high in equilibrium. The
following example demonstrates the possibility of multiple equilibria.

Example. Consider a case with two possible shocks zl < zh . The probability of getting zh is
p. The marginal product function is piecewise linear with Fn given by
                                         
                                          a − b n for n ≤ n̂
                                            1    1
                                Fn (n) =
                                          a2 − b2 n for n > n̂


with a1 − b1 n̂ = a2 − b2 n̂. If b1 = b2 , Fn is linear. If b1 > (<)b2 the marginal product convex

                                                13
(concave) in n. The left panel of Figure 2 shows different examples of Fn . In an incomplete
hoarding equilibrium, firms switch between two employment levels nL (zh ) and nH (zl ) and
aggregate employment is N (µ) = pnL (zh ; µ) + (1 − p) nH (zl ; µ). We choose parameters to
ensure that nH (zl ) < n̂ < nL (zh ) so Fnn (nH (zl )) = b1 and Fnn (nL (zh )) = b2 . For this
example, equation (16) is
                                                               
                       ∂N (µ)    w   p         w 1−p      w p
                              =            −β 2         + 2
                        ∂µ      µ2 zh b2       µ zl b1    µ zh b2
                                | {z }       |         {z         }
                                  The Hiring Effect        The Hoarding Effect


Not surprisingly, the slopes (b1 and b2 ) of the marginal product function govern the intensity
of the hiring and hoarding effects. If b2 is relatively low, then as µ increases, firms can hire
more workers without sharply reducing the marginal product of labor and the hiring effect is
strong. (The hiring effect matters only for the high z. Firms with low z are releasing workers
which does not entail a screening cost.) If b1 and b2 are both low, then as µ increases, the firm
can release many workers without sharply increasing the marginal product of labor and thus
the hoarding effect is strong. Since firms want to release workers when they draw low z’s, and
hire workers when they draw the high z’s, if the marginal product Fn is steeper for the high
z’s and flatter for the low z’s, the hoarding effect will tend to dominate. (In the example, the
                                                         
hoarding effect dominates whenever b2 > b1 1−β      p zl
                                                 β 1−p zh
                                                            .) The right panel of Figure 2 shows the
mappings T (µ) corresponding to the marginal product functions in the left panel. The more
concave marginal product functions have weaker hiring effects and stronger hoarding effects
and thus feature multiple steady state equilibria. The convex marginal product functions have
stronger hiring effects and weaker hoarding effects and have unique equilibria.

Unique Equilibria: It is possible to place restrictions on the model to rule out multiple equi-
libria. Multiple equilibria require two conditions. First, changes in the quality of the pool
must have a dominant hoarding effect on labor demand. That is, when the pool improves
(i.e., higher µ), firms’ willingness to release good workers when productivity is low overcomes
their willingness to hire good workers when productivity is high. Second, there must be many
firms on the hiring-firing margin so that small changes in demand cause substantial changes
in the equilibrium µ. Thus, one way to ensure that there is a unique stationary equilibrium
is to limit the number of potential marginal firms.
   The following assumption bounds the number of marginal firms. Recall that Z is the
maximum possible productivity. Let n∗ (Z) be the efficient number of workers associated with

                                                      14
Z, (i.e., ZFn (n∗ (Z)) = w) and let µ̂ = [φL − n∗ (Z)] / [L − n∗ (Z)]. That is, µ̂ is the quality in
the unemployment pool that would arise if all firms continuously maintained an employment
level of n∗ (Z).

Assumption 1 Assume the shock distribution has a density g (z) and that g (z) < ḡ where

                                           1 − β φL − n∗ (Z)
                                    ḡ =        µ̂           .
                                             β     Zn∗ (Z)


The following proposition states that if the density is sufficiently low (so that g is everywhere
less than ḡ), then the stationary equilibrium must be unique.

Proposition 3 Let G (z) satisfy Assumption 1. Then there is a unique stationary equilibrium
µ in the model without temps.

    The hiring effect and the hoarding effect cause firms at the margin to change their em-
ployment decisions in response to changes in µ. Assumption 1 limits the extent to which this
change in behavior influences the equilibrium µ essentially by limiting the number of marginal
firms. If Assumption 1 is satisfied, there are never very many firms at the margin and so
variations in µ have only small effects on N and T .



3     The Model with Temps
This section extends the model to allow for temp agencies. The temp agencies play an insur-
ance role by providing costly workers to firms with temporarily high productivity. Like the
other firms, the temp agencies confront the adverse selection problem when they hire workers.
Section 3.1 analyzes the supply of temp workers. Section 3.2 analyzes the demand for both
permanent and temporary workers. Section 3.3 studies the equilibrium.


3.1    The Supply of Temp Workers
Temp workers are supplied by competitive temp agencies. The temp agencies hire workers at
the market wage w and lease productive workers to firms at a temp wage wm . Like the other
firms, temp agencies retain only good workers. Thus, after the evaluation period (the first
period of employment), the temp agency gets the temp wage wm for each temp worker and
pays each temp worker w. In this respect, temp agencies are just like the other firms. They

                                                 15
have no informational advantage when they hire new workers and they must incur the same
evaluation cost to determine which workers are productive and which are not.
   Temp agencies do differ in two important dimensions from the other firms however. First,
the temp firms can lease workers to other firms without losing contact with the workers.
Before, if a firm dismissed a worker, it could not re-establish contact with him later on.
Second, we allow the temp firms to write contracts which we do not allow for the other firms.
Specifically, the temp agencies get paid by the firms only if the workers supplied are good.
We do not allow firms to do this on their own directly with the workers. If we allowed firms
to make this contract with each worker, the adverse selection problem would be solved. If we
did not allow the temp agencies to make this contract, the temp agencies would offer no relief
from the adverse selection problem.
   The temp industry is competitive and thus (expected) profits at temp agencies are zero.
The cost to the temp agency of acquiring each productive worker is the evaluation cost
w (1 − µ) /µ. The benefit to the temp agency is the present discounted value of markups
wm − w. If the evaluation cost were the only cost paid by the temp agency, in equilibrium it
should be that w(1 − µ) = µ (wm − w) /(1 − β). We refer to this wage as the efficient temp
wage and denote it by w̄m . That is,

                                           w
                                  w̄m =      [1 − β (1 − µ)] .                           (17)
                                           µ

It is straight-forward to show that w < w̄m < w/µ. Notice that if β → 1 (i.e., if the temp
agencies are very patient) then w̄m → w.
   We allow for the possibility that there could be additional flow costs of providing temp
workers. One interpretation of the flow cost x is a cost of maintaining accurate records
and contact information, processing payments, necessary time between jobs, etc. Another
interpretation of x is as a measure of fit or match quality between a temp worker and his
or her employer. Temp workers likely do not have the exact skill set or familiarity with the
work environment that a permanent worker does. As a result, temp workers are effectively
more costly than permanent workers because they are on average worse matches for the
firm. If there are additional costs, then the temp wage will exceed w̄m . To allow for this
possibility, we write the temp wage as the efficient temp wage plus an additional flow cost
x so that wm = w̄m + x. We refer to case with x > 0 as the inefficient temp case though
our terminology is not meant to imply that there are any additional distortions in the labor


                                               16
market. If the additional overhead costs cause the temp wage to be greater than w/µ then
the model collapses to the case without temp workers.
   Formally, the representative temp agency’s value function is

                             0 m
              v T (m) = max
                         0
                             m w − m0 (w + x) − w · e (m0 − m) + βv T (m0 )
                        m ≥0


where m is the current stock of temp workers on staff, and the function e (·) is again given by
(1) (the superscript T indicates the value function is for the temp agency). Like the individual
firms’ demand for labor, the temp agency faces a kinked adjustment cost when it changes its
labor force. If the temp agency optimally chooses to hire workers (m0 > m) then

                                                               dv T (m0 )
                                                       
                            m                  1−µ
                        w − (w + x) − w                     +β            = 0.
                                                µ                dm0

If m0 < m then
                                                        dv T (m0 )
                                wm − (w + x) + β                   ≤0
                                                           dm
with equality if m0 > 0. The shadow value of good temp workers to the temp agency is
                                 
                                 
                                                   0                   m0 < m
                        T
                                 
                     dv (m)                       T     0
                            =   wm − (w + x) + β dvdm(m0 ) m0 = m .
                       dm                  
                                       w 1−µ               m0 > m
                              
                              
                              
                                           µ


                                         dv T (m)       wm −(w+x)
   In a steady state, m0 = m and thus      dm
                                                    =      1−β
                                                                  .   If the temp agencies were hiring
as they approached the steady state then the temp wage would be wm = w̄m + x. (In the
analysis below, the temp wage is w̄m + x which implicitly assumes that the temp agency was
hiring as the economy entered the steady state.) On the other hand, if the temp agencies were
firing as they approached the steady state (if, for some reason, the temp agency begins with
more workers than necessary) then, wm = w + x. Intuitively, if the temp agency is hiring, the
discounted sum of temp wage payments must be enough to cover both the discounted flow
                                            
costs plus the initial evaluation cost w 1−µ
                                          µ
                                               .
   Figure 3 shows the steady state supply function for temp agencies that have a total of Mt
temp workers currently on staff. If wm = w̄m +x, the temp agency is willing to supply M ≥ Mt
since wm would cover both the search cost and the flow cost of the worker. If wm = w + x, the
temp agency is willing to supply 0 ≤ M ≤ Mt since the temp wage would cover only the flow


                                               17
cost of the worker. If w + x ≤ wm ≤ w̄m + x the temp agency supplies exactly Mt workers.


3.2    Labor Demand
With temps, firms can respond to changing conditions either by hiring workers directly or by
hiring workers from the temp agencies. The Bellman equation governing the firm’s optimiza-
tion problem is


             v (n, z) = max
                         0
                            {zF (n0 + m) − wn0 − we (n0 − n) − wm m + βV (n0 )} ,            (18)
                        n ,m


where m and n0 are temporary workers and productive permanent workers respectively. We
use the term “permanent worker” to distinguish these workers from temporary workers. Note
that the firm never begins a period with temp workers on hand, thus there is no continuation
value associated with hiring temps. Because the permanent workers have continuation values,
the decision to hire additional permanent staff is similar to an investment decision.
   If a firm wants to increase its employment it has two options. It can hire a permanent
worker at an effective cost w/µ − βV 0 (n), or it can hire a temporary worker at an effective
cost wm . As before, if the firm hires permanent workers, it hires to the point at which the
marginal product of labor is equal to the effecitve hiring cost. Thus, if the firm hires permanent
workers, zFn (n0 + m) + βV 0 (n0 ) = w/µ. Similarly, if the firm releases permanent workers then
zFn (n0 + m) + βV 0 (n0 ) = w.
   Unlike the earlier model, the firm can hire temporary workers in addition to its permanent
workforce. Intuitively, because retaining a permanent worker currently on staff is less costly
than hiring a temporary worker, if a firm chooses to hire temp workers, it will not fire any
existing permanent workers. Moreover, if the firm hires temporary workers, it will choose m
so that the marginal product of labor will be equal to the temp wage, zFn (n0 + m) = wm . If
the firm hires no temporary workers, then zFn (n0 ) ≤ wm . Define nM (z) as the solution to


                                      zFn (nM (z)) = wm .                                    (19)


Notice that nM (z) is a purely static variable. No forward- or backward-looking elements enter
the determination of this variable. This employment level is the one the firm would choose
if it freely interacted with a spot labor market for productive workers at a spot price wm . If
the firm chooses to hire any temporary workers, then total employment at the firm (including


                                               18
both permanent and temporary workers) must be nM (z).
   If the temp workers are not too costly, firms will likely hire a mix of permanent and
temporary workers. Define n̄ as the critical employment level where the effective cost of
hiring a permanent worker and the cost of hiring a temporary worker are equal.

                                             w
                                      wm =     − βV 0 (n̄) .                                (20)
                                             µ

This critical employment level will always exist provided that wm < w/µ. Since V 0 (n) is
decreasing in n, n̄ is unique. For n < n̄, hiring an additional permanent worker is effectively
cheaper than hiring a temp. For n > n̄, the continuation value βV 0 (n) is sufficiently low that
hiring a temp is effectively cheaper than hiring a permanent worker.
   Figure 4 depicts the optimal choice of permanent and temporary workers for three pro-
ductivity levels z1 < z ∗ < z2 . Each productivity level implies a different marginal product
of labor zFn (n + m) (the downward sloping lines in the figure). The two upward sloping
curves correspond to the effective net cost of hiring permanent workers (w/µ − βV 0 (n)) and
the effective net benefit of firing permanent workers (w − βV 0 (n)). The employment level n̄,
at which it is just as costly to hire a permanent worker as a temporary worker, is defined by
the intersection of the effective hiring cost line w/µ − βV 0 (n) with the temp wage wm . The
figure is drawn under the assumption that w/µ − βV 0 (0) < wm and so firms will want to hire
at least some permanent staff.
   Consider the hiring decisions for a firm that begins the period with n = 0 workers. If
the firm draws the low productivity level (z1 ) the firm uses only permanent workers and the
firm’s decision is the same as the case without temps. The firm hires to the point at which the
effective cost of permanent workers is equal to the benefit. This point is nL (z1 ). At nL (z1 ),
the effective cost of permanent workers is less than wm and thus there is no reason to hire
any temps. The medium productivity level z ∗ is the highest z for which the firm will not use
temps. This critical productivity level z ∗ is implicitly defined by


                                        z ∗ Fn (n̄) = wm .                                  (21)


If a firm were to draw z ∗ , it would hire n̄ permanent workers and zero temps. At this level of
employment (n̄) the effective cost of hiring permanent workers is the same as the effective cost
of hiring temporary workers. If the firm draws the high productivity level (z2 ), it hires both


                                               19
permanent and temporary workers. Total employment nM (z2 ) is defined by the intersection
of the marginal product curve and the temp wage line. At this employment level the firm
hires n̄ permanent workers and nM (z2 ) − n̄ temporary workers.
   The optimal hiring decisions of firms that begin with n > 0 can also be inferred from
the figure. A firm that begins with n̄ workers, will not release any permanent workers if it
draws the low shock (i.e., z1 ). A firm that begins with n between n̄ and nM (z2 ) and draws
the z2 shock, retains all of its permanent workers and hires temporary workers so that total
employment is nM (z2 ). The following Proposition summarizes the optimal policy function for
a firm in the model with temps.

Proposition 4 In the model with temporary workers, given µ and a wage for temporary
                       w
workers w̄m ≤ wm <     µ
                         ,   the optimal policy is given by an employment policy for permanent
workers n0 (n, z) and an employment policy for temporary workers m (n, z). If z ≤ z ∗ then
                                      
                                       nL (z) for n ≤ nL (z)
                                      
                                      
                       n0 (n, z) =         n        for nL (z) < n ≤ nH (z) ,
                                      
                                      
                                           nH (z) for nH (z) < n
                                      


and m (n, z) = 0. If z > z ∗ then
                                           
                                            n̄
                                           
                                                     for n ≤ n̄
                             n0 (n, z) =       n      for n̄ < n ≤ nH (z) ,
                                           
                                           
                                               nH (z) for nH (z) < n
                                           


and m (n, z) = max {0, nM (z) − n0 (n, z)}. Here nM (z) , n̄ and z ∗ are defined in (19), (20)
and (21) and nL (z) and nH (z) are defined in (3) and (4).

   One can show that, given µ, the continuation value V 0 (n) is identical to the continuation
value in the no temp model for any n ≤ n̄. Thus, for z ≤ z ∗ firms employ nL (z) ≤ n̄
permanent workers. This is exactly the same hiring policy as in the no temp model. Put
differently, if the firm is not actively hiring temp workers in a given period, its hiring policy
for permanent workers is unaffected by the availability of temps. Also, for z > z ∗ , firms
employ more total workers than in the model without temps. Specifically, firms employ
n̄ + m (n, z) = nM (z) ≥ nL (z) total workers. The composition of these workers differs
however. Firms that draw z > z ∗ continue to operate with their buffer-stock n̄ but respond

                                                     20
to the high shock by hiring temp workers. Taken together, these observations imply that,
for a given µ, total firm-level employment will be more volatile if temp workers are available.
Not surprisingly, the increased employment volatility is due to variation in temp employment.
Variation in permanent employment drops if temps are available.


3.3      Equilibrium
The definition of an equilibrium is similar to the case without temps. As before, we appeal to
an ε perturbation to ensure uniqueness of the distribution of employment across firms.

Definition: A Stationary ε-Equilibrium for the Model with Temporary Workers consists of a
fraction µ, a temp wage wm ≥ w̄m (µ), a value function v(n, z), an employment policy function
for permanent workers n0 (n, z), an employment policy function for temporary workers m (n, z),
and a distribution of permanent workers across firms H(n) such that

  1. Given µ and wm , n0 (n, z) and m (n, z) solve the firm’s problem in (18) and imply v(n, z).

  2. H (n) satisfies H (n) = limε→0 Hε (n) for all n where Hε (n) is a solution to
                                  Z Z
                       Hε (n) =         [(1 − ε) I (n0 (n, z) ≤ n) + ε] dHε (n) dG (z)


        and where the indicator function I (x ≤ n) = 1 iff x ≤ n.

  3. The fraction of productive workers in the unemployment pool is µ = (φL−N −M )/(L−
                            R
     N − M ) where N = ndH(n) is the total employment of permanent workers and
          RR
     M=       m (n, z) dH (n) dG (z) is the total employment of temporary workers.

   There are two broad types of equilibria in the model with temp workers. There is the
equilibrium that arrises when the temp wage is efficient (when wm = w̄m ) and the equilibria
when the temp wage is above the efficient level (when wm = w̄m + x). We refer to this
second case as the “costly temps” case. We discuss these two cases separately. We begin by
characterizing the equilibrium with a perfectly efficient market for temporary workers.


3.3.1     Efficient Temps

If wm = w̄m the temp wage is “efficient.” There are no additional overhead costs or markups
beyond the cost of recovering the initial evaluation for the temp agency. Here we show that

                                                  21
firms never hire permanent workers in the efficient temp case – all employees are temporary
workers.
   To demonstrate that only temp workers will be employed, we show that, for a firm with
no employees, the effective cost of hiring the “first” permanent worker is equal to the efficient
temp wage.6 A firm with zero current employees will increase employment next period with
probability one. The discounted shadow value of a permanent worker for such a firm is
βV 0 (0) = w(1 − µ)/µ. Using the definition of the efficient temp wage (equation 17), we
conclude that w/µ − βV 0 (0) = w̄m and the effective cost of hiring the first permanent worker
is the same as the cost of hiring a temp. Because the shadow value of permanent workers is
decreasing in n, the effective cost of hiring the second or third permanent worker is strictly
greater than w̄m . As a result, if wm = w̄m , the buffer-stock n̄ of permanent workers is zero
and the firms never hire permanent staff.
   That firms hire only temps is not surprising. The shocks to labor demand are idiosyncratic
and the temp agency offers to provide productive workers at a wage which covers the workers’
opportunity costs plus the minimal evaluation costs to the temp agency. In a sense, the temp
agencies are providing an insurance service to the production firms. Given this option, the
firms “perfectly insure” against variations in labor demand caused by idiosyncratic shocks and
the temp workers are the only ones ever hired.
   Since firms hire only temps, we can calculate total employment given µ using the static
condition (19). Employment for a firm with shock z is nM (z; µ). Aggregate employment of
permanent workers is N (µ) = 0 and aggregate employment of temporary workers is M (µ) =
RZ
 0
   nM (z; µ) g (z) dz. As before, the equilibrium is a fixed point in µ. Given total employment
M (µ), the implied degree of adverse selection in the unemployment pool is

                                                                   L
                                µ0 = T m̄ (µ) = 1 − (1 − φ)
                                                               L − M (µ)

where the notation T m̄ distinguishes this mapping from the mapping in the model without
temps. The fixed point mapping T m̄ (µ) is strictly decreasing in µ and thus, there is a unique
equilibrium µ∗ for the efficient temp case. Moreover, since w̄m > w, nM (z; µ) < n∗ (z) for
any z, and aggregate employment is strictly less than the efficient level of employment. The
following proposition summarizes this discussion.
    6
      This argument goes through even if the actual temp wage exceeds the efficient temp wage. That is, even
if wm > w̄m (µ), we still have w/µ − βV 0 (0) = w̄m .



                                                    22
Proposition 5 If wm = w̄m then, (i) the only workers employed in equilibrium are temp
workers and n̄ = 0; (ii) the equilibrium is unique; (iii) aggregate employment is less than the
efficient level of employment.


3.3.2   Costly Temps

The case in which the provision of temp workers entails costs above and beyond the search cost
(i.e., in which x > 0) is somewhat more complicated. Given µ, optimal behavior for each firm is
given by Proposition 4. Unlike the efficient temp case, if wm > w̄m , firms hire a strictly positive
buffer-stock of permanent workers and use temporary workers to accommodate transitory
labor demand shocks. In a stationary equilibrium, firms employ at most n̄ permanent workers
in any period where n̄ is defined by (20). We now proceed to characterize the equilibrium.
   To prove existence, we again construct a fixed point mapping in µ. Given µ, let v (n, z; µ)
be the value of a firm with current shock z and current permanent staff n that behaves
optimally. Let m (z, n; µ) and n0 (z, n; µ) be the associated policy functions characterized by
the cutoff functions nL (z; µ) , nH (z; µ), n̄ (µ) and nM (z; µ).

Complete Hoarding: If there is complete hoarding (so that nH (0; µ) ≥ min {n̄ (µ) , nL (Z; µ)})
then the distribution of permanent workers, H (n; µ), is given by
                                    
                                     0 for n < min {n̄ (µ) , n (Z; µ)}
                                                               L
                         H (n; µ) =                                      .                        (22)
                                     1 for n ≥ min {n̄ (µ) , nL (Z; µ)}


Firms may or may not use temps however. If n̄ (µ) ≥ nL (Z; µ) then no temps are hired and
aggregate employment is N (µ) = nL (Z; µ) . If n̄ (µ) ≤ nL (Z; µ) then firms hire both temps
and permanent workers though they never adjust their permanent staff. The permanent staff
at each firm is n̄ (µ) while total employment is max {nM (z; µ) , n̄ (µ)} and employment of
temps is m (z, n; µ) = max {nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ) , 0} . In this case, total employment of good
                                          RZ
workers in equilibrium is N (µ) = n̄ (µ) + zM (n̄(µ);µ) (nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ)) dG (z) .

Incomplete Hoarding: If there is incomplete hoarding (nH (0; µ) < min {n̄ (µ) , nL (Z; µ)}),
then the distribution of permanent workers, H (n; µ), is
                 
                 
                 
                                0                              for n < nH (0; µ)
                            G(zL (n;µ))
    H (n; µ) =       1−[G(zH (n;µ))−G(zL (n;µ))]
                                                   for nH (0; µ) ≤ n ≤ min {n̄ (µ) , nL (Z; µ)}   (23)
                 
                 
                                 1                       for min {n̄ (µ) , nL (Z; µ)} < n
                 


                                                      23
Again, firms may or may not use temps. If n̄ (µ) ≥ nL (Z; µ) then no temps are hired and
                                R∞
aggregate employment is N (µ) = 0 ndH (n; µ) . If n̄ (µ) ≤ nL (Z; µ) then firms hire both
temps and permanent workers. Firms with z < zM (n̄ (µ) ; µ) hire no temporary workers and
instead operate only using their permanent staff. Firms with z > zM (n̄ (µ) ; µ) choose total
employment nM (z; µ) and thus hire temporary workers m (z, n; µ) = nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ) . Total
                                      R∞             RZ
employment of good workers is N (µ) = 0 ndH (n; µ) + zM (n̄(µ);µ) (nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ)) dG (z) .

                                                                           φL−N (µ)
    In the above cases, the level of employment N (µ) implies T (µ) =       L−N (µ)
                                                                                    .   The mapping
T : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is continuous and thus existence of at least one equilibrium is guaranteed.
This discussion is summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 6. In the model with inefficient temps, the mapping T has at least one fixed point.
The fixed points µ∗ of this mapping and associated value function v (n, z; µ∗ ) , policy functions
m (z, n; µ∗ ) and n0 (z, n; µ∗ ) and distribution H (n; µ∗ ) are the stationary ε-equilibrium.

    In equilibrium, firms’ employment choices exhibits a buffer-stock adjustment pattern.
Specifically, there is a natural tendency for firms to “bunch up” at n̄. Thus, n̄ might be
considered the normal employment level for a typical firm in this industry. For these firms,
any increases in employment will be accomplished by temporary employment. Only if the
firm gets a very low shock will it reduce its permanent staff. For modest changes in z, the
firm will either make no adjustment to permanent employment or it will hire temp workers.
Notice, based on (22) or (23), in a stationary equilibrium, no firm ever has n > n̄.



4     Welfare and Policy
In this section we briefly consider the welfare in the labor market with adverse selection. After
calculating welfare, we then ask whether hiring subsidies or taxes improve aggregate welfare
relative to the case without government policy. Typically policy interventions entail a dynamic
transition from the initial steady state to a new steady state consistent with the new policy
instrument. For our purposes, we compare the steady state flow of welfare for different policy
choices. This comparison essentially adopts a “long-horizon” view which would be technically
appropriate only for very patient firms. Thus, in our policy calculations, we consider welfare
comparisons under the assumption that β is close to 1 and we ignore the welfare consequences
of the dynamic transition paths from one stationary equilibrium to another.


                                                24
   Calculating aggregate welfare for the model is straightforward. In either the model with
temps or the model without temps, we can characterize both the equilibrium degree of adverse
selection and the equilibrium distribution of employees across firms. We calculate welfare for
each firm that draws a particular shock z and then aggregate over all of the firms. While
the definition of welfare is natural, the calculations themselves are rather tedious. Exact
expressions for aggregate welfare are included in Appendix I.

Hiring Subsidies and Hiring Taxes. We consider the effects of a hiring subsidy (or tax). If the
labor market were frictionless, subsidizing firms to hire more workers would cause deadweight
losses. However, because of the adverse selection problem, subsidies or taxes to hiring could
work to undo some of the existing distortions in the market. A hiring subsidy is a natural
candidate for a policy in this environment since adverse selection effectively increases the costs
of changing the level of employment at a firm.
                                                                                            w(1−µ)(1−τ )
   If τ is the hiring subsidy, the effective after-tax cost of hiring a worker is               µ
                                                                                                         .   From
the firms’ perspective, this is equivalent to an environment without a subsidy but with a
                            1−µ̃       (1−µ)(1−τ )
different µ, say µ̃, with    µ̃
                                   =       µ
                                                   .   To avoid tracking the additional parameter τ, we
imagine that the government simply chooses µ directly. This choice will not be consistent with
a stationary equilibrium if the government chooses a µ for which T (µ) 6= µ. Thus, while the
firms behavior is governed according to µ, the true hiring costs to society are governed by T (µ).
The difference between the actual amount of adverse selection in the subsidized equilibrium
T (µ) and the effective costs to the firm µ is accounted for by the government hiring subsidy.
                                                                         µ−T (µ)
The implicit subsidy in the stationary equilibrium is τ =               µ(1−T (µ))
                                                                                   .   If µ > T (µ) then the
implicit subsidy is positive (i.e., the actual hiring costs are greater than the perceived hiring
costs). If µ < T (µ) then the implicit subsidy is negative (the government taxes hiring).
   We do not consider the revenue consequences of the tax or subsidy. This approach im-
plicitly ignores additional welfare effects caused by either raising additional tax revenue or by
lowering other distortionary tax rates. Instead, we assume the government either has access
to the necessary funds or can tax or transfer funds to agents lump sum. As mentioned above,
we judge policies based on how they change the average flow of welfare in the steady state
and so our analysis applies only if firms are sufficiently patient (i.e., only if β is sufficiently
close to 1).
   The inefficiency in the model arises because firms do not internalize the effects of their
own labor hoarding on the quality in the pool of available workers. Firms hoard labor to avoid


                                                         25
the costs of finding productive workers when demand is high. The cost of this behavior to
the firm is the value of wages paid during periods of average or below average demand. Firms
internalize both of these costs and benefits when they make their hiring and firing decisions.
Holding productive workers off the market however, also imposes costs on other firms. By
hoarding labor, firms restrict the supply of productive workers available for hire and thus
indirectly increase the cost of hiring to other employers. Firms do not internalize this cost
and thus there is room for a corrective tax or subsidy.
    Not surprisingly, whether it is optimal to tax or to subsidize hiring depends on the relative
strength of the hiring and hoarding effects. If the hiring effect is dominant, then a tax on
hiring improves welfare. If the hoarding effect is dominant, then a hiring subsidy improves
welfare. The following results summarize our main result in this section:

Proposition 7. For β near 1, (i) in complete hoarding equilibria (with or without temps), or
in the model with efficient temps, the marginal social benefit of a hiring subsidy (or hiring tax)
is zero; (ii) in incomplete hoarding equilibria (with or without temps), a hiring subsidy will
increase the steady state flow of welfare if there is a dominant hoarding effect in equilibrium
(i.e., if Tµ (µ) > 0); a hiring tax will increase the steady state flow of welfare if there is a
dominant hiring effect in equilibrium (i.e., if Tµ (µ) < 0).

    The intuition underlying Proposition 7 is somewhat subtle. When a firm hires workers, it
imposes negative externalities on other firms by lowering the quality of the pool of available
workers. Firms do not internalize this effect and as a result, locally, welfare would increase if
firms reduced employment overall. Whether the government uses a tax or a subsidy depends
on the strength of the hiring effect and the hoarding effect. If the hiring effect is dominant then
a hiring tax will reduce employment and improve the quality of the pool of available workers.
If the hoarding effect is dominant, a hiring subsidy causes firms to reduce employment because
it lowers their incentive to retain workers. In either case, the optimal policy improves the pool
of available workers by discouraging firms from hoarding.



5     Aggregate Shocks
While our main focus is on the steady state properties of the adverse selection model and the
effects of policy in such environments, we can also use the model to consider how such labor
markets react to aggregate shocks (e.g., business cycle variation). To do this, we extend the

                                                26
model to allow for time variation in the endogenous variables µt , Nt and, in the model with
temp workers, wtm and Mt . For simplicity, we maintain the assumption that the base wage
w is constant over time and confine our attention to how aggregate shocks influence adverse
selection and the demand for labor.
   Because of the complexity of the model, we use numerical techniques to analyze the equi-
librium reaction to shocks. Production for firm i at time t is At zit F (nit ) where zit is the
idiosyncratic productivity shock for firm i and At is an aggregate productivity shock common
                                                                                 n2it
to all firms. The function F is assumed to be quadratic: F (nit ) = Bnit −        2
                                                                                      .   We choose
parameter values for illustrative purposes only. The idiosyncratic shock z is uniformly dis-
tributed on a grid with mean 1 and standard deviation 0.15. The time periods are assumed
to be years. The firm’s annual discount factor β is 0.95. The scaling parameter B is chosen to
ensure that labor demand does not exceed our employment grid space. The aggregate shock
A follows an autoregressive process At = (1 − ρ) + ρAt−1 + εt , where ρ is set to 0.70 annually.
For the model with temp workers, we assume that the additional flow cost of temp workers
is ten percent of the base wage (i.e., x = 0.10). We assume that the aggregate quality share
φ is 0.95 and we choose total labor supply L to ensure that µ = 0.75 in the steady state.
The baseline parameters are summarized in Table 1. The remaining details of the numerical
solution are in Appendix III.
   We consider four models: (i) the model without temps, (ii) the model with efficient temps
(x = 0), (iii) the model with costly temps (x > 0) and (iv) a frictionless model with no
adverse selection problem. Table 2 reports the steady state values of aggregate employment
across the models. Comparing the frictionless case (column 1) with the adverse selection
model without the option of temp workers (column 2) shows that the hoarding effect is strong
enough to induce firms to employ more workers than they would in the frictionless model.
Allowing firms to use temp workers reduces the incentive to hoard labor and causes aggregate
employment to fall. In the costly temp case (column 3) employment again exceeds the efficient
level. In the efficient temp case (column 4), total employment is below the efficient level given
the greater cost of the temp workers.
   We now consider a transitory shock to the parameter At . We assume the economy begins
in the steady state equilibrium described by Propositions 2 and 6. At date 0, A0 immediately
and unexpectedly jumps up by ten percent and then gradually decays over time. Once the
aggregate shock occurs, firms act as though they know the path of At going forward (i.e., we
examine a perfect foresight solution).

                                               27
      Figure 5 shows the impulse response functions for the aggregate shock. The figures depict
reactions of each variable as a ratio of their steady state level. The upper left panel shows
the shock. The top middle panel reports total employment for each of the four models. Not
surprisingly, the model with the frictionless labor market responds most to the shock. Firms
in this model quickly expand employment following the shock and then release the workers
as the shock fades. In the models with adverse selection, the response is substantially more
muted but also more persistent. While adverse selection causes inefficiency and misallocation,
the inefficiencies do not result in a more volatile market. Instead, adverse selection causes
firms to under-react to the shock and thus the distorted market is inefficiently stable (insuf-
ficiently responsive to shocks). In part, this excessively stable labor market arises because
the degree of adverse selection varies over the cycle. The upper right panel shows the quality
(µ) in the unemployment pool following the shock. Because firms expand employment, they
draw more productive workers out of the unemployment pool lowering the average quality of
available workers and effectively making hiring more costly. This phenomenon is undoubtedly
a feature of real-world labor markets. In good times, firms hire and retain many good work-
ers leaving few productive workers available overall. In bad times, firms release productive
workers creating an opportunity for other firms that might want to expand employment.7
      In the lower panels, we decompose the employment response into permanent workers and
temp workers. Total employment of permanent workers rises more when temp workers are not
available (in the model with efficient temps, firms never hire permanent workers in accordance
with Proposition 5). The lower middle panel compares the model with efficient temps to the
model with costly temps. Notice that, as a percent of steady state, temp employment rises
more in the costly temp case. This is because there are fewer temps employed on average and
because most firms expand employment by hiring temps rather than by expanding their stock
of permanent workers.
      Notice that the change in temp workers is permanent. Because of the search costs of
finding productive workers, temp agencies hire only if the temp wage is high enough to cover
these costs. If the temp wage is not sufficiently high however, the temp agency continues to
supply the current stock of temp workers. The supply of temp workers would decline only if
wm fell below w + x (see Figure 3). Thus, the aggregate adjustment of temp workers in our
model is highly persistent as shown in the lower panels of Figure 5. An additional consequence
of this persistence is that the temp wage remains lower than the initial equilibrium even after
  7
      See House (2006) for a similar “stabilizing” effect in the context of financial market distortions.


                                                        28
the shock has faded. Temps hiring thus permanently increases in the long run and firms can
reduce their employment of permanent staff because of the greater availability of temp workers
going forward.8



6         Discussion and Related Literature
Interpretation of the Temp Wage. In the model, the temp workers get wages that exceed the
wages of the permanent workers. This may strike the reader as unrealistic since many temp
workers are paid less than permanent staff. Two points are worth mentioning. First, the temp
wage wm includes both the wage payment to the temp worker and the additional fee paid to
the temp agency. From the standpoint of the worker, the temp workers are paid no more than
the permanent workers in the model.
        Second, in our model there are no fundamental differences between temp workers and
permanent workers. In reality, workers select into career tracks which determine whether
they are a temp worker or a permanent worker. It would seem most likely that the most
productive workers seek out permanent work while lower productivity workers provide work
on a temporary basis. Indeed, one of the interpretations of the additional flow cost x in
the model with costly temps is as costs arising because the temp workers are inadequately
matched with the needs of the firm.

Hiring Subsidies in Practice. The Federal Government only rarely uses subsidies to new hiring
as a policy instrument and when it does, the rationale is typically as a counter-cyclical measure.
For instance, in January 2010, President Barack H. Obama proposed the Small Business Jobs
and Wages Tax Cut. The purpose of the proposal was to “accelerate the pace of job growth
by providing businesses – particularly America’s small businesses – with a tax cut for putting
more Americans back to work.” While there were other provisions in the proposal, the center
piece was to be a $5,000 tax credit for every net new employee that a business adds in 2010.
Ultimately, the actual 2010 legislation did not include the proposed hiring subsidy but instead
temporarily reduced payroll taxes for all employees. (Thus, the final bill had features of an
employment subsidy but not a hiring subsidy.)9
    8
     In the model, total employment of temps and permanent workers is bounded by the total supply of
productive workers φL. In the numerical example, total employment is always below this limit.
   9
     For details on the Small Business Jobs and Wages Tax Cut see the Office of the Press Secretary 2010 and
Congressional Budget Office 2010. Details of the 2010 stimulus act are in S.A. 4753: The Reid-McConnell Tax
Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization and Job Creation Act of 2010 Amendment to H.R. 4853.


                                                    29
       In 1977, the Federal government passed the New Jobs Tax Credit which provided for a
marginal wage credit for new hires over and above the previous year’s employment level. The
tax credit lasted from 1977 to 1978 and was targeted more towards low income and part time
workers rather than permanent staff. (See Perloff and Wachter (1979) for more details.)

Related Literature. Our paper connects a wide variety of research. First and foremost, the
paper contributes to the interrelated study of adverse selection in labor markets and the role
of temporary workers in the labor force. The study of adverse selection dates back to Ak-
erlof (1970) and Wilson (1977, 1980).10 Adverse selection in labor markets has been studied
by, among others, Greenwald (1986), Gibbons and Katz (1991), Weiss (1991), Montgomery
(1999) and Nakamura (2008). Research on temporary workers has become more active re-
cently though most of the work is empirical in nature. Prominent examples include Abraham
and Taylor (1996), Autor (2001), Houseman (2001) and Segal and Sullivan (1997).11 Ono
and Sullivan (2006) present a model of labor demand for permanent and temporary workers
which is sufficiently tractable to take to the data. While many of these papers mention ad-
verse selection and screening costs as an important cost of hiring permanent workers and an
important incentive for firms to use temps, none of these papers presents a model of temps
arising because of the adverse selection problem. We should note that Autor (2009) explicitly
points out that one of the functions of labor market intermediaries like temp agencies is to
alleviate adverse selection problems. Our paper adds to this literature by presenting, to our
knowledge, the first equilibrium model of temp-employment in an adverse selection setting.
       Our paper also relates to the literatures on labor hoarding (see Clark 1973, Fay and
Medoff 1985, and Fair 1985) and wage cyclicality. Solon et al. (1994) show that because the
composition of the labor force varies systematically over the business cycle (as firms release the
lowest productivity workers first), measured average real wages appear to be less pro-cyclical.
Our model implies a similar effect occurs in unobserved productivity. Similarly, Burnside et
al. (1993) show that labor hoarding causes measured variations in total factor productivity to
be substantially overstated. Wen (2005) analyzes the interaction between labor hoarding and
firms’ inventory management behavior.
       Finally, our work contributes to the growing literature on (s, S) adjustment in labor mar-
  10
      See Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), Mankiw (1986), de Meza and Webb (1987), and Eisfeldt (2004) for equilib-
rium models of adverse selection in financial markets. House and Leahy (2004) present an analysis of adverse
selection in (s, S) models. Hendel and Lizzeri (1999) analyze adverse selection in durable goods markets.
   11
      See also Autor and Houseman (2006, 2010), Böheim and Cardoso (2009), Foote and Folta (2002), Heinrich
et al. (2009) and Kvasnicka (2009).


                                                     30
kets (Bentolila and Bertola 1990). Recent contributions to this literature include King and
Thomas (2006) and Elsby and Michaels (2008).12 The Elsby and Michaels paper deserves spe-
cial mention. Elsby and Michaels analyze an equilibrium model of labor demand in which firms
face kinked adjustment cost functions and display (s, S) behavior as in our model. In their
model, the adjustment cost arises from search frictions. In addition to making a number of
substantive contributions to the literature on costly labor adjustment and kinked-adjustment
costs more broadly, Elsby and Michaels provide a number of technical contributions to the
analysis of such models. Many features of our formulation of the problem (notably, our expres-
sion for the steady state distribution of employment across firms in Lemma 2) draws directly
from their analysis.



7        Conclusion
We have presented an equilibrium model of labor demand in the presence of adverse selection.
Adverse selection raises the cost of hiring new productive workers and makes firms reluctant to
vary their permanent workforce in response to transitory labor demand shocks. Unlike many
other types of hiring costs, the adverse selection cost is endogenous. If the adverse selection
problem is severe, then it is optimal to hoard labor. The labor hoarding in turn rationalizes
the severity of the adverse selection problem. If the adverse selection problem is mild, then
few firms hoard labor, rationalizing the low degree of adverse selection.
       We then embed a market for temporary workers in the adverse selection model. Just
as adverse selection in the pool of unemployed workers makes firms reluctant to vary their
permanent workforce, it simultaneously creates a demand for temporary workers. The optimal
hiring policy for the firms is to maintain a buffer stock of permanent workers and to use temps
to accommodate transitory shocks to labor demand. The model predicts that, at the firm level,
variation in temp workers should exceed the variation in permanent staff.
       Not surprisingly, the equilibria are inefficient. The inefficiency arises because firms do
not internalize the costs they impose on other firms by hoarding good workers in periods
of low demand. The model suggests that allocations would be improved by a policy which
discourages firms from employing too many workers. This policy could take the form of a
  12
    The (s, S) model was initially developed by Arrow et al. (1951) to study inventory management and was
later extended to the study of consumer durables by Grossman and Laroque (1990). See, for example, Bertola
and Caballero (1990), Bar-Ilan and Blinder (1992), Caballero (1993), Eberly (1994), Carroll and Dunn (1997),
Adda and Cooper (2000), Caplin and Leahy (1999), Leahy and Zeira (2005), and House and Leahy (2004).


                                                    31
hiring tax but could also take the form of a hiring subsidy if the incentive to hoard workers is
sufficiently strong.
   Finally, using a dynamic quantitative numerical version of the model, we analyze how the
market reacts to aggregate shocks to labor demand. Adverse selection causes the labor market
to under-react to labor demand shocks. Shocks which cause firms to hire more workers lead to
a reduction in the quality of productive workers in the pool of available labor. The reduction
in quality reduces the incentive for other firms to hire. Similarly, during a recession, because
many workers are laid off, there is a disproportionate increase in the supply of productive
workers available and thus some firms find it attractive to hire. In the dynamic model,
aggregate shocks also lead to variations in temp employment. Because temp agencies pay an
upfront search cost to identify productive workers, aggregate shocks cause permanent changes
in the number of temp workers supplied in equilibrium.




                                              32
References
Abraham, Katharine G. and Susan K. Taylor, “Firms’ Use of Outside Contractors:
 Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1996, 14 (3), 394–424.

Adda, Jérôme and Russell Cooper, “Balladurette and Juppette: A Discrete Analysis of
 Scrapping Subsidies,” Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108 (4), 778–806.

Akerlof, George A., “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
 Mechanism,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 488–500.

Arrow, Kenneth J., Theodore Harris, and Jacob Marschak, “Optimal Inventory
 Policy,” Econometrica, 1951, 19 (3), 250–272.

Autor, David H., “Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills Training?,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1409–1448.

  , “Introductory Chapter,” in David H. Autor, ed., Studies of Labor Market Intermediation,
  University of Chicago Press, November 2009.

   and Susan N. Houseman, “Temporary Agency Employment as a Way out of Poverty?,”
  in Rebecca M. Blank, Sheldon H. Danziger, and Robert F. Schoeni, eds., Working but Poor:
  How Economic and Policy Changes are Affecting Low-Wage Workers, New York: Russell
  Sage Foundation, 2006.

   and     , “Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor Market Outcomes for Low-Skilled
  Workers? Evidence from “Work First”,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2010, 2 (2), 96–128.

Bar-Ilan, Avner and Alan S. Blinder, “Consumer Durables: Evidence on the Optimality
 of Usually Doing Nothing,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1992, 24 (2), 258–272.

Bentolila, Samuel and Giuseppe Bertola, “Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How Bad
 is Eurosclerosis?,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1990, 57 (3), 381–402.

Bertola, Giuseppe and Ricardo J. Caballero, “Kinked Adjustment Costs and Aggregate
 Dynamics,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual,” Vol. 5, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc, July 1990, pp. 237–296.

Böheim, René and Ana Rute Cardoso, “Temporary Help Services Employment in Portu-
  gal, 1995-2000,” in David H. Autor, ed., Studies of Labor Market Intermediation, University
  of Chicago Press, November 2009, pp. 309–334.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Labor Hoarding and the
 Business Cycle,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (2), 245–273.

Caballero, Ricardo J., “Durable Goods: An Explanation for Their Slow Adjustment,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (2), 351–384.

Caplin, Andrew and John Leahy, “Durable Goods Cycles,” NBER Working Papers 6987,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc February 1999.

                                             33
Carroll, Chris and Wendy Dunn, “Unemployment Expectations, Jumping (S,s) Triggers,
 and Household Balance Sheets,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual,” Vol. 12, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, July 1997.

Clark, Scott C., “Labor Hoarding in Durable Goods Industries,” The American Economic
  Review, 1973, 63 (5), 811–824.

de Meza, David and David C. Webb, “Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric
  Information,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1987, 102 (2), 281–292.

Eberly, Janice C., “Adjustment of Consumers’ Durables Stocks: Evidence from Automobile
 Purchases,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (3), 403–436.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., “Endogenous Liquidity in Asset Markets,” The Journal of Finance,
  2004, 59 (1), 1–30.

Elsby, Michael W. L. and Ryan Michaels, “Marginal Jobs, Heterogeneous Firms, & Un-
  employment Flows,” NBER Working Papers 13777, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc February 2008.

Fair, Ray C., “Excess Labor and the Business Cycle,” The American Economic Review,
  1985, 75 (1), 239–245.

Fay, Jon A. and James L. Medoff, “Labor and Output Over the Business Cycle: Some
  Direct Evidence,” The American Economic Review, 1985, 75 (4), 638–655.

Foote, David A. and Timothy B. Folta, “Temporary workers as real options,” Human
  Resource Management Review, 2002, 12 (4), 579–597.

Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence F. Katz, “Layoffs and Lemons,” Journal of Labor Eco-
 nomics, 1991, 9 (4), 351–380.

Greenwald, Bruce C., “Adverse Selection in the Labour Market,” The Review of Economic
 Studies, 1986, 53 (3), 325–347.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Guy Laroque, “Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio Choice in
 the Presence of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods,” Econometrica, 1990, 58 (1), 25–51.

Heinrich, Carolyn J., Peter R. Mueser, and Kenneth R. Troske, “The Role of Tempo-
 rary Help Employment in Low-Wage Worker Advancement,” in David H. Autor, ed., Studies
 of Labor Market Intermediation, University of Chicago Press, November 2009, pp. 399–436.

Hendel, Igal and Alessandro Lizzeri, “Adverse Selection in Durable Goods Markets,”
 The American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (5), 1097–1115.

House, Christopher L., “Adverse selection and the financial accelerator,” Journal of Mon-
 etary Economics, 2006, 53 (6), 1117–1134.

   and John V. Leahy, “An sS Model with Adverse Selection,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, June 2004, 112 (3), 581–614.


                                           34
Houseman, Susan N., “Why Employers Use Flexible Staffing Arrangements: Evidence from
 an Establishment Survey,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2001, 55 (1), 149–170.
King, Robert G. and Julia K. Thomas, “Partial Adjustment without Apology,” Inter-
 national Economic Review, 2006, 47 (3), 779–809.
Kvasnicka, Michael, “Does Temporary Help Work Provide a Stepping Stone to Regular
 Employment?,” in “Studies of Labor Market Intermediation,” National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc, 2009.
Leahy, John V. and Joseph Zeira, “The Timing of Purchases and Aggregate Fluctua-
  tions,” Review of Economic Studies, 2005, 72 (4), 1127–1151.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, “The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 1986, 101 (3), 455–470.
Montgomery, James D., “Adverse Selection and Employment Cycles,” Journal of Labor
 Economics, 1999, 17 (2), 281–297.
Nakamura, Emi, “Layoffs and lemons over the business cycle,” Economics Letters, 2008, 99
 (1), 55–58.
Ono, Yukako and Daniel G. Sullivan, “Manufacturing Plants’ Use of Temporary Workers:
 An Analysis Using Census Micro Data,” Working Paper Series WP-06-24, Federal Reserve
 Bank of Chicago 2006.
Perloff, Jeffrey M. and Michael L. Wachter, “The New Jobs Tax Credit: An Evaluation
 of the 1977-78 Wage Subsidy Program,” The American Economic Review, 1979, 69 (2),
 173–179.
Segal, Lewis M. and Daniel G. Sullivan, “The Growth of Temporary Services Work,”
  The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1997, 11 (2), 117–136.
Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A. Parker, “Measuring the Cyclicality of
  Real Wages: How Important is Composition Bias,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  1994, 109 (1), 1–25.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss, “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
  Information,” The American Economic Review, 1981, 71 (3), 393–410.
Weiss, Andrew, Efficiency Wages: Models of Unemployment, Layoffs, and Wage Dispersion,
 Princeton University Press, 1991.
Wen, Yi, “Labor hoarding and inventories,” Working Papers 2005-040, Federal Reserve Bank
 of St. Louis 2005.
Wilson, Charles, “A model of insurance markets with incomplete information,” Journal of
 Economic Theory, 1977, 16 (2), 167 – 207.
  , “The Nature of Equilibrium in Markets with Adverse Selection,” The Bell Journal of
  Economics, 1980, 11 (1), 108–130.

                                          35
                         Appendix I: Proofs of the Propositions
This appendix provides a sketch of the proofs of the propositions. Detailed proofs, as well as the proofs of the
lemmas, are available in an online appendix or from the authors upon request.

Proof of Proposition 1: Since z is bounded, the payoff function zF (n0 ) − wn0 − we (n0 − n) is bounded. It
is straightforward to show that the Bellman equation in (2) satisfies assumptions 9.4–9.7, 9.10 and 9.11 in
Stokey, Lucas and Prescott [1989]. Theorems 9.6 and 9.8 imply that there exists a unique v (n, z) which is
continuous and concave. Thus, V (n) is also continuous and concave in n.                           R
     To show differentiability, consider the set of functions B such that b ∈ B implies that B(n) = b (n, z) dG (z)
is differentiable and concave in n. Consider the mapping T defined by

                     r (n, z) = (T b) (n, z) = max
                                                0
                                                   {zF (n0 ) − wn0 − we (n0 − n) + βB (n0 )} .
                                                n

Since B is differentiable, maximizing the expression inside the brackets gives the optimal choice of n0 (n, z) as
(5). The image of the function b under T is then,
                                                         
                    zF (nL (z)) − w µ1 nL (z) + wn µ1 − 1 + βB (nL (z)) if n < nL (z)
                   
        r (n, z) =     zF (n) − wn + βB (n)                                    if n ∈ [nL (z) , nH (z)] .
                   
                       zF (nH (z)) − wnH (z) + βB (nH (z))                     if n > nH (z)
                   

This function is clearly differentiable away from nL (z) and nH (z). It is also differentiable at these points,
which can be verified by direct computation. Thus, r (n, z) is differentiable in n for all z. Thus, r ∈ B. Since
                                                                                R
the set B maps into itself, the unique solution is in B. If it is in B, V (n) = v (n, z) dG(z) is differentiable
and thus each small v is also differentiable as demonstrated above. Accordingly, the optimal policy function
is given by (5), where nL (z) and nH (z) are given by (3) and (4). 

Proof of Proposition 2: To prove the existence of equilibria, we first prove the continuity of the mapping T on
[0, 1]. Clearly, T is continuous on [0, µ̄) and (µ̄, 1], where µ̄, together with n̄, is given in the proof to Lemma 3.
To show that T is continuous at µ̄, it is sufficient to show that employment N (µ) is continuous at µ̄. For any
µ > µ̄, total employment is bounded by nH (0; µ) ≤ N (µ) ≤ nL (Z; µ). As µ approaches µ̄ from above, both
nH (0; µ) and nL (Z; µ) converges to n̄. This implies that N (µ) approaches n̄. For any µ < µ̄, each firm employs
the same number of workers nL (Z; µ). Thus, total employment is N (µ) = nL (Z; µ). As µ approaches µ̄ from
below, nL (Z; µ) converges to n̄, which implies that N (µ) approaches n̄. Finally, by definition, N (µ̄) = n̄ and
T (µ̄) = (φL − n̄)/(L − n̄). Therefore, N (µ) and T (µ) are continuous at µ̄.
     We next consider two case: T (µ̄) > µ̄ and T (µ̄) ≤ µ̄. We first demonstrate the existence of the stationary
equilibrium when T (µ̄) ≤ µ̄. In this case there is one and only one stationary complete-hoading equilibrium in
which all firms have the same employment level independent of productivity. When µ ≤ µ̄ , N (µ) = nL (Z; µ),
which monotonically and continuously increases with µ. Thus, T (µ) monotonically and continuously decreases
with µ for any µ ≤ µ̄. Consider the continuous and decreasing function s(µ) = T (µ) − µ on (0, µ̄]. By
assumption s(µ̄) = T (µ̄) − µ̄ ≤ 0. Since T is decreasing in µ in this range and since by assumption T (µ̄) ≤ µ̄
it must be the case that T (T (µ̄)) ≥ T (µ̄) thus, s(T (µ̄)) = T (T (µ̄)) − T (µ̄) ≥ 0. By the intermediate value
theorem there is a point µ∗ ∈ [T (µ̄) , µ̄] such that s(µ∗ ) = 0, which implies T (µ∗ ) = µ∗ . Since s (µ) is strictly
decreasing in µ this µ∗ is unique. Thus, we have one and only one complete-hoarding equilibrium with µ∗
between µ̄ and T (µ̄).
     We next consider the case where T (µ̄) > µ̄. Notice that T (µ) monotonically decreases with µ for µ < µ̄.
Thus, for µ < µ̄, T (µ) > T (µ̄) > µ̄ > µ, which implies that there is no stationary complete-hoarding
equilibrium. From the definition of the mapping T (µ), µ0 = T (µ) is bounded by φ on interval (0, 1). Consider
the interval (µ̄, 1), we have s(µ̄) = T (µ̄) − µ̄ > 0 and s(µ) = T (µ) − µ ≤ φ − 1 < 0 as µ approaches 1. By the

                                                        36
intermediate value theorem, there exists at least one solution µ∗ such that s(µ∗ ) = 0 since s(µ) is continuous
on (µ̄, 1). That is, we have at least one stationary equilibrium with µ∗ ∈ [µ̄, 1). 

Proof of Proposition 3: One sufficient condition for the uniqueness of the fixed point is that T 0 (µ) < 1.
                                  1−T (µ)
Differentiation gives T 0 (µ) = − L−N      0                                           0
                                      (µ) N (µ). When µ < µ̄, it is easy to show that T (µ) < 0. When µ ≥ µ̄,
N (µ) can be written as
                        Z    nL (Z;µ)                                                        Z   nL (Z;µ)
              N (µ) =                   [1 − H (n; µ)] dn = nL (Z; µ) − nH (0; µ) −                         H (n; µ) dn.
                         nH (0;µ)                                                             nH (0;µ)

                                                                          R nL (Z;µ)
Differentiating with respect to µ gives N 0 (µ) = − ∂nH∂µ
                                                        (0;µ)
                                                              −            nH (0;µ)
                                                                                        ∂H(n;µ)
                                                                                          ∂µ    dn,    where,

                 ∂H (n; µ)   g(zL (n; µ)) (1 − H (n; µ)) ∂zL∂µ
                                                             (n;µ)
                                                                   + g(zH (n; µ))H (n; µ) ∂zH∂µ
                                                                                              (n;µ)
                           =                                                                        .
                   ∂µ                          1 − [G(zH (n; µ)) − G(zL (n; µ))]
                                                        ∂zH (n;µ)         ∂zL (n;µ)
The proof of Lemma 1 provides expressions for              ∂µ       and      ∂µ     .   Using these together with (13) gives

                                                                               2
              ∂H (n; µ)   w β         g(zL (n; µ)) (1 − H (n; µ))         w     1        β
                        < 2                                             < 2                  ḡ.
                ∂µ       µ Fn (n) 1 − β [G (zH (n; µ)) − G (zL (n; µ))]  µ Fn (n∗ (Z)) 1 − β
                                                                                         ∂nH (Zl ;µ)
Plugging the above inequality into the expression for N 0 (µ) and using                     ∂µ         < 0, gives

                             1 − T (µ) w n∗ (Z)         β            1       w n∗ (Z)         β
                 T 0 (µ) <                                  ḡ <                                  ḡ,
                             L − N (µ) µ2 Fn (n∗ (Z)) 1 − β      L − n∗ (Z) µ̂2 Fn (n∗ (Z)) 1 − β

since µ is at least µ̂ = [φL − n∗ (Z)] / [L − n∗ (Z)]. Then, T 0 (µ) < 1 is guaranteed by Assumption 1.

Proof of Proposition 4: We start by illustrating that n̄ (µ) is well defined. For any µ, define b(n) = w           µ −
βV 0 (n; µ) − wm . b(n) is strictly increasing with n for any n < nmax , where nmax is defined as the largest
                                                                         0
support of the stationary distribution. Moreover, b(0) = w       µ − βV (0; µ) − w
                                                                                     m
                                                                                        = w̄m − wm ≤ 0, and b(n)
approaches w/µ − wm > 0 as n approaches nmax . Thus, there exists one unique n̄ (µ) such that b(n̄ (µ)) = 0,
and in particular n̄ (µ) = 0 when wm = w̄m . The effective cost of hiring one additional permanent worker,
w        0                                                                            m
µ − βV (n; µ), is at least as small as the cost of hiring a temporary worker, w , if and only if n ≤ n̄ (µ).
    Lemma 1 shows that nL (z; µ) monotonically increases with z. Consider firms with z sufficiently small such
that nL (z; µ) ≤ n̄ (µ). By the definition of nL (z; µ) and n̄ (µ), we have Fn (nL (z; µ), z)+βV 0 (nL (z; µ) ; µ) = w
                                                                                                                     µ
and wm + βV 0 (n̄ (µ) ; µ) = wµ . Taking the difference of these two equations on both sides gives

                         Fn (nL (z; µ), z) − wm = βV 0 (n̄ (µ) ; µ) − βV 0 (nL (z; µ) ; µ) ≤ 0.

This implies that Fn (nL (z; µ), z) < wm and nM (z; µ) < nL (z; µ). Any firm with n < nL (z; µ) hires permanent
workers nL (z; µ) and no temporary workers; the effective cost of hiring temps exceeds the effective cost of
hiring permanent workers. Firms with nL (z; µ) ≤ n ≤ nH (z; µ) maintain the employment of permanent
workers at n; these firms also have no incentive to hire temps since n > nM (z; µ). Firms with n > nH (z; µ)
reduce employment of permanent workers to nH (z; µ), and they will not simultaneously hire a temp. This is
because the cost of retaining a good worker w is less than the cost of hiring a temp wm . Thus, the optimal
policy is the same as the case without temps.
    Consider firms with z such that nL (z; µ) ≥ n̄ (µ). A firm with current employment n < n̄ (µ) increases
permanent workers to n̄ (µ) and hires nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ) temps. If the firm does not hire temps, then it hires
permanent workers to nL (z; µ). At this level of employment, however, Fn (nL (z; µ) , z) > wm so the firm
will deviate and hire temps. Since the firm must hire temps, it must be the case that n0 (n, z; µ) = n̄ (µ)
and m(n, z) = nM (z) − n̄(µ). Using similar reasoning, firms with n̄(µ) ≤ n ≤ nM (z) also must hire temps.

                                                             37
                                                                                   0
However, in this range the effective cost of additional permanent workers w µ − βV (n; µ) exceeds the marginal
           m
product w so the firm doesn’t increase its permanent workforce (they also don’t fire permanent workers).
Thus, for such firms, n0 (n, z; µ) = n and m(n, z; µ) = nM (z; µ) − n ≥ 0. Firms with nM (z; µ) ≤ n ≤ nH (z; µ)
maintain n0 (n, z; µ) = n but hire no temps m(n, z; µ) = 0. Firms with n > nH (z; µ) reduce employment of
permanent workers until n0 (n, z; µ) = nH (z; µ) and do not simultaneously hire temps m(n, z; µ) = 0. 

Proof of Proposition 5:
                                                                               0
1. According to Proposition 4, n̄(µ) is defined as the solution to w̄m = w
                                                                         µ − βV (n̄(µ); µ). Given the efficient
temp wage w̄m = (w − wβ (1 − µ)) /µ, we thus have V 0 (n̄(µ)) = w (1 − µ) /µ. Since V 0 is monotonically
decreasing on [0, nmax ] and bounded above by w (1 − µ) /µ. Thus, n̄(µ) = 0 under the efficient temp wage.
That is, firms never hire permanent workers regardless of their shocks. In the equilibrium, the only workers
employed are temporary workers.
                                                                                   RZ
2. Under the efficient temp wage, the total employment N(µ) is given by N (µ) = 0 nM (z; µ) dG (z), where
                                                                     1−β
nM (z; µ) is the solution to zFn (nM (z; µ)) = w̄m = w                µ      +β    for any positive z, and nM (0; µ) = 0.
Taking derivatives of nM (z; µ) with respect to µ gives

                                       ∂nM (z; µ)           1         w (1 − β)
                                                  =−                            > 0.
                                          ∂µ         zFnn (nM (z; µ))    µ2
                                                           RZ
Thus, aggregate employment increases with µ: Nµ (µ) = 0 ∂nM∂µ(z;µ) dG (z) > 0 which implies Tµ (µ) < 0 and
thus the equilibrium is unique.
3. When µ approaches 1, we have the efficient level of employment. Given Nµ > 0, it must be the case that
aggregate employment is strictly less than the efficient level of employment for any µ < 1. 

Proof of Proposition 6: To show existence, we prove the continuity of T (µ) on [0, 1]. The proof is similar to
the proof of Proposition 2 (though somewhat more complicated) and is thus omitted. By definition, given the
fixed point µ∗ , v (n, z; µ∗ ), m (n, z; µ∗ ) and n0 (n, z; µ∗ ) solve the firms’ dynamic programming problems. By
construction, the distribution H (n; µ∗ ) is implied by m (·) and n0 (·). 

Proof of Proposition 7:
i: Complete Hoarding. (a) In complete hoarding equilibria without temps, all firms have permanent workers
nL (Z; µ). Thus, steady-state flow welfare is W (µ) = (Ez) F (nL (Z; µ)) − wnL (Z; µ) and

                                       dW (µ)                             ∂nL (Z; µ)
                                              = [(Ez) Fn (nL (Z; µ)) − w]            .
                                         dµ                                  ∂µ

Lemma 1 shows that ∂nL∂µ    (Z;µ)
                                  > 0. The marginal shadow value of additional workers at nL (Z; µ) satisfies
V 0 (nL (Z; µ)) (1 − β) = (Ez) Fn (nL (Z; µ)) − w. Since V 0 > 0, (Ez) Fn (nL (Z; µ)) − w > 0. Thus, for β < 1,
dW (µ)
   dµ    > 0. As β → 1, dWdµ(µ) → 0.
     (b) Now consider complete hoarding equilibria with temps. There are two cases: n̄ (µ) ≥ nL (Z; µ) and
n̄ (µ) ≤ nL (Z; µ). When n̄ (µ) ≥ nL (Z; µ), firms maintain permanent workers nL (Z; µ) and hire no temporary
workers. This is the same as the complete hoarding equilibria without temps.
     When n̄ (µ) ≤ nL (Z; µ), firms hire both temps and permanent workers though they never adjust their
permanent staff. Permanent staff at each firm is n̄ (µ), total employment is max {nM (z; µ) , n̄ (µ)} and em-
ployment of temps is m (z, n; µ) = max {nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ) , 0}. The total flow welfare is
          Z   zM (n̄(µ);µ)                                  Z   Z
W (µ) =                      [zF (n̄ (µ)) − wn̄ (µ)] dG (z)+               [zF (nM (z; µ)) − (w + x) nM (z; µ) + xn̄ (µ)] dG (z) .
          0                                                 zM (n̄(µ);µ)

Differentiating with respect to µ, using the definition of w̄m (µ) , nM (zM (n̄; µ) ; µ) = n̄ and the fact that when


                                                                38
nM > 0, zFn (nM (z; µ)) = w̄m (µ) + x gives
                zM (n̄(µ);µ)                                                     Z Z                                                 
                                                                                                            1 − µ ∂nM (z; µ)
            Z
dW (µ)                                                            dn̄ (µ)                                                       dn̄ (µ)
       =                       [zFn (n̄ (µ)) − w]                         dG (z)+               (1 − β) w                    +x           dG (z) .
  dµ        0                                                       dµ            zM (n̄(µ);µ)                µ      ∂µ           dµ
                                                                    RZ
Aggregate employment is N (µ) = n̄ (µ) +                             zM (n̄(µ);µ)
                                                                                    (nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ)) dG (z) and thus,
                                                                    Z   Z                                               
                                                  dn̄ (µ)                                ∂nM (z; µ) dn̄ (µ)
                                Nµ (µ) =                  +                                        −                         dG (z) .
                                                    dµ                zM (n̄(µ);µ)          ∂µ        dµ

The marginal shadow value V 0 (n̄ (µ) ; µ) satisfies
                                        zM (n̄(µ);µ)                                                 Z              
                                                                                                              1−µ
                                 Z                                                                Z
    0
   V (n̄(µ); µ) (1 − β) =                               [zFn (n̄ (µ)) − w] dG (z) +               (1 − β) w         + x dG(z).
                                    0                                               zM (n̄(µ);µ)               µ

Combining these three equations gives
                                                                                 
              dW (µ)                  1−µ            dn̄ (µ)    0                 1−µ
                      = (1 − β) w           Nµ (µ) +           V (n̄(µ); µ) − w           .
                dµ                     µ               dµ                          µ
            dW (µ)
As β → 1,    dµ       → 0.
                                                                                         RZ
    (c) For efficient temp equilibria, welfare is W (µ) =                                 0
                                                                                              [zF (nM (z; µ)) − wnM (z; µ)] dG (z) and
                                                        Z     Z
                                     dW (µ)                                                       ∂nM (z; µ)
                                            =                     [zFn (nM (z; µ)) − w]                      dG (z) > 0
                                       dµ                 0                                          ∂µ
                                                        ∂nM (z;µ)
where the inequality holds because                        ∂µ            > 0 and zFn (nM (z; µ)) − w > 0. When β = 1, w̄m (µ) = w and
                                         dW (µ)
zFn (nM (z; µ)) − w = 0 so        = 0.    dµ
ii: Incomplete Hoarding. (a) With incomplete hoarding, nH (0; µ) < min {n̄ (µ) , nL (Z; µ)} and H (n; µ) is
given by (23). Again there are two cases to consider.
     Case 1: n̄ (µ) ≥ nL (Z; µ). In this case no temporary workers are hired. This case is the same as the
                                                R nmax (µ)
model without temps. Total welfare is W (µ) = 0            w (n; µ) dH (n; µ), where
                       Z     zL (n;µ)                                                                  Z   zH (n;µ)
     w (n; µ)     =                      [zF (nH (z; µ)) − wnH (z; µ)] dG (z) +                                       [zF (n) − wn] dG (z)
                         0                                                                                zL (n;µ)
                                ∞                                                                                        ∞
                                                                                                            1−µ
                           Z                                                                                         Z
                       +                   [zF (nL (z; µ)) − wnL (z; µ)] dG (z) − w                                               (nL (z; µ) − n) dG (z)
                               zH (n;µ)                                                                      µ         zH (n;µ)

                                                                                          R nmax (µ)      ∂w(n;µ)
or, using integration by parts, W (µ) = w (nmax (µ) ; µ) −                                    0             ∂n    H    (n; µ) dn. Differentiating gives
                                                         nmax (µ)                                                nmax (µ)
                       ∂w (nmax ; µ)                                    ∂ 2 w (n; µ)
                                                    Z                                                      Z
                                                                                                                             ∂w (n; µ) ∂H (n; µ)
         Wµ (µ) =                    −                                               H (n; µ) dn −                                               dn.       (24)
                           ∂µ                        0                     ∂n∂µ                              0                 ∂n        ∂µ

Consider each term in the expression. For the first term, differentiate w(n; µ) with respect to µ and evaluate
at n = nmax to get
                                                                zL (nmax ;µ)
                             ∂w (nmax ; µ)
                                                         Z
                                                                                                               ∂nH (z; µ)
                                           =                                   [zFn (nH (z; µ)) − w]                      dG (z) .
                                 ∂µ                         0                                                     ∂µ

After a change of integration, (from z to n) we get
                                         nmax (µ)
          ∂w (nmax ; µ)
                                    Z
                                                                                         ∂nH (zL (n; µ) ; µ) ∂zL (n; µ)
                        =                           [zL (n; µ) Fn (n) − w]                                              g (zL (n; µ)) dn.
              ∂µ                     0                                                          ∂µ              ∂n



                                                                                  39
                              dnH (z;µ) dzL (n;µ)
Using expressions for            dµ    ,   dn          and 1 − H(n; µ) and letting β → 1 we obtain

                                                     nmax (µ)
                       ∂w (nmax ; µ)                            zL (n; µ) Fn (n) − w
                                                Z
                                       w
                                     =− 2                                            (1 − H (n; µ)) g (zL (n; µ)) dn.
                           ∂µ          µ         0                      Fn (n)

    Now consider the second term in (24). Differentiating w (n; µ) with respect to n gives
                                           zH (n;µ)
                                                                                         1 − T (µ)
                                       Z
                         ∂w (n; µ)
                                   =                  [zFn (n) − w] dG (z) + w                     [1 − G (zH (n; µ))] .                (25)
                           ∂n            zL (n;µ)                                          T (µ)

Further differentiating with respect to µ gives

∂ 2 w (n; µ)             ∂zH (n; µ)                       w                     ∂zL (n; µ)
                   =                [zH (n; µ) Fn (n) −        ]g (zH (n; µ)) −            [zL (n; µ) Fn (n) − w] g (zL (n; µ))
   ∂n∂µ                      ∂µ                         T (µ)                      ∂µ
                              w
                         −        2 Tµ (µ) [1 − G (zH (n; µ))] .
                           (T (µ))
                                                                                   ∂ 2 w(n;µ)
Using the definition of zH (n; µ), and zL (n; µ), evaluating                          ∂n∂µ      at T (µ) = µ and letting β → 1, gives
                                  "Z                                                           #
                                       zH (n)
∂ 2 w (n)          ∂zH (n)                                       w(1 − T (µ))                    (1 − H (n)) g (zH (n))
               = −                          (zFn (n) − w)dG(z) +               [1 − G (zH (n))]
 ∂n∂µ                ∂µ             zL (n)                           T (µ)                           1 − G (zH (n))
                                 "Z                                                           #
                                     zH (n)
                         ∂zL (n)                                 w(1 − T (µ))                      H (n)
                       +                    (zFn (n) − w)dG(z) +              [1 − G (zH (n))]              g (zL (n))
                           ∂µ       zL (n)                          T (µ)                        G (zL (n))
                            w
                       −        2 Tµ (µ) [1 − G (zH (n))] .
                         (T (µ))

    Finally, consider the third term in (24). Note that
                                                                     
                  ∂H (n)      ∂zL (n) g(zL (n))   ∂zH (n) g(zH (n))
                          =                     +                       H (n) (1 − H (n)) .
                    ∂µ           ∂µ G(zL (n))        ∂µ 1 − G(zH (n))

Using (25) we have
       Z    nmax
           ∂w (n) ∂H (n)
                           dn
     0       ∂n     ∂µ
    Z nmax         " Z zH (n)                                                       #
           ∂zL (n)                                    w (1 − T (µ)) (1 − G (zH (n))) H (n) (1 − H (n)) g(zL (n; µ))
  =                            (zFn (n) − w) dG(z) +                                                                dn
     0       ∂µ       zL (n)                                      T (µ)                       G(zL (n; µ))
      Z nmax          "Z
                           zH (n)
                                                                                       #
             ∂zH (n)                                     w (1 − T (µ)) (1 − G (zH (n))) H (n) (1 − H (n)) g(zH (n))
    +                             (zFn (n) − w) dG (z) +                                                             dn.
       0        ∂µ        zL (n)                                      T (µ)                    1 − G(zH (n))

    Combining all three terms and letting β → 1 gives (after some algebra),
                                                                     Z   nmax
                                                      wTµ (µ)
                                       Wµ (µ) =                  2              [1 − G (zH (n))] H (n) dn.
                                                      (T (µ))        0




                                                                           40
    Case 2: n̄ (µ) < nL (Z; µ). In this case both permenant and temporary workers are hired. For n < n̄ (µ),
                  Z   zL (n;µ)                                                              Z   zH (n;µ)
 w (n; µ)   =                     [zF (nH (z; µ)) − wnH (z; µ)] dG (z) +                                     [zF (n) − wn] dG (z)
                  0                                                                           zL (n;µ)
                          zM (n̄(µ);µ)                                                                                   zM (n̄(µ);µ)
                                                                                                     1−µ
                      Z                                                                                              Z
                  +                       [zF (nL (z; µ)) − wnL (z; µ)] dG (z) − w                                                      (nL (z; µ) − n) dG (z)
                       zH (n;µ)                                                                       µ              zH (n;µ)
                      Z ∞
                  +                     [zF (nM (z; µ)) − wn̄ (µ) − (w + x) {nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ)}] dG (z)
                       zM (n̄(µ);µ)
                               Z ∞
                          1−µ
                  −w                                 (n̄ (µ) − n) dG (z) .
                           µ          zM (n̄(µ);µ)

For n = n̄ (µ),
                          Z   zL (n̄(µ);µ)                                                          Z     zM (n̄(µ);µ)
w (n̄ (µ) ; µ)    =                          [zF (nH (z; µ)) − wnH (z; µ)] dG (z) +                                          [zF (n̄ (µ)) − wn̄ (µ)] dG (z)
                          0                                                                              zL (n̄(µ);µ)
                              Z   ∞
                          +                   [zF (nM (z; µ)) − wn̄ (µ) − (w + x) {nM (z; µ) − n̄ (µ)}] dG (z) .
                               zM (n̄(µ);µ)

                                                           R n̄(µ)   ∂w(n;µ)
Total welfare is W (µ) = w (n̄ (µ) ; µ) −                   0          ∂n    H       (n; µ) dn. Differentiating gives
                                                            n̄(µ)                                            n̄(µ)
                                                                    ∂ 2 w (n; µ)
                                                       Z                                             Z
                               ∂w (n̄ (µ) ; µ)                                                                       ∂w (n; µ) ∂H (n; µ)
            Wµ (µ) =                           −                                 H (n; µ) dn −                                           dn.
                                    ∂µ                  0              ∂n∂µ                              0             ∂n        ∂µ

Again there are three terms to consider. Following an approach similar to that used in Case 1, gives
                                                                          Z   nmax
                                                           wTµ (µ)
                                          Wµ (µ) =                    2              [1 − G (zH (n))] H (n) dn.
                                                           (T (µ))        0

This completes the proof. 




                                                                                41
                           Appendix II: Deriving Equation (14)
Total employment can be written as
                                                         Z    Z
                                               N (µ) =                η (z; µ) g (z) dz                                                         (26)
                                                          0

where η (z; µ) is total steady state employment for all firms with productivity draw z.
                                                                                                                         Z   nH (z;µ)
 η (z; µ)   = nH (z; µ)        lim     (1 − H (nH (z; µ) ; µ)) + nL (z; µ)                  lim          H (s; µ) +                     ndH (n; µ)
                          s&nH (z;µ)                                                   s%nL (z;µ)                         nL (z;µ)
                                                                                                          Z   nH (z;µ)
            = nH (z; µ) (1 − H (nH (z; µ) ; µ)) + nL (z; µ)                  lim       H (s; µ) +                        nh (n; µ) dµ.
                                                                          s%nL (z;µ)                       nL (z;µ)

Differentiating (26) with respect to µ gives:
                                                         Z       Z
                                             ∂N (µ)                   ∂η (z; µ)
                                                    =                           g (z) dz
                                              ∂µ             0           ∂µ

where,

      ∂η (z; µ)        ∂nH (z; µ)                                             ∂nL (z; µ)
                   =              (1 − H (nH (z; µ) ; µ)) + H (nL (z; µ) ; µ)
         ∂µ               ∂µ                                                      ∂µ
                                                                                       Z nH (z;µ)
                         ∂H (nL (z; µ) ; µ)             ∂H (nH (z; µ) ; µ)                          ∂h (n; µ)
                       +                    nL (z; µ) −                    nH (z; µ) +            n           dn
                                ∂µ                            ∂µ                        nL (z;µ)       ∂µ

which, using integration by parts, is
                                                                                                                Z   nH (z;µ)
     ∂η (z; µ)   ∂nH (z; µ)                                             ∂nL (z; µ)                                             ∂H (n; µ)
               =            (1 − H (nH (z; µ) ; µ)) + H (nL (z; µ) ; µ)            −                                                     dn
        ∂µ          ∂µ                                                     ∂µ                                     nL (z;µ)       ∂µ

The first two terms in this equation show how employment for firms with shock z changes due to changes in
the firms’ optimal behavior holding the distribution H constant. That is, these terms quantify the changes
in employment caused by changes in nH (z; µ) and nL (z; µ). The last term shows how employment (for firms
with shock z) changes due to changes in the distribution H holding their policy fixed (i.e., holding the cutoff-
triggers nL (z; µ) and nH (z; µ) constant). Thus, the first two terms are a “direct effect” while the last term
represents a “feedback” effect. Recall that the cutoffs nL (z; µ) and nH (z; µ) are given by
                                                                                                 w
                                       Fn (nL (z; µ) , z) + βV 0 (nL (z; µ) ; µ) =                 ,
                                                                                                 µ

                                       Fn (nH (z; µ), z) + βV 0 (nH (z; µ); µ) = w.
Differentiating with respect to µ gives

                                                                                                       ∂V 0 (nL (z; µ) ; µ)
                                                                                                                                       
            ∂nL (z; µ)                                           00                    −1       w
                          = − [zFnn (nL (z; µ)) + βV (nL (z; µ) ; µ)]                              + β
               ∂µ                                                                               µ2             ∂µ
                                                        ∂V 0 (nL (z; µ) ; µ)
                                                                                               
                                     1            w
                          =                         + β
                            Λ (z, nL (z; µ) ; µ) µ2             ∂µ


                  ∂nH (z; µ)                                                                    −1       ∂V 0 (nH (z; µ) ; µ)
                               = − [zFnn (nH (z; µ)) + βV 00 (nH (z; µ); µ)]                         β
                     ∂µ                                                                                          ∂µ
                                              1             ∂V 0 (nH (z; µ) ; µ)
                               =                          β
                                     Λ (z, nL (z; µ) ; µ)           ∂µ



                                                                 42
where Λ (z, n; µ) is
                                  Λ (z, n; µ) = − [zFnn (n) + βV 00 (n; µ)] > 0.
                                 ∂η(z;µ)
Combining these expressions in     ∂µ      we have
                                                                                                           Z nH (z)
            (1 − H (nH (z; µ) ; µ)) ∂V 0 (nH (z; µ) ; µ) H (nL (z; µ) ; µ) w         ∂V 0 (nL (z; µ) ; µ)
                                                                              
∂η (z; µ)                                                                                                            ∂H (n)
          =                        β                    +                         +β                       −                dn
   ∂µ         Λ (z, nL (z; µ) ; µ)          ∂µ            Λ (z, nL (z; µ) ; µ) µ2            ∂µ              nL (z)   ∂µ

which is rearranged to give equation (16) in the text.




                                                      43
                       Appendix III: Computational Algorithm
In this appendix, we describe the numerical solution method used for calculating the non-stationary equilibria
for the model with aggregate uncertainty described in Section 5.
     First, consider the model without temporary workers. We assume the economy starts at date 0 with
the invariant distribution H given by Proposition 2 and that the economy returns to the steady state in
T = 30 periods. We then solve for the transition path associated with the aggregate shock sequence. The
                                                      (0)                         (j)
solution algorithm begins with an initial guess of {µt }Tt=0 . Given any guess {µt }Tt=0 (here j denotes the
j th guess), we solve for the time-dependent value functions and associated policy functions for firms using
standard value function iteration techniques with discrete grid spaces for employment n and the idiosyncratic
shock z. The policy functions, together with the initial distribution H0 , generate subsequent employment
                  (j)                                                                                 (j)
distributions {Ht }Tt=1 . For each period, we sum across firms to compute aggregate employment {Nt }Tt=0 .
                                                                   (j)
The sequence of aggregate employment implies a new sequence {µ̃t }Tt=0 . The updated guess is
                                    (j+1)        (j)           (j)
                                   µt       = ζµt + (1 − ζ) µ̃t , for t = 1...T.                             (27)

Here ζ ∈ (0, 1) is an attenuation parameter. We repeat this procedure to convergence. Our convergence
                     (j)     (j)
criterion is max{|µt − µ̃t |}Tt=0 ≤ µ × 10−4 .
     Now consider the model with temporary workers. We again assume that the economy starts at date 0 with
the invariant distribution H given by Proposition 6 and that the economy returns to the steady state after
T = 30 periods. The algorithm uses two primary nested loops. In the outer loop, we iterate over the sequence
{µt }Tt=0 . In the inner loop, we iterate over the sequence of temp wages {wmt }Tt=0 . The calculation for the
                                                     (k)                       (j)
inner loop proceeds as follows. Given any guess {µt }Tt=0 and a guess {wmt }Tt=0 , we solve the firms’ dynamic
programming problems using value function iteration. The time-dependent policy functions, together with the
                                                                 (j)
initial distribution H0 , generate employment distributions {Ht }Tt=1 . For each period, we sum across firms
                                                       (j)                                             D,(j) T
to compute total demand for permanent workers {Nt }Tt=0 and total demand for temp workers {Mt               }t=0 .
           (k) T          (j) T
Given {µt }t=0 and {wmt }t=0 , we solve the temp agency’s dynamic programming problem using value function
                                                                                          S,(j) T
iteration. The policy functions for the temp agency implies a supply of temp workers {Mt       }t=0 . We update
the guess of the temp wage according to
                                                                    
                                  (j+1)  (j)          D,(j)    S,(j)
                                 wmt = wmt + ζ m Mt         − Mt       , for t = 1...T,                      (28)

where ζ m > 0 is an adjustment parameter. We repeat this procedure to convergence. Our convergence
                    D,(j)    S,(j) T
criterion is max{|Mt      − Mt    |}t=0 ≤ M × 10−4 . Once we have the sequence {wmt }Tt=0 associated with the
             (k) T                                                                           T
sequence {µt }t=0 , we use the associated paths for temps and permanent workers {Mt , Nt }t=0 to calculate
                   (k)                                         (k+1) T
a new sequence {µ̃t }Tt=0 . We then construct a new guess {µt       }t=0 according to (27). We repeat this
procedure to convergence with the same convergence criteria as above.




                                                        44
                                      Table 1: Model Parameters

                             Parameter                               Baseline Value
           Wage (w)                                                      1.00
           Quality in unemployment pool ( m )                            0.75
           Persistence of aggregate shock ( r, annual )                  0.70
           Temp flow cost ( x )                                          0.10
           Discount factor (b, annual)                                   0.95
           Average idiosyncratic productivity ( z )                      1.00
           Std. dev. of idiosyncratic productivity ( s z )               0.15




                                     Table 2: Steady State Values

                                       Frictionless      Model without          Costly   Efficient
Variable
                                          Model            Temps                Temps     Temps
Temp wage ( w m )                            --               --                1.117     1.017
Aggregate employment ( N+M )              0.668              0.701              0.689     0.651
   Permanent workers (N)                  0.668              0.701              0.601     0.000

   Temp workers (M)                          --               --                0.088     0.651
     Notes: We choose the total labor supply (L) and the fraction of productive
     workers (f) to guarantee m = 0.75 across each simulation.
      FIGURE 1: OPTIMAL POLICY WITHOUT TEMPORARY WORKERS


                             w
                               - bV '(n)
                             m
w/m




                                          w - bV '(n)
w


                                                    zFn ( n)




                 nL ( z )   n* ( z ) nH ( z )            n
                                                          FIGURE 2: MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA EXAMPLE

                       Marginal Product of Labor ( Fn )                                                    Fixed Point Mapping (T())
0.34                                                                               0.8

0.32
                                                                                   0.7
 0.3
                                                                                   0.6
0.28

0.26                                                                               0.5


0.24                                                                               0.4

0.22
                                                                                   0.3
 0.2
                                                                                   0.2
0.18

0.16                                                                               0.1
       1   1.1   1.2   1.3    1.4    1.5     1.6    1.7     1.8   1.9   2            0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5    0.55    0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75   0.8
                                      n                                                                                

Notes: The left panel plots hypothetical examples of the marginal product function Fn (n) for the piecewise linear case described in the text. The
right panel plots the mappings T (m) corresponding to the marginal
         FIGURE 3: THE SUPPLY OF TEMP WORKERS

   wm


wm + x




w+ x




                 Mt                             M
                    FIGURE 4: OPTIMAL POLICY WITH TEMPORARY WORKERS



w/m


                                                                 w
                                                                   - bV '(n)
                                                                 m
wm



                                                             w - bV '(n)
w




                                                 z* Fn (n + m)    z2 Fn (n + m)

                                     z1 Fn (n + m)


      nL ( z1 ) n                  nM ( z2 )
                                                          FIGURE 5: RESPONSE TO AN AGGREGATE SHOCK
                    Aggregate Shock                                           Aggregate Employment                                Quality of Unemployment Pool ()
1.15                                                         1.15                                                        1
                                                                                                Frictionless
                                                                                                No Temps
                                                                                                Costly Temps           0.98
 1.1                                                          1.1                               Efficient Temps
                                                                                                                       0.96


1.05                                                         1.05                                                      0.94


                                                                                                                       0.92
  1                                                            1
                                                                                                                        0.9                                No Temps
                                                                                                                                                           Costly Temps
                                                                                                                                                           Efficient Temps
0.95                                                         0.95                                                      0.88
       0      2        4       6        8            10             0     2        4       6         8            10          0     2        4        6        8             10




            Aggregate Permanent Employment                              Aggregate Temporary Employment                                      Temp Wage
 1.1                                                          1.1                                                       1.1
                                      No Temps                                                  Costly Temps                                               Costly Temps
                                      Costly Temps                                              Efficient Temps                                            Efficient Temps
1.08                                                         1.08                                                      1.08


1.06                                                         1.06                                                      1.06


1.04                                                         1.04                                                      1.04


1.02                                                         1.02                                                      1.02


  1                                                            1                                                         1


0.98                                                         0.98                                                      0.98
       0      2        4       6        8            10             0     2        4       6         8            10          0     2        4        6        8             10


       Notes: The figure reports the responses of the variables as a ratio of their steady state values to an unanticipated shock at date 1. Time, in years,
       is on the horizontal axis.
