                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS AND WAGE INEQUALITY

                                         Arnaud Costinot
                                         Jonathan Vogel
                                            Su Wang

                                       Working Paper 17976
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17976


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2012




We thank Esteban Rossi-Hansberg for comments. This paper has been prepared for the 2012 American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Arnaud Costinot, Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Supply Chains and Wage Inequality
Arnaud Costinot, Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 17976
April 2012
JEL No. F1

                                              ABSTRACT

A salient feature of globalization in recent decades is the emergence of "global supply chains" in which
different countries specialize in different stages of a sequential production process. In Arnaud Costinot,
Jonathan Vogel and Su Wang (2011), CVW hereafter, we have developed a simple theory of trade
with sequential production to shed light on how global supply chains affect the interdependence of
nations. In this paper we develop a multi-factor extension of CVW to explore how the emergence of
global supply chains may affect wage inequality within countries. Our main theoretical prediction
is that the emergence of global supply chains has opposite effects on wage inequality among workers
employed at the bottom and the top of these chains. This suggests that the consequences of globalization
on wage inequality may be very different in primary sectors like agriculture or mining than in manufacturing
sectors.


Arnaud Costinot                                      Su Wang
Department of Economics                              MIT
MIT, E52-243B                                        su_wang@mit.edu
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142-1347
and NBER
costinot@mit.edu

Jonathan Vogel
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jvogel@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
A salient feature of globalization in recent decades is the emergence of “global supply chains”
in which di¤erent countries specialize in di¤erent stages of a sequential production process. In
Arnaud Costinot, Jonathan Vogel and Su Wang (2011), CVW hereafter, we have developed a
simple theory of trade with sequential production to shed light on how global supply chains a¤ect
the interdependence of nations. The goal of this paper is to develop a multi-factor extension of
CVW to explore how the emergence of global supply chains may a¤ect wage inequality within
countries.
    We start from the same basic environment as in Arnaud Costinot and Jonathan Vogel (2010),
CV hereafter. As in CV, we consider a world economy with two countries, North and South,
each populated by a continuum of workers with di¤erent skills. Both countries have access to the
same technology for producing a unique …nal good, but North is skill abundant relative to South.
Crucially, as in CVW, production of the …nal good requires a continuum of stages to be performed
sequentially. At each stage, producing new intermediate goods requires workers and intermediate
goods produced in the previous stage. The more skilled are workers at a given stage, the higher is
the output of the intermediate good at the next stage.
    We focus on the following thought experiment. Suppose that North and South move from
complete autarky to complete goods market integration, i.e. from a world with only local supply
chains to a world with both local and global supply chains. What would be the implications for the
assignment of workers to stages of production and for wage inequality? We demonstrate that global
supply chains lead all Southern workers to move into earlier stages of production. As they do, wage
inequality in South decreases among workers employed at the bottom of the chain, but increases
at the top, an anti-Stolper-Samuelson e¤ect. This does not arise because of market imperfections,
but because of the sequential nature of production.
    While there is large literature focusing on the relationship between trade and inequality, our
paper is most closely related to Pol Antràs, Luis Garicano, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2006)
who use a perfectly competitive assignment model to study the consequences of o¤shoring on wage
inequality in a ‘knowledge economy.’ Beside the fact that our analysis does not rely on strong
functional form assumptions on the distribution of worker skills, our model of trade with sequential
production has one clear prediction: the emergence of global supply chains should have opposite
e¤ects on wage inequality among workers employed at the bottom and the top of these chains. This
new theoretical result is the main contribution of our paper.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the basic environment. Section
II characterizes the free trade equilibrium. Section III discusses the consequences of global supply
chains for matching and wage inequality. Section IV o¤ers some concluding remarks.




                                                  1
2       Basic Environment
We consider a world economy with two countries, North (N ) and South (S). Each country is
populated by a measure one of heterogeneous workers with skill s 2 [s; s]                   (0; 1). We denote by
Lc (s) > 0 the inelastic supply of workers with skill s in country c = N; S and by wc (s) the wage
of these workers in country c. As in CV, we conceptualize di¤erences in skill abundance between
North and South by assuming that the distribution of skills can be ranked in terms of the monotone
likelihood ratio property
                                       LN (s0 )   LS (s0 )
                                                >          , for all s0 > s:                                     (1)
                                       LN (s)     LS (s)
As in CVW, there is one …nal good. Production of the …nal good is sequential and identical around
the world. To produce the …nal good, a continuum of stages                2 [0; 1] must be performed. At each
stage, the production function is Leontief. Formally, consider two consecutive stages,                 and    +d ,
with d in…nitesimal. If a …rm combines q( ) units of intermediate good                      with q( )d units of
workers of skill s, its output of intermediate good           + d is given by

                                        q ( + d ) = (1 + ln sd ) q ( ) .                                         (2)

According to equation (2), more skilled workers produce more output at any stage. Hence s
measures absolute productivity di¤erences across workers. Since s 2 (0; 1), equation (2) implies
that output falls along the production chain. This is consistent with a model in which a worker
with skill s makes mistakes at a constant Poisson rate equal to                ln s, as in the benchmark model
of CVW. All markets are perfectly competitive and all goods are freely traded. p( ) denotes the
world price of intermediate good . For expositional purposes, we assume that “intermediate good
0” is in in…nite supply and has zero price, p(0) = 0. “Intermediate good 1” corresponds to the
unique …nal good mentioned before, which we use as our numeraire, p (1) = 1.


3       Free Trade Equilibrium
In a free trade equilibrium, markets clear and …rms maximize pro…ts taking prices as given. Pro…t
maximization requires that

                                 p( + d )        (1   ln sd ) p ( ) + wc (s) d ,                                 (3)

with equality if total employment of workers of skill s in country c is strictly positive between stages
    and   + d . Condition (3) states that the price of intermediate good               + d must be weakly less
than its unit cost of production, with equality if intermediate good + d is actually produced by a
worker with skill s in country c.1 Together with the labor market clearing conditions, condition (3)
    1
    To see this, note that the production of one unit of intermediate good + d using a worker of skill s requires
1= (1 + ln sd ) units of intermediate good as well as workers for all intermediate stages in ( ; + d ]. Thus the unit
cost of production of intermediate good + d is given by [p ( ) + wc (s) d ] = (1 + ln sd ). Since d is in…nitesimal,



                                                         2
implies that factor price equalization must hold in a free trade equilibrium. Otherwise workers of a
given skill would not be employed in at least one country. Accordingly, the free trade equilibrium
must replicate the integrated equilibrium, i.e. the autarky equilibrium of a …ctitious economy with
endowments L (s)           LN (s) + LS (s). In the rest of this paper, we denote by w ( ) the common
wage schedule in both countries under free trade.
    The free trade equilibrium always exhibits positive assortative matching, as the next lemma
demonstrates.

Lemma 1 In a free trade equilibrium there exists a strictly increasing matching function M :
[s; s] ! [0; 1] such that in both countries: (i) workers with skill s are employed in stage                                     if and
only if M (s) = , (ii) M (s) = 0, and (iii) M (s) = 1.

Sketch of Proof.            The key part of the proof consists of showing that if a worker of skill s is
employed in stage        then a worker of skill s0 > s cannot be employed in a stage                           0   < . As in CVW,
the wage and price schedules are strictly increasing. If the wage schedule were not strictly increasing
then no …rm would hire the high-wage, low-skill workers, and the labor market would not clear.
If the price schedule were not strictly increasing then no …rm could produce the stages at which
prices were not rising without violating condition (3). Given these results, one can then proceed
by contradiction. Suppose that there exist s0 > s and                     0   <        such that M (s0 ) =          0   and M (s) = .
Then condition (3) implies       w (s0 )   w (s)       (ln s0       ln s) p (     0)   and   w (s0 )   w (s)       (ln s0   ln s) p ( ),
which together imply p (        0)    p ( ), contradicting p ( ) strictly increasing.

    The intuition is the same as in CVW: e¢ ciency requires more skilled workers to leverage their
higher productivities on larger amounts of inputs by operating higher up the chain. Since North is
skill abundant and the matching function is the same in both countries, one can further show that
North produces relatively more in later stages of production. This implies the existence of global
supply chains with Southern workers at the bottom and Northern workers at the top under free
trade.
    Using Lemma 1, one can express the good and labor market clearing conditions in a compact
way. Letting Q ( ) denote world output at stage , good and labor market clearing imply

                                        Q (M (s + ds))
                                                       = 1 + ln sM 0 (s)ds,                                                         (4)
                                          Q (M (s))
                                                  M 0 (s)Q (M (s)) = L(s).                                                          (5)

In line with equation (2), equation (4) states that the percentage change in world output between
two consecutive stages is determined by the skill of the worker assigned to this stage. Equation (5),
in turn, equates the demand for workers over this set of stages with the supply of workers assigned
to them. The rest of our analysis crucially relies on the following lemma.
this is equal to (1   ln sd )p ( ) + wc (s) d .




                                                                3
Lemma 2 In a free trade equilibrium the matching function and wage schedule are given by the
solution of two ordinary di¤ erential equations

                              d ln M 0 (s)              0          d ln L(s)
                                            = ln s eln M (s) +               ,                     (6)
                                   ds                                  ds
                                   d2 ln w(s)         0

                                       ds2
                                              = 1+sM s(s) ln s d lndsw(s)
                                                       d ln w(s)
                                                                   2
                                                                           M 0 (s)
                                                                                                   (7)
                                                           ds          +     s ,


with boundary conditions such that:
                             Z     s
                                       d ln L(s)        d ln M 0 (s) ds
                                                                                     = 1,          (8)
                               s           ds                ds      ln s
                                                             w0 (s), w0 (s) = 0.                   (9)

Proof. Let us …rst consider equation (6). By equation (4), we know that

                                               Q0 (M (s))
                                                          = ln s.
                                               Q(M (s))

By di¤erentiating equation (5), we also know that

                                                   L0 (s)M 0 (s) L(s)M 00 (s)
                              Q0 (M (s)) =                                    .
                                                             [M 0 (s)]3

Combining the two previous expressions with equation (5), we obtain

                                       L0 (s)M 0 (s) L(s)M 00 (s)
                                                                  = ln s,
                                             L(s) [M 0 (s)]2

which can be rearranged as equation (6). Note that integrating this equation, we get
                                              Z    s
                                                        1 d ln L(t)            d ln M 0 (t)
                        M (s) = M (s) +                                                     dt.
                                               s       ln t   dt                    dt

By Lemma 1, we know that M (s) = 0 and M (s) = 1. Combining this observation with the
previous expression, M 0 (0) must be such that equation (8) holds. Let us now turn to equation (7).
The zero-pro…t condition implies

                                   p0 [M (s)] =         ln s p [M (s)] + w (s) .                  (10)

In equilibrium …rms must be indi¤erent between using workers of skill s and s + ds in sector
M (s + ds), which implies, after simpli…cations,

                                                            p [M (s)]
                                              w0 (s) =                .                           (11)
                                                                s



                                                            4
Di¤erentiating the previous expression, we get

                                             p0 [M (s)] M 0 (s)s   p [M (s)]
                                 w00 (s) =                                     .
                                                            s2

Combining this expression with equations (10) and (11), we obtain, after simpli…cations, equation
(7) with w0 (s) = 0 and w0 (s) = 0 since p(0) = 0 and p(1) = 1, by choice of numeraire.

    Note that the system of di¤erential equations characterizing the free trade equilibrium is block-
recursive. We now take advantage of this simple structure to explore the consequences of global
supply chains.


4    Consequences of Global Supply Chains
We focus on the following thought experiment. Suppose that North and South move from complete
autarky to complete goods market integration, i.e. from a world with only local supply chains to a
world with both local and global supply chains. What would be the implications for the assignment
of workers to stages of production and for wage inequality?
    Since the free trade equilibrium replicates the integrated equilibrium, moving from the autarky
equilibrium to the free trade equilibrium is isomorphic to changing the skill distribution from Lc ( ),
c = N; S, to L ( )   LN ( ) + LS ( ). This means that the consequences of global supply chains can
be studied by starting from the counterparts of equations (6) and (7) under autarky and doing
comparative dynamics on this system of di¤erential equations as the skill distribution goes from
Lc ( ) to L( ).
    Let Mc ( ) denote the matching function under autarky in country c = N; S. We can state the
…rst of our two main results as follows.

Proposition 1 Starting from autarky, the emergence of global supply chains leads to stage down-
grading for all Southern workers, M (s)         MS (s). The converse is true in North.

Proof. We focus on South. The argument for North is similar. We proceed by contradic-
tion. Suppose that there exists s0 2 (s; s) such that M (s0 ) > MS (s0 ). Then there must exist
s1 2 [s; s0 ) such that M (s1 ) = MS (s1 ) and M 0 (s1 ) = MS0 (s1 ). By condition (1), we know that
the world distribution is such that L (s0 ) =L (s) > LS (s0 ) =LS (s), for all s0 > s, which implies
L0 (s)=L(s) > L0S (s)=LS (s). Combining this observation with equation (6), we must therefore have
d ln M 0 (s)=ds > d ln MS0 (s)=ds whenever ln M 0 (s) = ln MS0 (s). Since ln M 0 (s1 ) = ln MS0 (s1 ), we
must therefore have ln M 0 (s)      ln MS0 (s), and hence, M 0 (s)         MS0 (s) for all s 2 [s1 ; s], with
strict inequality for some s. Since M (s1 ) = MS (s1 ), this further implies M (s) > MS (s), which
contradicts M (s) = MS (s) = 1.

    The intuition is the same as in CV. Since North is skill abundant compared to South, the world
skill distribution features relatively more high-skill workers than the Southern skill distribution.

                                                       5
                                                             1


                                                            0.9


                                                            0.8


                                                            0.7




                                      Stage of Production
                                                            0.6


                                                            0.5


                                                            0.4


                                                            0.3


                                                            0.2


                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                            South Autarky
                                                                                                                            Free T rade
                                                             0
                                                             0.1     0.15     0.2   0.25     0.3       0.35   0.4    0.45         0.5
                                                                                               Skill




                             Figure 1: Change in Southern Matching Function


Accordingly, more stages should employ high-skill workers. This explains why M                                                                       1(   )    MS 1 ( ),
and in turn, why M (s)                MS (s). This is illustrated in Figure 1 in which we assume that the
skill distribution is a truncated Pareto with the same support in both countries but, in line with
condition (1), the Northern skill distribution has a fatter tail.
    To conceptualize changes in wage inequality, we follow CV and focus on changes in d ln w(s)=ds.
To see why this is a natural metric for inequality, suppose that d ln w(s)=ds under free trade is
higher than d ln wS (s)=ds under autarky in South over some range of skills [s1 ; s2 ]. Then starting
from autarky, the relative return to skill rises at all points within this range: w (s00 ) =w (s0 ) >
wS (s00 ) =wS (s0 ) for all s2        s00 > s0                              s1 .
    The second of our two main results can be stated as follows.

Proposition 2 Starting from autarky, the emergence of global supply chains decreases wage in-
equality among low-skill Southern workers, d ln w(s)=ds                                                             d ln wS (s)=ds for s              s^, but increases
wage inequality among high-skill Southern workers, d ln w(s)=ds                                                                         d ln wS (s)=ds for s     s^, with
s^ 2 [s; s]. The converse is true in North.

Proof. We focus on South. The argument for North is similar. First note that since w0 (s) =
wS0 (s) = 0, we have d ln w(s)=ds = d ln wS (s)=ds. Now let

                                 sb                         sup fs 2 [s; s]                                                  o
                                                                               0      d ln wS (s0 )
                                                                   j d lndsw(s
                                                                            0
                                                                               )
                                                                                           ds0            for all s0 2 [s; s] .

If s^ = s, the proposition trivially holds. Now suppose that s^ < s. By de…nition, s^ must be
such that d ln w(^                s)=ds and d2 ln w(^
                 s)=ds = d ln wS (^                 s)=ds2 > d2 ln wS (^
                                                                       s)=ds2 . Since d ln w(^
                                                                                             s)=ds =
         s)=ds and d2 ln w(^
d ln wS (^                 s)=ds2 > d2 ln wS (^
                                              s)=ds2 , equation (7)— which also holds in autarky in
South with w (s) and M (s) replaced by wS (s) and MS (s)— implies that M 0 (^
                                                                            s) > MS0 (^
                                                                                      s). We
must therefore also have d ln M 0 (^
                                   s)=ds > d ln MS0 (^
                                                     s)=ds. And by the same argument as in the
proof of Proposition 1, this implies M 0 (s)                                               MS0 (s) for all s > s^, with strict inequality for some


                                                                                             6
                            Figure 2: Change in Southern Wage Distribution


s > s^. Combining this observation with equation (7), we must have, for all s > s^, d2 ln w(s)=ds2
d2 ln wS (s)=ds2 whenever d ln w (s) =ds = d ln wS (s) =ds. This implies d ln w(s)=ds             d ln wS (s)=ds
for s   s^, which concludes our proof.

    In words, global supply chains have opposite e¤ects on wage inequality among workers employed
at the bottom and the top of the chain. The impact on inequality at the bottom of the Southern
income distribution is reminiscent of the well-known Stolper-Samuelson e¤ect. Compared to the
autarky equilibrium in South, high-skill workers are relatively more abundant in the integrated
equilibrium, which tends to lower their relative wages. In a model without sequential production,
such as the one studied in CV, this e¤ect would lead to a pervasive decrease in inequality in South.
Here, instead, the sequential nature of production leads to an increase in inequality at the top of
the Southern income distribution. This is illustrated in Figure 2.2
    The logic of such non-monotonic e¤ects is discussed in detail in CVW, but the key reason
why trade models with and without sequential production have very di¤erent implications for
wage inequality can be understood as follows. In a perfectly competitive model without sequential
production, changes in wages re‡ect changes in the prices of the goods produced by di¤erent workers.
If free trade makes the prices of the goods produced by high-skill workers relatively cheaper in South
compared to autarky, then inequality must go down in South. In a perfectly competitive model
with sequential production, by contrast, changes in wages also re‡ect changes in the prices of the
intermediate goods used by these workers. In this environment, if free trade makes the prices of
the intermediate goods used by high-skill workers relatively cheaper in South compared to autarky,
then this tends to increase inequality. This force dominates in the second portion of Figure 2.
  2
    Figure 2 focuses on an example in which inequality increases at the top. Proposition 2 allows for [^
                                                                                                       s; s] to be
empty. In our simulations, we have encountered both situations.




                                                        7
5    Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have developed a multi-factor extension of CVW to investigate the consequences
of global supply chains on wage inequality within countries. Our model of trade with sequential
production features a continuum of heterogeneous workers and allows for general skill distributions,
but remains highly tractable. A novel result that emerges from our analysis is that global supply
chains have opposite e¤ects on wage inequality among workers employed at the bottom and the top
of these chains. This suggests that the consequences of globalization on wage inequality may be
very di¤erent in primary sectors like agriculture or mining— which account for a large fraction of
GDP in many developing countries— than in manufacturing sectors— which are the focus of most
empirical studies on trade and inequality.


REFERENCES
 Antràs, Pol, Luis Garicano, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. “O¤shoring in a Knowledge
     Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1): 31-77.

 Costinot, Arnaud, and Jonathan Vogel. 2010. “Matching and Inequality in the World Economy.”
     Journal of Political Economy 118(4): 747-786.

 Costinot, Arnaud, Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang. 2011. “An Elementary Theory of Global Supply
     Chains.” Review of Economic Studies forthcoming.




                                                 8
