NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

1944, 1963 AND 1985:
MODIGLIANIESQUE MACRO MODELS

Stanley Fischer

Working Paper No. 1797

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1797
Januaxy 1986

1944, 1963 and 1985:
JYbdiglianiesque Macro Mc)dels

ABSTPCT

In

1944 Franco Modigliani published a famous article summarizing the

Keynesian model; in 1963 he extended the 1944 framework. This paper,
written for a conference in honor of Modigliani, asks how the earlier

papers would be modified in the light of recent developments in
macroeconomics. The attempt is not to summarize modern macroeconomics,
but rather to describe the structure modern macroeconomists should have
in mind in thinking about the way the economy and macroeconomic policy

work. The paper argues that the basic structure of the 1963 model still
stands, with modifications. The 1985 version is an extended Phillipscurve—augmented IS—LM model. The major modifications to the 1963 model
are in the treatment of the Phillips curve and aggregate supply, in the
analysis of expectations, and in the openness of the economy.

Stanley Fischer
Department of Economics
E52-280, M.I.T.
Cambridge, MA 02139
617-253-6666

December 1985

1944, 1963, AND 1985:
'bdig1ianiesque Macro Models
Stanley Fischerl

Franco Modigliani's 1944 article coming at the end of the

period of absorption of the General They started a remarkable career
in macroeconomics that continues to provide insight and inspiration to
generations of members of the MIT Money Workshop and a far wider

audience outside MIT. "My 1944 article" is certainly the most cited
work in the Money Workshop. "My 1963 article" is a distant second,
though it has not been clear why the work of the younger Modigliani
finds more favor with its author than that of the mature scholar,
pointing in 1963 to developments that were soon to be embodied in the
MPS model.

The 1944 and 1963 Modigliani articles continue to be worth
reading today, both for their insights and as summaries of the state of

knowledge at the time.2 The 1944 article is decisive in its discussion
of the role of wage stickiness in generating real effects of monetary

'This is a revised version of a paper prepared for the conference in
honor of Franco Modigliani, Martha's Vineyard, September 1985. It is to
of
be published in a volume Macroecono
FrancoModgllani (MIT Press, 1986). Comments from and discussion with
Andrew Abel, Olivier Blanchard, Peter Diamond, Rudiger Dornbusch, Paul
Krugman, Merton Miller, Franco Modigliani, Danny Quah, Julio Rotemberg,
Paul Samuelson and Martin Weitzman, none of whom-—least of all Franco
Modigliani-—should be held responsible for the views expressed in this
paper, and financial assistance from the National Science Foundation are

!_yJi2r

ratefu11y acknowledged.
As the author acknowledges in his Collected Paprs, (Vo1. I, pp 66-67,
and "The Monetary Mechanism . . ." Vol.. I, pp 69-78) the 1944 article
contains errors in its discussion of the controversy over the properties
of a monetary economy initiated by Lange (1942) and settled by Patinkin
(1963).

2

policy and unemployment "equilibria' in the Keynesian model. It is
interesting too for its grappling with the Hicksian Value and Capjal
argument that the short term interest rate is determined by the
transaction costs of moving between zero interest money and interest—

bearing short-term securities. The same issue has been emphasized
recently by Neil Wallace (1981); the well-known difficulty of generating

a demand for the non—interest bearing asset, money, when interestbearing assets are available is typically overcome by modern theorists
by postulating that money has to be used to make a purchase (the Clower
constraint) or that money—holding yields unspecified utility services.
The 1963 article describes its macroeconomics as those of the

mid—fifties. The basic macroeconomic model is more sophisticated than
the 1944 version in its handling of the banking system and the

distinction between inside and outside money, the consumption and
investment functions, and the exp1icit inclusion of a government budget

constraint potentially linking monetary and fiscal policy. Most
interesting from the viewpoint of current controversies are the brief
discussion of markup pricing as an alternative to the Keynesian supply
function that makes output a decreasing function of the real wage, the
demonstration that credit rationing does not much change the
macroeconomic analysis of the operation of monetary policy3, and the

3Recent work on the microeconomics of credit rationing (for example,
Jaf'fee and Russell (1976), Keeton (1979), Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)) has
not been assimilated into analytic macroeconomic models, though credit
rationing is an essential component of the operation of monetary policy
in the MPS model. See Blinder (1985) for a recent attempt at a simple
macroeconomic model in which credit rather than interest rates is the
main transmission mechanism for monetary policy; Friedman (1983) has
emphasized the credit—GNP relationship.

3

discussion of the problem facing a monetary authority confronted with

real wage rigidity. There is in addition a hint that the author did not
at the time regard the Phillips curve trade-off dilemma as a serious
one

In this paper I ask what 'my 1985 article" would look like if
Franco Modigliani had the time to set out a representative macroeconomic

model——or rather two models-—of the mid—eighties. The attempt to set
out representative models may reasonably be regarded as not only
presumptuous but also foolish.

I trust that the presumptuousness will

be excused as an attempt to smoke out the views of the discussant.5
The attempt may be regarded as foolish because no single model
can possibly hope to encompass the many substantial analytic

contributions to modern macroeconomic theory. To name only a few:
.Overlapping generations models by Samuelson (1958), Diamond (1965),

Lucas (1972), Barro (1974), Wallace (1981), Sargent and Wallace (1983),

Grandmont (1985), _Lmake important points about the role of money
and social security in promoting efficiency, about capital overaccumulation and the effects of debt on capital accumulation, about the

Phillips curve and the information—conveying role of prices, about
discounting of future tax payments, about the difficulty of

distinguishing between money and bonds in formal modelling, about
commodity monies, and about multiple equilibria arising from nonlinearities, each of which is part of the modern canon.

4Collected Papers, Vol. I, pp 80—81. The discussion of the Phillips
curve tradeoff concludes: "According to some views this is
predicament of our times, but I don't propose here to assess this claim
even less, to propose remedies".
gr
The paper was discussed at the conference by Franco Modigliani; written
comments will appear in the conference volume.

4

.Disequilibrium models by Patinkin (1963), Mundell (1964), Clower
(1965), Solow and Stiglitz (1968), Barro and Grossman (1976), Benassy

(1982), Neary and Stiglitz (1983), etal show in fixed or sticky price
models why quantities enter behavioral equations, identify the wageprice vectors that generate classical or Keynesian behavior, and
demonstrate the role of self-justifying pessimism in producing Keynesian
unemployment.

.The explosion of work on labor contracting by Baily (1974), Azariadis
(1975), MacDonald and Solow (1981), Hart (1984), Hall and Lazear (1984),

Stiglitz (1985), etal, has examined the implications of non—spot—market
relationships between firms and workers for wage and output
determination and shown when contracts will lead to under- or
overemployment equilibria.

.The loose notion of efficiency in asset pricing has been made precise
by Samuelson (1965), Fama (1970), Merton (1973), Breeden (1979), Tirole

(1985), etal and the efficiency of asset markets has been tested by
Shiller (1981), Leroy and Porter (1981), Singleton (1981), Marsh and
Merton (1985) et a]..

.Rationa]. expectations econometrics has been applied to the testing of

standard optimizing models of consumption, fixed investment, inventory
investment, labor demand and supply, by Hall (1978), Hansen and
Singleton (1980), Flavin (1981), Shapiro (1984), Blarichard (1983),

Eichenbaum (1983), Sargent (1978), Mankiw, Rotemberg and Summers (1985)
et_a]., and to questions about the effects of anticipated and

unanticipated policy changes by Mlshkin (1983) and others.

5

.The notion of policy making as a game between government and the

private sector, implied by the work of Lucas (1973) and Sargent and
Wallace (1975), has led far beyond the Tinbergen (1967) approach in the
work of Kydland and Prescott (1977), Barro and Gordon (1983), Rogoff

(1983), Backus and Driffill (1985) etal.
.The modelling of price and wage stickiness has advanced under the hands
of Barro (1972), Fischer (1977), Phelps and Taylor (1977), Sheshinski
and Weiss (1977), Tay1or (1980), Rotemberg (1982), Blanchard (1983),
Mankiw (1985), Akerlof and Yellen (1985), Blanchard (1985), Caplin and

Spulber (1985) etal.
The list of topics is incomplete—-among the missing are
indexation, the microeconomics of money, models of banking, informationbased macroeconomics, real business cycle theory, and search theoretic
models of labor market dynamics and the natural rate of unemployment--

and the lists of authors can be multiplied many times. However, in the
spirit of the earlier papers, the attempt is not to summarize all of
modern macroeconomics but rather to describe the structure most modern
macroeconomists should have in mind if and when they think about the way
the economy and macroeconomic policy work.

The essential question is what difference do the many
contributions described above make to our basic understanding of the way

the economy works? Does "my 1963 model" have to be thrown away, or does
the basic structure still stand?

Modern textbooks, and this paper, say

the structure still stands, to be sure with some rooms added, with some
altered, and with modern styling replacing the fashions of twenty years
ago.

6

In saying this, I certainly do not mean we have learned nothing
in the last twenty years: the sample of topics and papers above is
sufficient evidence of the fundamental significance of much of the

research of the past twenty years. Nor would I want to encourage any
Bourbons who see no reason to go beyond what they knew under the
previous regime: the technical level and sophistication of modern
macroeconomics demand full time attention and effort.

While no single model comfortably encompasses the basic views of
unreconstructed Keynesians, old-line monetarists, and fresh-water
macroeconomjsts6 along with those of the eclectic center, the model that

comes closest, and that best serves to focus discussion of macroeconomic
Controversies, is the extended Phillips-curve-augmented IS-LM model.7

The choice of a non—maximizing model may render the exercise suspect to

many in the profession.8 But it has the benefit of providing a
believable account of the operation of the economy.

The major modifications that have to be made to the 1963 model
are in the treatment of the Phillips curve and aggregate supply, in the

The phrase is Robert Hall's.
Policano (1985) expresses some surprise that the IS-LM model is still
the basic model used in modern macroeconomics textbooks. The
versatility of the model is responsible for its survival: it can be used
to analyze both monetary and fiscal policy, in both full employment and
unemployment modes; it can generate quantity theory or pure Keynesian
results with only minor modifications. The model Is capable of
accommodating monetarist and Keynesian views, as Friedman's (1970)
theoretical framework shows. In my view it can also accommodate a basic
rational expectations—market clearing view, though I am not sure
adherents of that approach would agree.
There is no necessary inconsistency between IS—LM type models and
maximizing models; see for Instance Aiyagari and Gertler (1985).

7

analysis of expectations9, and in the openness of the economy. Because
dynamics depends sensitively on details of lag specifications in each
component of the model, I will not lay much stress on the specifics of
dynamic adjustment.

10

I. THE SIMPLEST CLOSED ECONOMY MODEL.

The general structure of the models is the same as that of the
1944 and 1963 versions and the standard textbook model in using separate
equilibrium conditions for the goods market, the asset markets, and the
labor market.

In the closed economy model, the level of output is determined

by aggregate demand and supply. Aggregate demand is a function of
permanent labor income (YP), current income (Y), wealth, the real
interest rate (r), government spending on goods and services (G), and
taxes net of transfers (T).

9me earlier models assumed unitary elasticity of expectations, which
translates into the assumption that all changes that take place are
expected to be permanent. The assumption is not fully specified until
It becomes clear whether it applies to levels of variables or their

tes of change.
A view implicit in much recent literature is that each dynamic
adjustment mechanism by itself should be capable of explaining business
cycle dynamics, which ——waiving questions about the existence of a
trend--can be summarized by the second order difference equation for
=
detrended output,
y - + a t-2 + e where c is
uncorrelated, a1 Is about i5
a2 Is about (—.45). The multiplieraccelerator mecfianism or Metzlerian inventory dynamics come close to
producing this adjustment pattern, but it may rather be the interaction
of the many dynamic adjustment mechanisms in the economy--slow price and
wage adjustment, slow adjustment of labor and capital inputs, inventory
and fixed Investment dynamics, exchange rate dynamics-—that is
responsible for GNP's hump shape. Rose (1985) in ongoing research asks
why so many economic variables appear to have very similar, and very
simple, dynamic behavior when lagged adjustment is assumed to be
widespread.

an

serially

8

(1)' V =

( Y,

H+B

+ K, r, q, G, T)

Y,

P

Current income enters in addition to permanent labor income because of
evidence that Consumption demand is more sensitive to current income
than is implied by the pure life cycle—permanent income hypothesis.11
Permanent income may affect not only consumption but also investment

demand, as has been emphasized by Eisner (1978). Real non-human wealth
Consists of real high-powered money (H) and government bonds (B) plus

the value of physical capital. We discuss below the issue of whether
debt is wealth, and the related question of whether future taxes should

also affect aggregate demand. The inclusion of just a short—term
interest rate is a simplifying assumption; the long rate, or Tobin's q—the ratio of the market value of capital to its replacement Cost——is
more relevant to the investment decision than the short rate.12
Assuming the marginal propensity to consume out of current
income is less than unity, (1)' can be rewritten:
H ÷B

(1) V = A( V, ——— + K, r, 6, T)
P

For example, Flavin (1981) and Hall and Mishkin (1982).
In an alternative formulation of the model, g would enter explicitly,
both in determining the value of the capital stock, and in affecting the
investment decision. The model would then be essentially that of Tobin
(1969). With q normally inversely related to r, an open market purchase
that reduces the interest rate then increases aggregate demand both
through a wealth effect on Consumption demand and a cost of capital
effect on investment (Modigliani, 1971). However, as Tobin shows, the
inclusion of q does not sigificantly change the analysis of the
operation of policy so long as bonds and capital are gross substitutes.

9

The demand for real balances is a function of the level of
income and output (in some versions spending replaces income), of' the

nominal interest rate, and of real wealth, designated V. Assuming a
constant ratio between the stock of money and the stock of high-powered
money13, the equilibrium condition in the money market can be written

L(Y,

(2) H/P =

r+ir, V)

where it is the expected rate of inflation and

I =r+ir
aa

,'4-s

4.-1S .111 C1 CO L itt t_C
ttic It'JIutaIta

The treatment of capital in the assets markets is the same as
that of the 1944 and 1963 papers, implicitly assuming that capital and

bonds are perfect substitutes (Tobin, 1963). The more complete
treatment in which adjustment costs imply that the price of installed
capital-—Tobin's q--may vary and in which capital and bonds are gross
substitutes does not much affect the analysis of open market operations
(Tobin, 1969).

Aggregate supply starts with a wage setting equation:

(3) W =
t

where

e +

t'

f(Y
—

e

is the predetermined wage rate in period ,

P and e are the

price level and level of output expected to obtain in period t at the

time wages are set;14 Y appears in the wage setting equation to reflect
the possibility that the wage in period t is determined in part on the

13Movements in the money multiplier have at times, notably in the Great
Depression, played a significant role. But they are not normally
sufficiently important to carry the money multiplier as a separate
yriab1e through the remainder of the paper.
Where time subscripts are not used, the subscript should be understood
to be

10

basis of a pre--determined overtime schedule. A price setting equation
completes the supply side:
(4) Pt =

h(W,

Y

The price setting equation is consistent with two major alternatives:
first that output supplied is a decreasing function of the real wage; or
second that price is set as a constant mark—up on the wage or on costs.
The conventional Keynesian supply function with output a decreasing
function of the real wage can obtain when the function h( )

Is

increasing ifl both its arguments; the simplest mark—up pricing equation

holds when Y drops out of the function h( ).

The model is completed by the government budget constraint:
(5) Gt —

Tt

+ It(Bt')t) =

(Mt÷1—Mt + Bt+1—B)/P

In (5), net transfers, T, are defined exclusive of interest payments on

the debt. The interest payments are singled out for separate treatment
for the later discussion of debt dynamics.

Comparison with 1963 and Discussion.
Equations (1), (2) and (5) are virtually Identical to equivalent

equations in the 1963 paper15. The major differences are in the lack of
detail about the banking system in the 1985 version and In the

specification of aggregate supply. The details of the 1963 version were
heavily influenced by the author's desire to discuss both the GurleyShaw inside—outside money distinction and the Patinkin dichotomy—

neutrality controversy. The 1985 version shares the judgment of both

5That model did not explicitly include government spending however.

11

the 1944 and 1963 papers in placing the main leverage of monetary policy
in price stickiness rather than equilibrium non-neutralities.

On the aggregate supply side, the 1963 version formalized the

notion that the wage is constant up to the point of full employment with
labor input determined by the demand for labor, and that thereafter the
nomina1 wage adjusts to generate the rea1 wage at which labor supply is

equal to demand,16 As previously noted, there is also a discussion of
markup pricing, in which In the short run output is determined by demand
at the price level determined by the prevailing level of wages.
In the 1985 version the wage for each period is mostly

predetermined by a Friedman-Phelps-Phillips curve. The length of the
period is not specified. Output and labor input is then determined by
demand, perhaps even beyond the point of conventional full employment as

workers go on overtime. The formulation in terms of output rather than
unemployment saves an Okun's law equation relating output to
unemployment; it is possible that this formulation beyond its parsimony
has served also to reduce the attention paid to unemployment as the
macroeconomic problem,

The demand determination of output is at the heart of one of the

key controversies in macroeconomics. The fact of predetermination of
wages is not necessarily disputed, but the Keynesian notion that demand

determines output-—implying that there might be either under- or
overemployment of labor--is (Barro, 1977).

I have nothing new to

16Eguation (6) of the 1963 model comes close to writing down the "mm"
formulation of disequilibrium economics in which labor input is
determined by the minimum of quantity supplied and demanded at the
existing wage/price vector.

12

contribute on the issue of whether the labor market should be thought of
as clearing in some sophisticated sense in the very short as well as the
long period, but record the view that the aggregate supply framework of
this paper, which includes the expectations—adjusted Phillips curve, has
performed well in recent years in providing an interpretation of the
recent disinflation.

The long—run Phillips curve in the 1985 model Is vertical:
nominal wages adjust to anticipated changes in the price level so that
there is no trade-off between output and inflation when the inflation is

anticipated.17 In this framework, the length of the period over which
the wage is predetermined is a major determinant of macroeconomic

dynamics. The model's dichotomy in which the wage is predetermined for
a period is a substantial simplification of the real-world adjustment
process in which staggered wage and price setting can generate longlived adjustments out of comparatively short contracts.18

A further controversy centers around the role and determinants

of expected price and output levels in the wage setting process. The
17

The specification of the wage setting equation in levels is not
innocent. One implication is that past mistakes are forgotten in the
wage—setting process. A formulation in which the rate of change of the
real wage is made a function of the level of output builds mistakes
permanently into the real wage. Another implication is that there is a
unique full employment real wage, whereas in the rate of change
formulation, the steady—state level of employment is independent of the
real wage. The latter property would be more plausible if the wage
equation (3) were formulated in terms of the unemployment rate rather
than output. The two formulations do not differ in their implications
for short—run output determination, but have different dynamic and
The empirical evidence is mixed, though for the
policy Implications.
period since the mid—sixties the rate of change formulation appears more
gnsistent with the data (Blanchard, 1985a)
Taylor (1980), Blanchard (1983). See also footnote 10.

13

spirit of the rational expectations approach is to condition those
expectations on expectations of policy and other exogenous variables.
Counterposed to this view is the undoubtedly true statement that most
people do not know what the money supply--let alone its expectation--is,
and thus that they base expectations on the actual behavior of the

relevant variable. Adaptive expectations are likely used in routine
circumstances when the consequences of error are small and more
comprehensively-based expectations at times when there are major changes
in policy.

Assuming expectations are rational neutralizes expectations as
an independent source of economic dynamics; the implications of
alternative expectations assumptions can usefully be investigated if

there is reason to believe they are not rational. So can questions of

the credibility of announced changes in policy. But rational
expectations is the right initial hypothesis.

The Agggate Supply

Curve.

The aggregate supply curve, AS, in Figure 1 is derived from (3)
and (4).

If the markup is constant and the nominal wage is not a

function of the current level of output, the aggregate supply curve is

horizontal, as on AS'. If the mark—up and/or the wage increases with
the current level of output, the aggregate supply curve is positively

sloped, as is AS. We henceforth assume the short—run supply curve is
positively sloped.

Held constant along an aggregate supply curve are the expected

price level and expected level of output. An increase in either shifts

P
AS

- __;s'

y

Figure 1.

14

the aggregate supply curve up, raising price at each level of output.
Provided output in equation (4) is a function of the real wage, there is
a unique long-run full employment level of output at which the long run
aggregate supply curve is vertical.
aggregate_Demand.

The aggregate demand curve AD in Figure 1 represents equilibrium

in both the goods and the assets markets. Substituting for the real
interest rate in (1) from (2) and the relationship between real and
nominal rates, we obtain the AD curve as a relationship between the
price level and current level of output; its position depends on the

expected rate of inflation, the stock of bonds, and fiscal policy

parameters. In calculating the slope of the AD curve we assume
permanent income increases, but not much, with current income.19
The negative slope of the AD curve reflects both the so-called
Hicks—Keynes effect that arises from the increase in the nominal
interest rate (and with expected inflation held constant, the real rate

of interest) as real balances fall, and the wealth effect of an increase

in prices on the real value of wealth. The Hicks-Keynes effect is
sufficient to produce AD's negative slope.

An increase in the expected rate of inflation, or government
spending, or a reduction in taxes, shifts the AD curve up and to the

right, increasing output and the price level. An increase in the stock
of high—powered money or government bonds likewise shifts the AD curve

19For the AD curve to slope down, the total effect of a unit increase in
current income on aggregate demand, operating on consumption both
directly and through permanent income, and on investment through the
accelerator has to be less than unity.

15

to the right. We discuss later the question of whether bonds are net
wealth. An equiproportionate increase in the stocks of money and bonds
shifts the AD curve up proportionately, indicating the potential
neutrality of such a policy change.
Equilibrium.

Output and the price level are determined at point E in Figure

1. We describe E as a position of short—run equilibrium, though the
expectations on which wages were determined may be falsified. If either
the price level or the level of output is different from the level that
was expected, the quantity of labor employed will not be equal to the

quantity workers would prefer to supply. Point E can be a position of
long—run equilibrium only if workers' expectations are fulfilled, if the
budget is balanced, and if the remaining exogenous variables are
constant.
We now use the model to analyze a variety of' policy changes.

An_Open_arket_Purchase.
An open market purchase increases H while decreasing B by an

equal amount. There is no wealth effect at the initial price level. At
any given level of Income, the larger money stock reduces the interest
rate, shifting the aggregate demand curve to the right.
If the change in the money stock was unanticipated, both the

level of output and the price level rise In the short run. Then as
expectations adjust, the short run supply curve shifts up, and more of

the adjustment takes the form of a price increase. Eventually output
returns to the full employment level at a higher price level. The real

16

and nominal interest rates fall because the ratio of money to bonds has
risen; the stock of real high powered money increases, implying that
prices rise proportionately less than the money stock.

Because the open market purchase reduces the public's holdings
of bonds, disposable income would fall unless there were an offsetting

reduction in net taxes, which we therefore assume to have been made. In
addition, the lower real interest rate increases the rate of investment,
implying the full employment level of output rises relative to what it

would otherwise have been. We do not take explicit account of this
effect of the monetary change.
Run.

Suppose the government increases spending and reduces taxes; the

change has not been anticipated in wage setting. Both the tax reduction
and the increase in spending raise aggregate demand; if the expected
rate of inflation remains unchanged or rises, the price level and level

of output will rise. Again provided the expected rate of inflation does
not fall, and if wealth effects on the demand for consumption and real
balances are small, both the real and the nominal interest rates will

increase. The analysis is entirely that of the conventional IS—LM
model, except for the need to consider the effects of the fiscal
expansion on the expected rate of inflation.

Except when fiscal policy takes the form of balanced budget
changes in expenditure, fiscal expansion implies subsequent changes in

the stocks of money and bonds. If the fiscal policy change is
transitory, there need be only one—time changes in asset stocks; if the

17

change is permanent there will be ongoing changes in asset stocks. We
consider permanent fiscal changes.
Money-Financed_Deficits.

Suppose there was initia1ly no government debt and that after
the fiscal expansion, high-powered money Is printed to cover the
deficit. In the new steady state, and absent growth of output, the
growth rate of money and the inflation rate will both be 8 where e

satisfies
(6) e.(H/P) =

G —

T.

Permanent money financing of deficits Is possible only if the deficit is
small, for the maximum amount of steady state seigniorage is small.
The goods market equilibrium condition can be rewritten
(7) Y = A( Y, L( Y, r+e, V) + K, r, G, T)

The fiscal expansion—-the increase In G and reduction in T---tend to

Increase the real interest rate at the full employment level of output.
Offsetting that effect is the reduction in real balances that arises

from the Increase In the expected rate of inflation. But if the wealth
effect of reduced high-powered money holdings on consumption demand Is
small——as it is——the real interest rate will increase to maintain goods

market equilibrium in the long run. With the real interest rate higher,
the nominal rate too must rise.

Thus permanent fiscal expansion, even if it is money financed,

raises the real interest rate in both the short and the long runs. This
conclusion would be changed If Individuals were infinite horizon
maximizers with a constant rate of time preference: in that case saving

18

behavior adjusts so that the real after-tax interest rate is always
driven to the rate of time preference.

The real interest rate could be

changed in the long run in such models only through taxation of the
return on capital.
Bond Financing of Deficits.

Pure bond financing of deficits Is not possible in the steady

state In a non-growing economy. Holding the stock of nominal balances
Constant, the government budget constraint is

(8)

=

Gt

—

Tt

+

(l-i-it)(Bt/Pt)

If interest payments are not included in T (net taxes minus transfers),
or if the non-interest deficit does not for any other reason decrease as
the stock of bonds increases, then (8) is an unstable equation provided
the real interest rate is positive; the simple notion that everincreasing interest payments overwhelm the budget is true in this

case.2° Even if the budget deficit is defined inclusive of real
interest payments, there can be no steady state unless the deficit is
zero. 21

20Rewriting the left hand side as
(Bt+i/Pti)(P +1' and dividing
through by (P
the coefficient on the real stock of bonds on the
right hand sie becomes the real interest rate. The effect of
in reducing the real value of G - T on the right hand side is an
artifact of discrete time and should be ignored. Modification of this
uation to the case of a growing economy is straightforward.
If the budget deficit Is defined inclusive of nominal interest
payments on the debt, then equation (8) appears to make possible a
steady state with positive deficit. But (a) this is purely a result of
an inflation illusion in fiscal policy, in which non-interest transfer
payments are reduced as the debt increases and (b) there will be a
steady state only if the stock of money is increasing at the same rate
as the nominal stock of debt.

19

Although pure debt financing of a deficit is not possible in
steady state in a non-growing economy, mixed money and debt financing of
small deficits is possible: essentially the seigniorage pays the
interest bill on the outstanding stock of debt as well as covering the

deficit. This is one sense in which Sargent and Wallace's (1980)
argument that deficit financing is inflationary is correct. Similarly,
transitory debt financing of a deficit wiLl leave a larger debt and
larger interest payments than money financing, so that eventually a
higher inflation rate will be needed to finance the larger interest—
inclusive deficit.

The contrast between the short run discussed in the previous

section and the long run in this section is very sharp. In the short
run debt financing probably raises the price level less than money

financing; in the long run it does not. Equivalently, short term debt
financing of a transitory deficit, with all future interest—inclusive
deficits held constant, raises the price level less than money financing
of the same deficit.22
Bonds and Net Wealth
The long-run non—neutrality of money when the ratio of money to

bonds is changed results from the assumption that government bonds are

net wealth. The assumption that bonds are net wealth was discussed by
Patinkin (1963) who recognized that the issue was whether individuals in
aggregate regarded themselves as having a future tax liability with

22This implies that future net taxes are increased to offset the effects
of higher interest payments resulting from the transitory debt financed
deficit.

20

present value equal to that of the debt. If the debt was to be paid off
by future generations, the logical assumption seemed to be that the debt

was net wealth. Barros (1974) contribution to the debate was the
recognition that finitely lived individuals could nonetheless have
effectively infinite horizons if they cared in a particular way about

their heirs' utility. In this case the debt would not be wealth.23
The issue turns out to be surprisingly far-reaching. For
instance, does the pay as you go nature of social security affect

capital accumulation? Is the national debt a burden in the Modigliani
(1960) sense that it leaves future generations with a smaller capital

stock? Does deficit rather than tax financing raise the real interest
rate?

In all cases the answer turns on the same considerations as

whether the debt is wealth.24
Further, if individuals act as if they are infinitely lived, the
life—cycle hypothesis of consumption has to be significantly modified to

include the making of bequests. Indeed, recent research by Kotlikoff
and Summers (1981) argues that most wealth is the result not of life—
cycle saving, but of bequests.

23The question arises whether the government can keep rolling over the
debt rather than paying it off. The rolling over strategy is possible
only if the growth rate of population exceeds the real interest rate, in
which case the equilibrium is inefficient. When the equilibrium is
efficient, a transversality condition for the government debt in effect
p1ies that the debt is paid off.
That is, provided individuals are not liquidity constrained.
Liquidity Constraints dominate the issue of Ricardian equivalence in the
sense that with liqudity constraints, flows of current income affect
aggregate demand whether or not individuals would treat the debt as
wealth if they were not constrained.

21

Despite the importance of the issue, there have been no
empirical tests sufficiently decisive to move prior beliefs about the

issue.25 The Ricardo-Barro hypothesis implies that private consumption
should be invariant to the financing of government spending; private

saving should thus rise when the budget deficit increases. Neither this
implication of the hypothesis or its opposite, nor the effects of social
security on savings, have yet been convincingly established

econometrically. Those willing to accept more casual evidence point to
reductions in private saving rates and increases in real interest rates

as budget deficits have increased since 1981 as prima_fade evidence
against the hypothesis.

Tobin and Buiter (1981) have shown that childlessness, zero
bequests, and a variety of other likely events cause the failure of the
Ricard-Barro mechanism, all in the direction that causes the debt to be

treated as net wealth. Drazen (1978) suggests that a national debt
overcomes the difficulty for parents of appropriating some of the return
from investing in their children's human capital and thereby raises

national wealth. Barsky, Mankiw and Zeldes (1984) show that in the
absence of human capital insurance, future taxes to repay debt reduce
the variance of future income, raising current consumption and thus in

effect making the debt net wealth. Abel (1985) shows that with
uncertain lifetimes, the debt may be net wealth.

25Seater (1985) provides a useful review of research on this issue, with
references to much of the literature. See also Modigliani and Sterling
(1985).

22

The weight of the theoretical arguments26 and in my view the
empirical evidence suggests the debt is to a significant extent net
wealth, but those whose priors are sufficiently strong can continue, at
least for the present, to believe it is not.

In the remainder of the

paper we treat the debt as net wealth, recognizing that in practice
future tax liabilities fall to some extent on those now living, and that
the debt would thus be discounted to some extent.
The short run effectiveness of monetary policy is not dependent

on whether the debt is net wealth. So long as wages and prices are
sticky in the short run, monetary policy will have real effects. This
is very much the message of Modigliani (1963), who downplays the
importance of the long-run non-neutralities of money of the type that

arise when the debt is wealth. On the fiscal policy side, the issue of
whether the debt is net wealth is crucial to the question of whether a
tax cut is expansionary and raises the real interest rate.27
The Fisher Relation and the Mundell--Tobjn Effect.

Because the 1963 paper was written before persistent inflation
became a primary concern of United States macroeconomics, the Fisher
relation and Its distinction between the real and the nominal interest

rates was not discussed.28
26

Bernheim and Bagwell (1985) make what they describe as the reductioad
absurdum argument that if all individuals are effectively linked——for
instance by the possibility that their descendents might marry each
other——then all redistributions have no effects on real resource
allocation, being Immediately undone by the recipients. Further, tax
distortions are non-existent because individuals internalize the

eratIon of the government.
28 footnote 24.
The Fisher effect is discussed by Friedman (1968).

23

The pure Fisher effect, in which the real interest rate is
invariant to the inflation rate, does not obtain in the current model,

even when the nominal stocks of both money and bonds increase at a

constant rate. The Mundell—Tobin effect is responsible for the non—
neutrality.

Consider the full employment version of the current model in
which inflation has been anticipated in wage setting.

Suppose for

simplicity that the stock of bonds is zero, and that the growth rate of

money has increased from zero to some positive rate. The money enters
the economy through transfer payments, but there is an offsetting
reduction in disposable income arising from capital losses on existing
holdings of money.

Real balances will be constant in the new steady state. Suppose
for the moment that the real interest rate remained unchanged, with the

nominal interest rate increasing one for one with the inflation. Then
real balances would be reduced. But this means the goods market cannot
be in equilibrium, because aggregate demand is reduced below supply.
The real interest rate has to fall to maintain equilibrium, the final
result being an increase in the nominal and a reduction in the real

interest rate. Because the real high powered money stock is small,
though, this non—neutrality is likely to be empirically unimportant in

the long run.29 Tax distortions of the type emphasized by Feldstein
(1983) are potentially a more important source of non—Fisher results.

29The mechanism that has been described here is that of Munde1l (1964).
The Tobin (1965) non-neutrality of inflation arises from the assumption
that individuals consume a constant fraction of disposable income, which
includes the value of net (inflation adjusted) transfer payments. In a
growing economy, the value of these net transfer payments includes a
term g.m where g is the growth rate of the economy and a is the value of
real balances. With m falling with the rate of inflation, consumption
at a given level of output will fall when the inflation rate rises,
producing the same effect on aggregate demand as that in the text.

24

Perhaps the most interesting Fisher—related result is the

claimed rejection of the Fisher effect by Summers (1982). Summers,
working with decadal averages, finds almost no relationship between the

nominal interest rate and the inflation rate. He interprets this as
showing that even in the long run the nominal interest rate barely
changes with the expected inflation rate, thus going well beyond Irving
Fisher1s claim that it takes decades for the Fisher neutrality to
obtain .30

The question of the Fisher effect is still open though. Barsky
(1985) argues that the price level in the ineteenth century essentially
followed a random walk, so that the ex ante nominal and real rates were
the same; he also shows that the differences in decade average real

rates are not significant. Further, controversy still obtains (McCallum
(1984) and Summers (1984)) over whether working with data averaged over
long periods, or with the low frequency end of the spectrum as Summers
does in his econometric tests, handles the difficulty of the distinction
between actual and anticipated inflation.

II. Qpening the Economy..

30me early Fama result (1975) of constancy of the real interest rate
appeared even then to be a result peculiar to the period of the
regression; after the real interest rate changes of the early eighties,
any notion of even approximate real interest rate constancy must be
rejected.

25

In 1944 it was certainly reasonable for the basic model of U.S.

macroeconomics to represent a closed economy.3l Even in 1963 when
balance of payments concerns were serious, recognizing the openness of
the economy would not have required much change in the basic model.

With the nominal exchange rate fixed and the price level assumed
constant, the real exchange rate in an open economy version of the 1963
model would have been constant and the current account a simple function

of the level of income. With capital flows relatively insignificant,
the current account could be taken as the driving force in international
transactions.

In 1985 international transactions play a larger role in

determining the behavior of the U.S. economy. Supply shocks that
originated abroad were instrumental in the two inflationary episodes of
the seventies; the volume of trade has more than doubled as a percentage
of GNP in the last twenty years; the gap between domestic absorption and

output amounts at present to several percent of GNP. Under flexible
exchange rates and substantial capital mobility, monetary and fiscal
policy affect the nominal exchange rate quickly and, because domestic
prices are sticky, also affect the real exchange rate and resource

allocation.32 Monetary policy changes, such as the ill fated late 1978
31

Keynes' own use of a closed economy model of Britain has frequently
been criticized. It is not obvious what features of the Keynesian
message would have been changed by recognizing the openness of the
British economy: government spending and tax cuts are still expansionary
in an open economy, as is an increase in the money supply unless the
onomy is in a liquidity trap.
Dornbusch and Fischer (1984) contains an extended discussion of
international linkages of the U.S. economy and presents an open economy
model on which I draw.

26

contraction, and the October 1979 "regime change" can be triggered by

concern over the dollar. No modern forecaster of inflation can ignore
the dollar.

The exchange rate directly affects both goods and assets market
equilibria, and the aggregate supply or markup equation.

In the goods

market:

(1)" Y = A(Yp, V, r, G, T, e/P)

V is real wealth. The variable P now denotes the consumer price index.
The variable q will be used to denote the price of domestic output.33
The money demand equation remains unchanged, though there is an
issue of whether the price of domestic output or the CPI, or some

combination, should be the deflator for real balances. The asset market
equilibrium condition has to be extended because domestic residents can
now hold an extra asset--foreign bonds. The simplest, risk neutral,
assumption is that expected returns on domestic and foreign bonds are

equalized. If 1* is the foreign interest rate, then
(9) i = 1* + e

where e is the expected rate of change of the exchange rate. Attempts
to locate a risk premium in the relationship between domestic and
foreign rates, perhaps as a function of the outstanding stocks of the

assets (Frankel, 1982) have not been successful. We thus will use (9),

33Denoting the price of domestic output by q, and setting the price of
foreign goods at unity, the CPI can be written
P = qSel—s; the relative price of foreign goods is then

e/q = (e/P)l/s; thus e/P in (1)" represents the price of foreign
relative to domestic goods.

27

together with the assumption that the foreign interest rate is given, as
the portfolio equilibrium condition linking domestic and foreign
interest rates.34
The price of domestic output, q, depends not only on wages and
output but also on the exchange rate:

q = H(W, Y, e)
An increase in e is a depreciation of the exchange rate that increases

the price of domestic output. Using the definition of the CPI as a
weighted average of the price of domestic output and the exchange rate.
the pricing equation can be rewritten as:
(10) P = h(W, Y, e).

Net wealth now consists not only of high—powered money, bonds

and capital, but also net ownership of foreign securities, F. Foreign
asset accumulation is equal to the current account surplus:

((M+B)/P)

(11) V =

(12) e(F÷l_p)/p

+ K +

=

eF/P

NX(Y, e/P) +

eti*(Ft/Pt)

The analysis of monetary and fiscal policy is essentially that
of the Mundell—Fleming model.

An Open Market Purchase.

Suppose the economy starts from a position of equilibrium and

that an open market purchase takes place. The domestic interest rate

34Although there is no compelling evidence for risk premia, there is
also no evidence that suggests the forecast implicit in (9) is a good
one. See for example Cumby and Obstfeld (1984).

28

tends to fall, output and the price level to rise. Assuming the open
Market purchase is a once over event, with budgetary implications
neutralized by offsetting changes in taxes, the domestic price level
will be expected to rise further next period as wages adjust.
With the domestic nominal interest rate lower, international
interest rate equalization implies that the exchange rate has to be

expected to fall next period. The real exchange rate therefore
depreciates (rises) this period (Dornbusch, 1976). Equivalently, the
lower domestic interest rate produces a capital outflow that causes the

exchange rate to depreciate. The depreciation increases the
inflationary effect of the expansionary monetary policy; to the extent
that the trade balance responds in the short run to the exchange rate,
the exchange rate effect also increases aggregate demand.
In the longer term as prices adjust fully the exchange rate

returns close to its initial level. The increase in the ownership of
foreign assets during the adjustment period implies a capital inflow in
future years, requiring a slightly appreciated future exchange rate.

Fiscal_Expansion
Expansionary fiscal policy tends to increase the domestic

interest rate and appreciate (reduce) the exchange rate. The
inflationary impact of the expansion is modified by the exchange rate

appreciation. Both domestic investment and net exports are crowded out.
The decline in ownership of foreign securities during the adjustment
periods requires a slightly depreciated exchange rate In future to

29

generate the current account surplus to pay the interest on the foreign
borrowing.

Recognition of the openness of the economy thus modifies the

analysis of monetary and fiscal policy. For a given increase in nominal

aggregate demand, a monetary expansion is more inflationary and a
fiscal expansion less inflationary in the short run than they would be

in the closed economy. Empirical estimates suggest the differential
effects are not mere theoretical niceties, but are rather empirically
significant and to be taken account of in the choice of policy, for
instance during a process of disinflation.35

iii. conciudg_cornrnents.

None of us has not heard the joke about the unchanging questions

and the changing answers in economics exams. Contrary to the joke, the
basic answers in this paper to how monetary and fiscal policy work are

close to those of the earlier papers. But it is only the basic answers
to the question of whether changes in monetary and fiscal policy have

real effects that are unchanged. The modern answers differ in placing
much greater emphasis on expectations, on stock—flow relations, on the

openness of the economy, and in the modelling of aggregate supply. They
differ also because they are less certain than they were then, and they
command less consensus within the profession.

35Dornbusch and Fischer (1984), Sachs (1985); Fischer (1985) discusses
the effects of exchange rate appreciation on the costs of disinflation.

30

Part of the loss of certainty arises from the complexity of
dynamics in model even as simple as the present ones36: serious
macroeconomics that attempts to describe the behavior of the economy
rather than ll1ustrate particular points may no longer be possible with
just pen and paper, but may rather need more powerful technology.
Certainly analysis of the adjustment of the economy to disturbances or
policy changes to be used in actual policy making is bound to use a more

detailed model than can be solved explicitly. The dynamic properties of
the major econometric models, or of maximizing models such as those of
Kydland and Prescott (1982), can be understood by means of simulations,
but not from analytic exercises.

It could be argued that the right way

to do macroeconomics is to study the detailed structure of such models

and to develop understanding of how they work through a variety of

simulation exercises. That is the only way to understand a particular
large-scale model; the purpose of simpler models like those in this
paper is to develop a sense of the overall structure of the economy and
intuition about its working.

The loss of assurance is best explained by asking what view was

being contested in the 1944, 1963, and 1985 papers. In 1944 Franco
Modigliani was contesting Keynes' claim to have produced an unemployment

equilibrium and analyzing Keynesian interest rate theory. In 1963 he
was contesting the Gurley-Shaw--Radciiffe view that the basic model would

be significantly altered by including financial intermediation, and the

36For instance, the analysis of the open economy model in Section II did
not pursue the dynamics of foreign and domestic debt accumulation in
detail; the analysis of Section I did not pursue the dynamics of capital
accumulation.

31

Patinkin emphasis on equilibrium non—neutralities. The 1985 paper
implicitly contests the views of the rational expectations-market
equilibrium school that anticipated changes in money have no real
effects and that the only significant fiscal variables are government
spending and the micro—structure of tax rates.37
Two factors are responsible for the loss of mainstream self-

assurance. The first is empirical. Lucas and Sargent (1978) emphasize
the inconsistency of the 1970's inflation with 1960's vintage Phillips

curves. But the expectations—augmented Phillips curve was rapidly
assimilated into the mainstream and has stood up well from the early

1970s to the present. The deeper reason for unease is that significant
components of the mainstream model have had empirical difficulties, in

different ways. The demand function for money has shifted. The
investment function refuses to conform to neoclassical theory. The
consumption function shows more sensitivity than it should to current

income. There is no consolation in these difficulties for competing
schools in macroeconomics, for none has produced empirically superior
formulations.

The second factor responsible for the loss of mainstream selfassurance and lack of consensus within the profession is the theoretical

depth of the rational expectations—equilibrium attack. The models
analyzed in this paper are not fully based on maximization--the wage and

price setting assumptions in particular are ad hoc.38 Progress in

Modigllanl (1977) directly confronts those views.
The use of "ad hoc" as a term of derision makes the point; ad hoc
could also be interpreted as fulfilment of the terms of Occam's Razor.

32

repairing that weakness is being made by many of those cited in the

introduction. But until and unless a new model appears that both
satisfies the critical standards of the best theorists and is consistent
with the behavior of the macroeconomy, macroeconomics will continue to

be faced with a tradeoff between theoretical purity and relevance. That
will be the macroeconomist's burden for a long time.

As a master macroeconomist, Franco Modigliani has shown the
ability to live creatively with that tension.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Abel, Andrew B, 1984. "Bequests and social security with uncertain
lifetimes", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper * 1372.
Alyagari, S. Rao and Mark Gertler, 1985. "The backing of government
bonds and monetarism", Journal of_MonetarEconornics, 16, 1 (July), 19—
44.

Akerlof, George and Janet Yellen, 1984. "A near rational model of the
business cycle with wage and price inertia", mimeo, Berkeley.
Azariadis, Costas, 1975. "Implicit contracts and underemployment
equilibria", Journal of Political_EconomI, 83, 6 (Dec.), 1183-1202.

Rakus, David and E.J. Driffill, 1985. "Inflation and reputation",
American Economic Review, 75, 3 (June), 530—538.
Baily, Martin N. 1974. "Wages and employment under uncertain demand",
Review of Economic Studies, 41, 1 (Jan.), 37—50.
Barro, Robert J. 1972. "A theory of monopolistic price adjustment",
Review of Economic_Studies, 39, 1 (Jan.), 17—26.

1974. "Are government bonds net wealth?", Journal
Political_Econoy, 82, 6 (Nov/Dec), 1095-1118.
,

of

1977. "On long term contracting, sticky prices and monetary
policy", Journal of_Monetaryconomics, 3, 3 (July), 305-316.
,

and David Gordon, 1983. "A positive theory of monetary policy
in a natural rate model", Journal of Political Eco, 91, 4 (Aug),
589—610.

and Herschel Grossman, 1976. Money,emQjornent and inflation,
Cambridge University Press.
Barksy, Robert, 1985. "Tests of the Fisher hypothesis and the
forecastability of inflation under alternative monetary regimes",
Chapter 2, M.I.T. Ph.D. dissertation.
N. Greg Mankiw and Stephen Zeldes, 1984. "Ricardiari consumers
with Keynesian propensities", National Bureau of Economic Research
working paper #1400.
,

Benassy, Jean—Pascal, 1982. The economics of market disequilibrium,
Academic Press.

Bernheim, Douglas and Kyle Bagwell, 1985. "Is everything neutral? The
implications of intergenerational altruism in an overlapping generations
model with altruism", mimeo, Stanford.

2

Blanchard, Olivier, 1983. "Price asynchronization and price level
inertia", in R. Dornbusch and M. Simonsen, eds, InflationL debt, and
indexation, MIT Press.
,

1983a. "The production and inventory behavior of the American

automobile industry', Journal of Political Economy, 91, 3 (June), 365—
400.
,

1985. "Monopolistic competition, small menu costs and real

effects of nominal money", mimeo, MIT.
,

1985a. "Output, prices and wages: an empirical structural

investigation", mimeo, Department of Economics, M.I.T.
Blinder, Alan S. , 1985.

'Credit rationing and effective supply
failures", NBER working paper #1619.

Breeden, Douglas, 1979. "An intertemporal asset pricing model with
stochastic consumption and investment opportunities", Journal of
Financial Economics, 7, (Sept), 265-296.
Caplin, Andrew and Danie1 F. Spulber, 1985. "Inflation, menu costs and
endogenous price variability", mimeo, Department of Economics, Harvard
University.
Clower, Robert, 1965. "The Keynesian counter—revolution: a theoretical
appraisal", in F.H. Hahn and F. Brechling, eds, The Theory_2Llnterest
Rates, Macmillan.

Cumby, Robert and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984. "International interest—rate
and price—level linkages under flexible exchange rates: a review of
recent evidence", in John Bilson and Richard Marston, eds, Exc!ge Rate
Theory and Practice, University of Chicago Press.
Diamond, Peter A., 1965. "National debt in a neoclassical growth model",
American Economic Review, 55, 5 (Dec), 1126—1150.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976. "Expectations and exchange rate dynamics",
Journal of Political Economy, 84, 6 (Dec), 1161—1176.
and Stanley Fischer, 1984. "The open economy: implications for
monetary and fiscal policy", NBER Working Paper # 1422

Drazen, Allan, 1978. "Government debt, human capital, and bequests in a
life—cycle model", Journal of Political Economy, 86, 3 (June) 505—516.
Eichenbaum, Martin, 1983. "A rational expectations equilibrium model of
Inventories of finished goods and employment", Journal of Monetary
Economics, 12, 2 (Aug), 259—278.

3

Fama, Eugene F., 1970. "Efficient capital markets: a review of theory
and empirical work", Journal of Finance, 25, 383—417.

1975. "Short-term interest rates as predictors of inflation",
American Economic Review, 65, 3 (June), 269-282.
,

Feldstein, Martin, 1983. Inflation, tax rule and capit_formatiqn,
University of Chicago Press.

Fischer, Stanley, 1977. "Long term contracts, rational expectations, and
85, 1
the optimal money supply rule",
(Feb), 191—205.
1985. "Real balances, the exchange rate and indexation: real

n ,iinF$arni" mimn MIT

Flavin, Marjorie A., 1981. "The adjustment of consumption to changing
expectations about future income", Journal of Political Econorn, 89, 5
(Oct), 974—1009.
Friedman, Benjamin M. 1983 "The roles of money and credit in
macroeconomic analysis", in J. Tobin ed, Macroeconornicsrices and
quantities, Brookings Institution.

Friedman, Milton, 1968. "The role of monetary policy", American_Economic
Review, 78, 1 (March), 1—17.

1970. "A theoretical framework for monetary analysis",
Journal of Political_Econorn, 78, 2 (March/April), 193—238.
,

Grandmont, Jean-Michel 1985. "on endogeneous competitive business
cycles", Econometrica, forthcoming
Grossman, Herschel I., 1983. "The natural rate hypothesis, the rationalexpectations hypothesis, and the remarkable survival of non—market
clearing assumptions", in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Vol. 19, Variability in Employment, Prices, and Mone.
Hall, Robert E., 1978. "Stochastic implications of the life cycle—
permanent income hypothesis: theory and evidence", Journal of Political
Economy, 86, 6 (Dec), 971—987.
and Edward Lazear, 1984. "The excess sensitivity of layoffs
and quits to demand", Journal_of Labor Economics, 2, 233-257.
and Frederic S. Mishkin, 1982. "The sensitivity of consumption
to transitory income-—estimates from panel data on households",
Econometrica, 50, 2 (March), 461—481.

4

Hansen,

Lars P. and Kenneth Singleton, 1983. "Stochastic consumption,
risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of asset returns", Journal of
Political Econoy, 91, 2 (April), 249-265.

Hart, Oliver, (1983). "Optimal labour contracts under asymmetric
information, an introduction', Review_of Economic_Studies, 50, 1 (Jan),
3-35.

Jaff'ee,

Dwight M. and Thomas Russell, 1976. "Imperfect information,
uncertainty, and credit rationing', Qrter1y Journal of Economics, 90,
4 (Nov), 651—666.
Keeton, William, 1979. Equilibrium

credit

rationing, Garland Publishers.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1981. "The role of
intergenerational transfers in aggregate capital accumulation", Journal

of_PoJJtiçLEconom, 89, 4 (Aug), 706-732.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, 1977. "Rules rather than
discretion——the inconsistency of optimal plans", Journal of Political
Economy, 85, 3 (June), 473-491.
,

1982.

"Time to build and aggregate fluctuations",

Econometrica, 50, 6 (Nov), 1345-1370.
Lange,

Oskar, 1942. "Say's law: a restatement and criticism", in 0.
Lange ed, Studies in mathematical economics and econometrics, University
of Chicago Press.
Leroy, Stephan F. and Richard D. Porter, 1981. "The present value
relation: tests based on implied variance bounds". Econometrica, 49, 3
(May), 555—574.
Lucas, Robert E., 1972. "Expectations and the neutrality of money",
Journal of Economic Theory, 4, 2 (April), 103-124.

1973. "Some international evidence on output-inflation
,
tradeoffs", American Economic Review, 63, 3 (Sept), 326—344.
and Thomas Sargent, 1978. "After Keynesian macroeconomics", in
After the Phi 11 iQs curvejrsistence of high inflation and high
unernployent, Conference Series # 19, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
McCallum, Bennett T., 1984. "On low-frequency estimates of long-run
relationships in macroeconomics", Journal of Monetary_Economics, 14, 1
(July), 3-14.

5

McDonald, Ian M. and Robert M. Solow, 1981. "Wage bargaining and
employment', American Economic_Review, 71, 5 (Dec), 896-908.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1985, Small menu costs and large business cycles: a
macroeconomic model of monopoly", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 2
(Nov), 529-538.

Julio Rotemberg and Lawrence Summers, 1985. "Intertemporal
substitution in macroeconomics", Quarteriy Journal of_Economics, 100, 1
(Feb), 225—251.
,

Marsh, Terry A. and Robert C. Merton, 1985. "Dividend variability and
variance bounds tests for the rationality of stock market prices", Sloan
School of Management Working Paper * 1584-84.
Merton, Robert C., 1973. "An intertemporal capital asset pricing model",
Econometrica, 41, 5 (Sept), 867—888.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1983. Arationalexpectationsp2roachto
macroeconomics, University of Chicago Press.

4_ _QLc2

Modigliani, Franco, 1980. The_Cofl
Modigliani, Andrew Abel (ed), Vols. I, II, and III, MIT Press.

1944. "Liquidity preference and the theory of interest and
money", Econometrica, 12,1 (Jan), 45-88.
,

1961. "Long—run implications of alternative fiscal policies and
the burden of the national debt", Economic Journal, 71, 4 (Dec), 730755.
,

,

1963. "The monetary mechanism and its interaction with real

phenomena", Review of Economics and Statistics, 45, 1 (Feb), 79—107.

1971. "Monetary policy and consumption linkages via interest
,
rate and wealth effects in the FMP model", Consumer Sjnding,d
MonetaryPolçy: The Linkages, Conference Series *5, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston.
,

1977. "The monetarist controversy, or should we forsake

stabilization policies?, American_Economic Review, 67, 1 (March), 1-19.

and Arlie Sterling, 1985. "Government debt, government spending
and private sector behavior: a comment", mimeo, Sloan School of
Management, M.I.T.
Mundell, Robert A., 1964. "Inflation, saving, and the real rate of
interest", Qrna1_q 01 LQ2Y 71, 3 (June), 280-283.

6

1964a. "Some subtleties in the interpretation of Keynesian
equilibrium", Weltwirtschaftl1chesArcJv,
,

J. Peter, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1983. "Toward a reconstruction
of Keynesian economics; expectations and constrained equilibria",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98 (Supplement), 199-228.
Neary,

Patinkin, Don, 1965. MonyInterestandpces 2nd ed., Harper and
Row.

Phelps, Edmund S. and John B. Taylor, 1977. "Stabilizing powers of

monetary policy under rational expectations', d2L2_llticai
Economy, 85, 1 (Feb), 163-190.

Policano, Andrew J., 1985. "The current state of macroeconomics; a view
from the textbooks", Journal of Monet
Ec omics 15, 3 (May), 389398.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1983. "The optimal degree of commitment to an
intermediate monetary target", mimeo, University of Wisconsin.
Rose, Andrew K., 1985.
"The autoregressivity paradox in macroeconomics:
implications for simultaneity, equilibrium, and the business cycle",
mimeo, MIT.

Rotemberg, Julio J., 1982. "Sticky prices in the United States",
Journal of Political Economy, 90, 6 (Dec), 1187—1121.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., 1985. "The dollar and the policy mix:1985", Brookings

ers on Economic ACtlyfly, 1, 117—186.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1958. "An exact consumption loan model with or
without the social contrivance of money", Journal of Political Econy,
66, 6 (Dec), 467—482.

1965.

"Proof that properly anticipated prices fluctuate
randomly", Industrial Management_Review, 6, 2 (Spring) 41-49.
,

Sargent, Thomas J., 1978.

"EstimatIon

of dynamic labor demand schedules

under rational expectations", Journal of Politica1_Qm, 86, 6 (Dec),
1009-1044.

and Neil Wallace, 1975. "'Rational expectations, the optimal
monetary instrument, and the optimal money supply rule", Journal of
Political Economy, 83, 2 (April), 241—254.

1981. "Some simple monetarist arithmetic", Federal Reserve
,
Bank of Minneapo1i_Qtery Review, 5 (Fall) 1-17

7

1983. 'A model of commodity money', Journal of Monetary

-,

Economics,

12, 1 (July), 163—188.

Seater, John J., 1985. "Does government debt matter? A review", Journal
of_Moneta!Economics, 16, 1 (July), 121-132.
Shapiro, Matthew D. , 1985. "Capital utilization and capital

accumulation: theory and evidence", Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper #
736.

Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, 1977. "Inflation and costs of price
adjustment", Review of Economic Studies, 44, 2 (June), 287—304.
Shiller, Robert J., 1981. "Do stock prices move too much to be justified
by subsequent changes in dividends?", American Economic Review, 71, 3
(June), 421-436.

Singleton, Kenneth J., 1980. "Expectations models of the term structure
and implied variance bounds", Journal_of PoliUcalEcony, 88, 6 (Dec),
1159—1176.
Solow, Robert M. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1968. "Output, employment and
wages in the short run', Quarterly Journai of Economics, 82, 537—560.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1984. "Theories of wage rigidity", NBER Working
Paper # 1442.
and Andrew Weiss, 1981. "Credit rationing in markets with

imperfect competition", American_Ecomic_ w, 71, 3 (June), 393—410.
Summers, Lawrence H., 1982. "The nonadjustment of nominal interest
rates: a study of the Fisher effect", in J. Tobin, ed, Macroeconomiç

pç_gties, Brookings Institution.
Summers, Lawrence H., 1985. "Reply to McCallum", forthcoming.
Taylor, John B., 1980. "Aggregate dynamics and staggered contracts",
88, 1 (Feb), 1-23.

Tinbergen, Jan, 1967. Economic Qolicy; principles and design, Rand
McNally.
Tirole, Jean, 1985. "Asset bubbles and overlapping generations: a
synthesis", forthcoming, Econometrica.
Tobin, James, 1961. "Money, capital, and other stores of value",
American_Economic_RevIew, 51, 2 (May), 26-37.

8
-,

1965.

'Money and economic growth", Econometrica, 33, 4 (Oct),

671-684.
,

1969. 'A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory",

Journal of Mone

Credit__and_Bank ig, 1, 1 (Feb), 15-29.

and Willem Buiter, 1980. "Fiscal and monetary policies, capital
formation, and economic activity", in G. von Furstenberg, ed, The
government and
Ball inger.

c!tal_formation,

Wallace, Neil, 1981. "A Modigliani—Miller theorem for open market
operations", American Economic Review, 71, 3 (June), 267—274.

