NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEITY IN HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS:
HIGH SCHOOL CURRICULUM, COLLEGE MAJOR, AND CAREERS
Joseph G. Altonji
Erica Blom
Costas Meghir
Working Paper 17985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17985

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012

Forthcoming at the Annual Review of Economics doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080511-110908.
We thank Sarah Amanda Levis for excellent research assistance and Peter Arcidiacono, Richard Murnane,
Robert Triest, Seth Zimmerman and participants in a conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
(September 2011) for helpful comments. Part of this research was conducted while Altonji was visiting
the LEAP Center and the Department of Economics at Harvard University. We also received research
support from Department of Economics, the Economic Growth Center, and the Cowles Foundation,
Yale University. We are solely responsible for errors and omissions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Joseph G. Altonji, Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneity in Human Capital Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and
Careers
Joseph G. Altonji, Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir
NBER Working Paper No. 17985
April 2012
JEL No. I21,J24
ABSTRACT
Motivated by the large differences in labor market outcomes across college majors, we survey the
literature on the demand for and return to high school and post-secondary education by field of study.
We combine elements from several papers to provide a dynamic model of education and occupation
choice that stresses the roles of specificity of human capital and uncertainty about preferences, ability,
education outcomes, and labor market returns. The model implies an important distinction between
the ex ante and ex post returns to education decisions. We also discuss some of the econometric difficulties
in estimating the causal effects of field of study on wages in the context of a sequential choice model
with learning. Finally, we review the empirical literature on choice of curriculum and the effects of
high school courses and college major on labor market outcomes.

Joseph G. Altonji
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
joseph.altonji@yale.edu
Erica Blom
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
erica.blom@yale.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17985

Costas Meghir
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
c.meghir@yale.edu

Contents
1 Introduction

3

2 Lifecycle decision making: a theoretical model and some empirical implications

4

2.1

2.2

2.3

Preliminaries and notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2.1.1

The state space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2.1.2

Updating beliefs about ability and preferences

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2.1.3

The human capital production function

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Labor market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

2.2.1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Education choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

2.3.1

Utility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

2.3.2

College education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

2.3.3

High school education

Work and occupation choices

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

2.4

Parental inuence and transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

2.5

Implications of the model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

2.5.1

Theoretical implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

2.5.2

The returns to education paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

2.5.3

Econometric implications

13

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 The eects of high school curriculum on educational attainment and wages
3.1

Conclusion about the eects of high school curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Empirical evidence on the determinants of college major
4.1

Trends in college major

4.2

Expected earnings

4.3

Preferences

4.4

Ability and preparation

15
19

20

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Returns to college major: empirical evidence

23

24

5.1

Estimation strategies in the existing literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

5.2

Possible alternative strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

5.3

Estimates of the return to major

26

5.4

Descriptive evidence from the ACS on college major choice and returns

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

5.5

College major and occupational choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

29

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Conclusion

30
2

1 Introduction
A huge literature studies educational attainment and the return to education, with the more recent work focussing

1 There is much less work on why indviduals choose dierent

on heterogeneity in the return.

types

of education or on

the career consequences of those choices. This is surprising, because the question of what kind of education should
be provided receives an enormous amount of attention in policy discussion and is a decision that every student must
make, particularly at the post-secondary level. Periodically, there are calls for reform of the high school curriculum,
often in response to concern about the readiness of students for the work force. An important example is

at Risk

A Nation

(Gardner (1983)). As we discuss below, the report advocated a focus on the new basics, with an increase

in the number of courses in key academic subjects such as math and science. But despite the perennial debate about
what students should study and many calls for better math and science instruction, there is surprisingly little hard

2

evidence about the labor market consequences of specic high school courses.

At the college level, dierences by eld of study have received much less attention in the academic literature than
the average return to post-secondary education. This is true even though the dierence in returns across college majors
rivals the college wage premium. For example, using the data from the 2009 American Community Survey (ACS),
we nd that after adjusting for basic demographics, potential labor market experience, and graduate education, the
gap in log wages rates between male electrical engineering and male general education majors is 0.561 (0.016). This is
nearly as large as the 0.577 (0.003) dierence between college graduates and high school graduates. Furthermore, the
standard deviation of the return to various majors is 0.177 for menabout double the typical estimate of the value
of the year of school. The President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (2012) is the latest in a series
of policy reports calling for a major increase in college graduates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
However, the extent to which these dierences reect unobserved dierences in high school preparation and worker
ability or represent compensating dierentials for nonpecuniary aspects of jobs is not well-established. Understanding
these dierences is important for understanding the role of education in economic success and even for providing advice
to students who are deciding on a course of study.
In keeping with the treatment of schooling as homogeneous, most of the literature in labor economics on career
earnings focuses on the return to general experience, job tenure, and job mobility. However, there is an important and
growing literature concerned with the implications of occupation-specic human capital for wages and mobility. Field
of education conditions occupational paths.
In this paper, we provide a survey of the theoretical and empirical literature on the heterogeneous nature of
education and its link to particular occupation paths.

First, we combine elements from several papers to provide

a theoretical model of education choice, occupation choice, and wages.

The model has ve key features.

First,

preferences, innate ability, and the initial vector of skills and knowledge early in high school shape the feasibility and
the desirability of particular education programs.

Second, individuals only learn gradually about their preferences

1 See Card (1999) and Meghir and Rivkin (2011) for surveys.
2 A recent example is President's Council of Advisors on Science

and Technology (2011).

3

and ability and are uncertain about wages. Third, the type of education program shapes what one learns during a
schooling period. Fourth, education programs and occupations have dierent skill and knowledge prerequisites that
inuence learning and job performance. Switching elds in response to new information about ability, preferences, and
returns is costly. Finally, knowledge accumulation is stochasticstudents cannot simply decide that they are going
to complete a program of study. We draw out a number of implications of the model that have been discussed in the
literature, including an important distinction between ex ante and ex post return to an education choice. We also use
the model to discuss some of the econometric diculties that sequential choice in the presence of learning poses for
estimating the causal eect of eld of study on wages.
We then turn to the empirical literature on the demand for and return to particular types of education, beginning
with high school curriculum and then turning to college major. We place particular emphasis on the determinants of

3 We supplement the existing

college major and the eects of high school courses and college major on wage rates.

literature with an analysis of the returns to college major using the ACS, which is large enough for us to consider
narrowly dened majors and 5-digit occupation categories.

Due to space constraints, we focus primarily on the

literature for the US.
We conclude with some theoretical and econometric implications of the model as well as suggestions for future
research.

2 Lifecycle decision making: a theoretical model and some empirical implications
The aim of the following section is to describe a theoretical model that brings together the educational choices with the
labor market careers that follow them. This sets the scene for interpreting the review of empirical results that follows.
From an econometric point of view this unied framework can help identify the assumptions required for empirical
analysis. As a setup, this model is not new and brings together elements of Altonji (1993) and Arcidiacono (2004),
who emphasize the dynamic decisions about type of education, as well as Keane and Wolpin (1997), Eckstein and
Wolpin (1989) and Violante, Gallipoli, and Meghir (2005), who also include risk considerations and examine the role
of parents. We conclude this section with a discussion of the implications of the model and the important empirical
challenges that this eld faces. Almost all of the empirical literature we describe is either based on OLS regression or
on instrumental variables strategies and focuses on specic aspects of educational choice. This work is very important,
and we expect that going forward IV style approaches will continue to play a dominant role given the diculties with
structural modelling. However, the model implies that when agents are making a sequence of choices among multiple
education options, the use of single equation methods to estimate ex ante and ex post returns to education choices
requires strong assumptions. These methods also lead to incomplete measures of such returns, since costs are ignored.
Readers who are primarily interested in the empirical work may wish to skip to Section 3 on a rst pass through the

3 We

discuss the literature on the choice of high school curriculum in the supplementary appendix.

4

paper.
We now describe the sequence of decision phases for the individual. We start from the end point where individuals
make labor market decisions; we then go back through the education choices and end up at the beginning, when
parents can make transfers and inuence their children's decisions.

2.1 Preliminaries and notation
2.1.1 The state space
We dene the state space, i.e. the set of relevant variables describing the history of events and choices made by the
individual up until the current point, by

Ω.

This includes past grades and educational attainment, and possibly past

choices to the extent they have persistent eects on behavior either directly or through expectations.

Ω will track labor market history,

assets. Once in the labor market,
help determine the vector of skills

K,

Ωt

also includes

including wages and the occupational choices that

which drives achievement in school and wages. We use the subscript

ς

to denote

educational stages, i.e. high school, rst part of college and second part of college. When the individual enters the
labor market, we switch to a subscript

τ

and education choices made in period
state space is updated by
period.

t

which denotes years in the labor market. In general we denote labor market

by

xτ ,

and other information, including grades, wages, assets, etc., by

Ωτ = {Ωτ −1 , xτ −1 , gτ −1 },

4 The initial information

ΩI

where

τ =ς

during education and

τ =t

gτ .

The

during the labor market

will contain a vector of background variables, including parental characteristics,

grades, and childhood developmental characteristics. In practice, much of the state space will be unobserved by the
researcher.

When implementing such a model empirically, the relevant information set would have to be suitably

restricted so as to make the computational problem feasible. However, here we ignore such (important) specication
issues.

2.1.2 Updating beliefs about ability and preferences
It is useful to think of individuals as possessing ability

a

(possibly multidimensional) and preferences

unknown to the individual and are a source of uncertainty.

θ.

Both are

The individual learns about ability and preferences

through environment and through experience, such as trying a set of courses or switching occupations in the labor
market. This is helpful in explaining switches between elds of study and between occupations, as individuals learn
what they can and cannot do well and what they like. We start with prior beliefs summarized by the distribution

F (a, θ).

These are updated according to Bayes' rule, i.e.:

F τ (a, θ|Ωτ ) =∝ G(Ωτ |a, θ)F τ −1 (a, θ|Ωτ −1 )
4 We

make the notational distinction between the labor market periods (t) and the educational periods to emphasize that they last a

dierent amount of time. In the labor market we will think of periods as one year (or perhaps a quarter). In education we will have a high
school period, a rst period of college, and a second period of college, each lasting dierent amounts of time. It also helps distinguish the
nature of the state space or choice variables.

5

τ

where

information set
set is

G(·)

denotes stage (such as high school, college, or labor market period).

ΩI ,

and

Ωτ .

At the initial stage, which is the end of statutory schooling,

F I (a, θ|ΩI ) = F (a, θ),

is the likelihood function of the

τ − 1 is taken to be I ,

the information

i.e. the prior distribution.

In what follows, whenever ability and preferences need to be integrated out, it is done so based on the updated
distribution.

2.1.3 The human capital production function
Productivity in the labor market and hence wages will be driven by a vector of human capital indices (skills)

r
{Kit
}, r = 1, ..., R,

where

t

measures time from entry in the labor market and

r

Kit =

indexes skills.

Human capital evolves as

Kit = f (Kit−1 , Dit , ai , it |Ωs )
where

Ωs

(1)

contains the completed educational history of the individual, including choices of subjects, elds of study and

majors, as well as grades. This emphasizes that accumulated skills may depend on the particular type of education
followed. Skills are produced by the set of past skills and by occupational experience reected in
vector of experiences in the

L

possible occupations, including unemployment. Note that skills are not equivalent to

occupations. However, the dependence on
entry in the labor market,
learns.

it

Dit

l
Dit = {Dit
}, an L × 1

Dit

reects the fact that what one learns depends on the occupation. Before

is empty and skills are produced through education; eld of study inuences what one

is an idiosyncratic error term that reects the fact that knowledge accumulation is stochastic; it may depend,

for example, on unforeseen illness or the quality of instructors.

f

is increasing in

Kit

and ability, allowing possibly for

self-productivity and ability-skill complementarity. Finally, the separate dependence on educational history reects
the fact that the level and type of education may lead to a permanently dierent type of human capital which is not
perfectly substitutable with other types and which commands its own market price. For example, medical training
allows one to become a surgeon, a skill not obviously substitutable with skills of individuals of a dierent educational
background.

2.2 Labor market
The labor market is competitive and includes

L

dierent occupations, each paying an occupation-specic wage

per eciency unit of human capital. Human capital required for the sector is a combination of the

R

skills

Kit .

αlt

It is

dened by the occupational production function

Ql = Ql (K, a)

Thus the set of skills an individual

i

(2)

accumulates denes the eciency units she can supply in each of the sectors

l.

Assuming symmetric information between workers and employers, human capital is priced based on expectations of

6

productivity from the distribution of belief about ability

F t (a, θ|Ωt ).

The resulting individual wage is

ln wilt = αlt + lnEF t (Qlit ) + uilt

where

uilt

is an idiosyncratic shock to eciency units for the

lth

(3)

occupation.

In practice, one would have to nd

ways to restrict and rene the information set. However, this implies that factors aecting learning from individual
experience will determine wages despite the fact that they have no inuence on productivity itself. For example, math
grades in high school may aect lawyers' wages.

(See Farber and Gibbons (1996), Altonji and Pierret (2001) and

Lange (2007) for work on employer learning about productivity with only general education.) Wage equations may
dier for men and women, although this has not been made explicit in the above equation.
One traditional way of parametrizing the above wage equation is as follows:

2
ln wislt = α0lt + α1sl âit + α2sl Xit + α3sl Xit
+ α4sl Titl + vilt

where

Titl

notation

is person

âit

i's

current tenure in occupation

l

to denote the expectation about ability at

and

t.

Xit

is total labor market experience.

The subscript

s

We use the loose

indicates that the coecients of the wage

equation depend on education history including the sequence of eld choices and highest degree. Finally,

vislt

is an

K

using

idiosyncratic stochastic shock. This equation is an approximation obtained by substituting out for the vector

(1), (2), and (3). Tenure in other occupations would also belong in the equation to the extent that productivity in
occupation

l

depends on skills learned in other occupations. Very recently, a few theoretical and empirical papers have

5

appeared that formalize occupations as sets of tasks with skill requirements that overlap.

2.2.1 Work and occupation choices
We now formally describe the lifecycle decision process relating to education and the labor market. It is presentationally
and analytically more convenient to start from the end and move backwards, the order in which one would actually
solve such a model.
Following the completion of education the individual enters the labor market and chooses between a number of
dierent occupations, including inactivity or home production. The labor market choices are repeated in each period
and the value functions are indexed by

t,

which denotes length of time in the labor market and emphasizes that this

is a non-stationary lifecycle problem. The terminal condition is left unspecied here.
An individual possesses a utility function, which expresses her preference over consumption and occupations. This
is denoted by

ul (ct |ξtl , a, θ), where ct

is consumption and the index

occupation is determined by a set of parameters
As described above, the vector

5 See,

θ

l denotes occupation.

θ, by ability and by a random shock ξ l

may not be known.

The preference for a particular

(with

l=B

for unemployment).

Beliefs about it depend on past experiences, and indeed the

for example, Lazear (2009), Gathmann and Schönberg (2010), Poleatev and Robinson (2008) and Yamaguchi (2012).

7

6

updating of beliefs about preferences or ability may be an important source of switching occupations.
Now dene the value of working in occupation

VtB (Ωt , ξtB ).

as

Vtl (Ωt , ξtl ), l = 1, ..., L − 1

and the value of unemployment as

We have that

Vtl (Ωt , ξtl ) = max

c,At+1

where

l


L
Ea,θ ul (ct |ξtl , a, θ) + βEt [Vt+1
(Ωlt+1 , ξt+1 )]

At+1 are assets in period t+1, included in Ωlt+1 (Ωt includes At respectively).

The superscript

l on Ωlt+1 indicates

that each occupational choice will lead to a dierent point in the state space because of dierent labor market earnings
(wilt ), dierent savings behavior (At+1 ) and most pertinently dierent labor market experiences. Assets evolve based
on the usual dierence equation

At+1 = (1 + r)(At − ct + wilt )
The expectations operator
dened, except that

wilt

Et

is taken with respect to information in period t. The value of unemployment is similarly

is replaced by unemployment benets.

The optimized value of the labor market in period

VtL (Ωt , ξt ) = max



l

This value depends on the entire set of shocks
periods, including shocks to wages.

t

is then given by


Vtl (Ωt , ξtl ), l = 1, ..., L − 1 , VtB (Ωt , ξtB )


ξt = ξtl , ..., ξtL−1 , ξtB

as well as on other factors unknown in earlier

Thus from the perspective of earlier periods, these are sources of uncertainty,

which will matter given risk aversion and incomplete insurance markets.
Important factors in practice are frictions and occupational shocks, such as exogenous job destruction.

From a

substantive point of view these can be important particularly if the extent of frictions dier from sector to sector. Given
that individuals are risk averse, dierent risk characteristics may aect occupational and by implication educational
choice. As we have set it up here there is still occupational risk, which is reected in dierent volatility of wages.

2.3 Education choices
2.3.1 Utility
Let

j

denote the eld of study followed by the individual and

ς = H, C1 , C2

college, second period of college). The ow utility of schooling choice
preference shock denoted

ζςj

and on consumption.

(j, ς),

(j, ς)

depends on eort exerted, on a stochastic

It also depends on the individual's ability

that are known up to some person-specic vector of parameters
pursuing

denote the level (high school, rst period of

θ.

including the cost of eort. We denote this utility by

ujς (cς |ζςj , a, θ),

which does not dier notationally

u

and

Papageorgiou (2010) for a concise overview of the literature on learning and occupational mobility.

8

and on preferences

Ability and preferences inuence net enjoyment of

from the utility conditional on occupation. We often leave the school level subscript on

6 See

a

c

implicit. Since ability

and preferences are not known, they need to be integrated out with respect to the current distribution of beliefs and
preferences

F ς (a, θ|Ωjς )

dened earlier.

2.3.2 College education
We split college into two decision periods:
between a number of general courses;

C2

C1

represents the rst period of college, wherein a student can choose

is a period of specialization wherein the student chooses major.

ΩC1

is the

resulting information and knowledge set at the end of the rst period of college, including the mix of all past courses.
Grade progression is contingent on meeting certain threshold requirements, i.e.
major

(gC1 > C1∗ ),

in order to continue in

j .7

In the second period of college, a major is chosen out of
value of a specic major

j

JC2

possible options, subject to having qualied. The

is given by

VCj2 (ΩC1 , ζCj 2 ) =
n
o
L
maxc,AC2 Ea,θ uj (c|ζCj 2 , a, θ) + β C2 EC2 [Vt=0
(Ωjt=0 , ξt=0 )]
where

ζj

are utility shocks for major

j

and

ξ is the relevant set of shocks for the labor market that will follow completion

of the major. The superscript on the discount factor here and below reects the fact that the education periods last
longer than a year. Following major choice
where, like before, the superscript

j

j

and the second period of college, the updated information set is

denotes that the updating follows choice

graduation requirements for a degree in

j . AC1

j. Ωjt=0

reects whether the student met

are assets at the point of decision and

second period in college and are contained within the set

Ωjt=0 .

Ωjt=0

AC2

are assets at the end of the

They are related by

AC2 = (1 + rC1 )(AC1 − c2 − FCj 2 )

where

FCj 2

represents costs of education for major

j.

Note that dierential costs of education by subject matter would

be very useful empirically for the purposes of identication. The function
the labor market (which starts at

t = 0)

following major choice

j,

E[Vt=0 (Ωjt=0 , ξt=0 )]

is the expected value in

as dened above. The dependence on time

t

reects

the non-stationary nature of the life-cycle problem.
Continuing with a major requires one to have satised the grade requirement
student has to choose one of

JC2

gC1 > C1∗ .

Thus the value when the

majors is

VC2 (ΩC1 , ζC2 , ξC2 , gC1 ) =

maxj,L
7 The

nh
i
o
L
(ΩC1 , ξC2 )
VCj2 (ΩC1 , ζCj 2 ) × 1(gC1 > C1∗ ), j = 1, ..., JC2 , Vt=0

thresholds could depend on major, but we avoid further complicating the notation.

9

with

gC1

representing the grades obtained in the rst period and

C1∗

8 Grades

being the grade threshold for promotion.

are a random variable whose distribution depends on individual characteristics and eort, which we leave implicit.
The choice includes the possibility of starting o in the labor market with information set

Ωt=0 = ΩC1 ,

i.e. with the

educational history up until that moment, but without completing a major. This is reected in the value function

L
Vt=0
(ΩC1 , ξt ).
Upon nishing high school the individual chooses between college (if she qualies) and the labor market. The information set at the beginning of that stage (C1 ) is summarized by

ΩH .

Choosing college involves choosing a particular

curriculum (for example humanities versus social science versus natural sciences). This problem is presentationally
similar to the one of choosing major. The value of each of the

JC1

curriculum options is

n
o
VCj1 (ΩH , ζCj 1 ) = maxc,AC1 Ea,θ uj (c|ζCj 1 , a, θ) + β C1 EC1 [VC2 (ΩjC1 , ζC2 , ξC2 , gC1 )]
where

ΩjC1

is the state space resulting from the

j th

choice. Assets

AC1

are given by

AC1 = (1 + rH )(AH − c − FCj 1 )

where

AH

are assets following high school completion and

FCj 1

are the monetary costs of following curriculum

j

in the

rst period of college. The value at the start of the college choice period is

VC1 (ΩH , ζC1 , ξC1 , gH ) =
nh
i
o
L
maxj,L VCj1 (ΩH , ζCj 1 ) × 1(gH > H ∗ ), j = 1, ..., JC1 , Vt=0
(ΩH , ξC1 )
where

gH > H ∗

signies that the high school grades are sucient to qualify for college.

2.3.3 High school education
The earliest choice the individual has to make is to attend high school and follow a particular curriculum
The value of choosing

j

j, j = 1, ..., JH .

is

j
j
VHj (ΩI , ζH
) = maxc,AH {Ea,θ uj (c|ζH
, a, θ) + β H EH [VC1 (ΩjH , ζC1 , ξC1 , gH )]},

where

ΩI

represents the initial information set, including parental background and earlier school achievement, and

represents the updated information set given the curriculum choice

j .9

ΩjH

High school is funded by parents. Parents also

make promises of transfers that will depend on whether the child attends high school or not. These are included in

8 The
9 The

grades belong to the state space

ΩC1 ,

but we make the dependence of

VC2

on

gC1

explicit for clarity.

choice that a student faces may vary across schools. School quality would inuence the function as well, but we leave this implicit.

10

ΩI ,

while at the end of this stage assets (included in

ΩH )

are given by

AH = (1 + r)(AU + w0H − c)(1 − HS) + (1 + rH )(T − c)HS

where

AU

are parental transfers if the child enters the labor market, while

school (HS

= 1).

T

are transfers if the child completes high

Any costs of school are implicit in the amount transfered. The dierent interest rates reect the

dierences in the amounts of time for the two activities, with work lasting one year (or quarter). The resulting choice
faced by the individual is between one of the possible elds of study

j

and entering the labor market. She earns

w0H

if she chooses to work at that point. The value in anticipation of this choice is

VH (ΩI , ζH , ξH ) = maxj,L

nh

i
o
j
L
VHj (ΩI , ζH
), j = 1, ..., JR , Vt=0
(ΩI , ξH )

The notation on the state space makes explicit that the initial position may dier depending on the parental transfers,
to which we now turn.

2.4 Parental inuence and transfers
The starting point of decision is at the end of compulsory schooling. We suppose that while the child makes her own
decisions, they can be inuenced by parents. Part of the inuence is through genetic and cultural factors that are not
the subject of conscious choices by the parent. Part is through decisions that inuence the health, educational and

10 These are all implicit in the original information set

broader social experiences of the child prior to high school.

ΩI ,

and although some may be the result of earlier choices, we do not have much to say about them here. However, one
important source of inuence is nance: parents choose how much to transfer to their children, either unconditionally
or conditional on desired actions by the children (such as attending high school or college). This is a crucial source
of funding for children who may not have other access to nancial sources. From a policy perspective, understanding
such transfers lies at the heart of understanding the extent to which outcomes can be inuenced through government
transfers.
Parents possess assets

AP .

They need to choose how much to transfer to their children, given that they will fund

high school and given that they may care about the child's welfare as well as whether the child completes high school.
We denote by

AU

transfers oered if the child drops out of school and by

T

transfers given if the child continues

schooling. Given these, parents solve the problem

max E0 [V P (AP − T × HS − AU × (1 − HS), HS) + κ[VH (ΩI , ζH , ξH )]]

T,AU

subject to

n
o
j
L
HS = 1 maxj [VHj (ΩI , ζH
), j = 1, ..., JR ] > Vt=0
(ΩI , ξH ) , AU ≥ 0, T ≥ 0
10 Surveys

of this literature include Currie (2009), Todd and Wolpin (2003), Heckman and Masterov (2007), and many others.

11

VP

where
of

ΩI

is the parents' value function,

HS

is a binary indicator for high school attendance, and

AU

and

T

are part

aecting the child's education decision. Note that we assume that transfers cannot be negative; for example, the

parents cannot ne the children to induce them to attend high school. Finally,
to child utility.

In a standard altruistic model, transfers will increase with

children, who can achieve higher value

V H.

AP

κ

is the weight attached by parents

but will be lower for higher ability

This is a more complicated model because of the parents' preference for

their child to attend high school and their resulting willingness to use transfers to distort the child's choice towards
education. The key point here is the link that this model creates between parental wealth and education in a world
with liquidity constraints: wealthier parents will make more transfers enabling childen to study, whereas equal ability
children from lower income backgrounds may be unable to do so if they cannot borrow. Conditional parental tranfers
can easily be incorporated into the college stage of the model.

2.5 Implications of the model
2.5.1 Theoretical implications
11 First,

The model implies an interesting interplay between preferences and the purely nancial return to education.
preferences and innate ability aect the ex ante
a particular major

nancial return to completing high school, starting college, and choosing

even if they play no role in the wage equation.

This is because they inuence the likelihood that

an an individual will ultimately choose to complete a program of study and receive the ex post payo associated with
it.

Second, persons with preferences for elds with high labor market payos, such as engineering, have higher ex

ante and ex post returns to high school completion and college attendance. This is true even though preferences do
not directly enter the wage equation. These two results imply, for example, that parental education and gender could
aect the nancial return to education even if they have no eect on wage rates. Altonji (1993) demonstrates this
empirically.
Sequential decision making under uncertainty about preferences, ability, and knowledge accumulation opens up
some interesting possibilities concerning the eects of wages on education outcomes. One example is that an increase
in expected wages of college graduates holding the wages of high school graduates and college dropouts constant boosts
the high school graduation rate and increases college enrollment but has an ambiguous eect on the college dropout
rate. To see this, note rst that the college wage increase will increase the ex ante return to starting college, holding
constant human capital at the end of high school and beliefs about preferences and ability. On one hand, this will
induce some individuals with relatively low probabilities of completing college to start, raising the college dropout
rate. On the other hand, the higher payos will induce some individuals who would otherwise have dropped out after
the rst period of college to continue. A second example is that an increase in the payo to a degree in one eld,
say engineering, holding the ex post payo in other elds constant, can lead to an increase in the graduation rate in
the other elds. The reason is that the increase in the engineering wage raises the ex ante return to starting college.

11 See

Altonji (1993) for proofs of the claims in this section using a stripped-down version of the model sketched in this section.

12

Consequently, this higher wage will increase the number of persons who spend the rst period of college in a program
geared toward completing a degree in engineering by more than it reduces the number who start college in a program
geared toward a humanities degree. If enough of the college entrants who start in engineering ultimately conclude that
they prefer the humanities major and the occupations it leads to, and/or enough conclude that they are much more
likely to be able to meet graduation requirements in humanities than in engineering, then the ow into humanities
following the rst period of college could be enough to oset the smaller number who start college with the intention
of pursuing a humanities degree.
The role of risk aversion brings forward two important empirical issues.

First, individuals will also care about

uncertainty in ability and the eect of this uncertainty on alternative degrees or courses of study, possibly avoiding
ones where ability might matter a lot.

In general we will see a risk-return trade-o induced not only from the

macroeconomic environment and the possible volatility of returns but also because of uncertainty in individual ability
and microeconomic uncertainty in wages within each sector.

2.5.2 The returns to education paths
The model oers a systematic way of dening and measuring returns to education. Thus, for example, the returns to
a major

j

relative to dropping out of college and working is dened as

R(ΩC1 , ζCj 2 , ξC2 )

L
VCj2 (ΩC1 , ζCj 2 ) − Vt=0
(ΩC1 , ξC2 )
=
L
Vt=0 (ΩC1 , ξC2 )

This depends on individual heterogeneity, known to the individual but not to the econometrician. The estimated return
will be an average of this function and will depend on individual history. Thus, we can document how the returns
dier across individuals with dierent choice history of courses, grades, etc. The ex ante heterogeneity of returns is
driven partly by these dierences in early experiences and partly by the way that they aect individual perceptions and
expectations of their ability and preferences. Moreover, they take fully into account the costs of education, including
opportunity cost and eort involved in alternative course choices.

2.5.3 Econometric implications
The model we presented also brings to the fore econometric issues that will appear when reviewing the literature.
First, wages across dierent levels of education and elds of study are best described by a Roy-type model, implying
heterogeneous returns to education.
Heckman and Robb (1985)).

In other words this is a switching regressions framework (see Quandt (1972),

Ex post the selection into any of the sectors will be endogenous to the extent that

preferences about education are correlated with unobserved determinants of wages (lazy at school and lazy at work
for example) and to the extent that information about future wages is known by the individual at the time education
choices are made, but is unobserved by the econometrician. For example, if an individual knows they will be more
productive working in an oce rather than outdoors, this will inuence the sequence of education choices and imply

13

that education choice is endogenous for wages, even if education and labor market ability are themselves independent.
This brings us to the dicult question of identiability and identication in practice. The model highlights the
costs of education as the main source of exogenous variation: a low-cost college can trigger a chain of decisions that
leads to college completion, where this may have not happened if fees were higher. Thus if there is variation in the costs
of obtaining alternative combinations of education, and if such variation can be taken as exogenous (i.e. not correlated
with quality of education or with the characteristics of the individuals having access to such fees), this can be an
important source of exogenous variation. However, as shown in Heckman and Navarro (2007) and further discussed in
Meghir and Rivkin (2010), this may be far from enough to identify such dynamic models non-parametrically. Thus, in
practice, identication will be in part driven by such exogneous variables and by restrictions on the functional forms
of the distribution of unobservables.
The dynamic model presents a clear approach to estimating both an education choice model and the returns to
education, as well as the specic properties of wages.
is transparency regarding the assumptions made.

Any source of endogeneity is taken into account and there

However, it is a complicated model; to include all the detail we

have suggested may be almost impossible in practice. Thus, a dynamic approach will have to impose a number of
simplications and will rely on functional form restrictions.

The complexity of such models and the detailed data

requirements can be a serious impediment to their use.
Meanwhile, most of the literature we review has taken the simpler approach of estimating relatively simple wage
equations based on instrumental variables. The cost is the limited external validity and alternative assumptions that
in a sense take the place of the ones required by the ful dynamic structural model: Imbens and Angrist (1994) have
shown that IV will identify the Local Average Treatment Eect parameter (LATE), which is the eect of the binary
treatment on those who were induced into treatment (college in our example) by the variation in the value of the
instrument. If the instrument (say reform assignment) is independent of all the unobservables, such is the case when
it is randomized, then LATE identies the eect of those who switched into treatment as a result of the reform under
the key additional assumption that no one is induced out of treatment as a result of the policy (monotonicity). In this
case the theoretical framework can be suggestive of whether monotonicity is valid.
With many dierent treatments, as would arise in our context of multiple levels of education and curriculum
choices, it is harder to interpret instrumental variables, even if we had enough instruments. This of course does not
mean that the dynamic model is necessarily our only alternative. Consider, for example, the wage equation, and take
expectations conditional on a set of instruments that have been randomized (Z ) and on educational history denoted
by

S.

Assume that the dimension

l

indexes the education path. (We will ignore for this example the labor market

history as well as time in the labor market.)



E ln wil |Si = Sil , Z = zi = αlt + βsl Sil + E(uil |Si = Sil , Z = zi )

This is a standard Roy model and its identiability has been studied by Heckman and Honore (1990).

14

βsl

is the

average ex post return to education path
assumption required, i.e. that
the education choices

Sil .

Sil .

In terms of our notation the issue is whether the control function

E(uil |Si = Sil , Z = zi ) = E(uil |Si = Sil )

and whether it has independent variation from

The form of this function is driven by the dynamic selection process described earlier in the

theoretical model. Constructing this control function will require a model for

S.

In general this is not going to be a

single index model, because of the sequential nature of the choices; hence the need for many instruments. For example,
Cameron and Heckman (1998) have shown that education choice can be represented by an ordered choice model
(which hugely simplies the identication and estimation problem) when there is just one unobserved factor driving
educational decisions. When we depart from this very framework, we will need more than one index to represent the
choice of

Si

as well as many instruments. This is an issue of both sucient amounts of exogenous variation and the

correct structure. In interpreting the results of the existing empirical literature, we need to remember that important
identication questions remain both when implementing the full dynamic structure and when estimating a simpler
version of the model. But given the complexity and pitfalls of estimation based on dynamic structural models, we
expect careful studies using IV strategies or OLS with rich controls to continue to play a critical role in the literature
going forward.

3 The eects of high school curriculum on educational attainment and
wages
As we noted in the introduction, there is surprisingly little hard evidence about the causal eects of specic high

12 This is partly due to data limitations, but

school courses on educational attainment and labor market outcomes.

mostly due to the fact that student course selection is not random given the available options, as is clear from the
model in Section 2. Furthermore, student curriculum choices are shaped by school requirements, tracking policy, and
guidance, and these reect to some extent the qualications and interests of the student body. In the supplemental
appendix, we provide a brief discussion of trends in course taking, socieconomic correlates of course taking and role
of graduation requirements, but we found little model-based curriculum choice.

The complexity of the subject is

undoubtedly part of the reason why. Even with excellent data, identifying the causal eects of high school courses on
educational attainment, choice of college major and occupation, and wage rates is a dicult task.
In this section we review the limited evidence on the eects of high school curriculum. We emphasize wage eects
but also touch upon educational attainment and choice of major. We discuss the approaches to estimation that are
used and briey summarize the results. None of the studies we reviewed model the endogeneity of curriculum choice
by allowing for dynamics.

The implication is a lack of clarity of the underlying determinants of both wages and

educational choice, as we discussed in Section 2. The existing empirical studies estimate equations of the form

Si = Ci Gs + Xi Bs + Ci gsi + esi
12 Due

to space constraints, we do not discuss evidence on the eects of curriculum on test scores.

15

(4)

for educational attainment

S

and

ln W agei = Ci Gw + Xi Bw + ρSi + Ci gwi + ewi
for wages where here

Ci

denotes high school curriculum,

are unobserved random intercepts, and

gsi

and

gwi

Xi

(5)

denotes background and other characteristics,

Ci

are unobserved random coecients.

ewi

and

esi

is typically a count of the

number of year-long courses taken in various subjects. It is likely to be correlated with the composite error terms in

Gs

the equations, which will lead to bias in OLS estimates of

and

Gw .

Studies dier in a number of ways including in

the assumed exogenous source of variation for the curriculum, in whether or not all courses are examined at the same
time rather than one by one or in subsets, in whether courses in a given subject area are dierentiated by level, and
in whether the analysis is conditional on high school graduation.
An important issue is whether one should control for post-secondary education
aects the interpretation of the coecient on

C.

S

in the wage equation. Doing so

The entire history and type of educational attainment will aect

wages to the extent that each path leads to a dierent set of skills. As specied in (5),
courses on

lnW age

Gw

is the average eect of

holding years of post secondary education constant. For example, high school math and science

courses may inuence the types of jobs obtained by students who enter the workforce after high school or facilitate
completion of a BS in engineering as opposed to a lower-paying college major. Controlling for post-secondary education
in some fashion makes sense because post-secondary schooling is costly. However, if the return
rate, then part of the return to
investment in

S.

Cih

is through facilitating protable investments in

Altonji (1995) reports a set of estimates based on including

S

S.

ρ

addresses the fact that

S

exceeds the interest

It raises the option value of

in the wage equation with

which he assumes is the real discount rate. Most studies report estimates with and without
estimate

ρ

ρ set to 0.04,

S. None of the papers that

is endogenous in (5).

We now to turn to the studies. Altonji (1995) is the rst comprehensive study of the eects of curriculum on post-

13 He uses data from the National Longitudinal Study of 1972 (NLS72),

secondary educational attainment and wages.

which follows samples of 12th grade students from a large number of high schools. His specication of (4) and (5)
includes counts of courses in eight subject areas: math, science, English, social studies, foreign languages, commercial
studies, industrial arts and ne arts. His main identication strategy uses the substantial amount of variation across
high schools in the average value
If the variation in

Ch

Ch

of

Ci

as an instrumental variable for

Ci ,

where

h

is the high school

i

14

attends.

reects high school or school district policies that are unrelated to the distribution of aptitude,

ability, and prior preparation of the student body, then use of high school averages as excluded instruments would
yield consistent estimates of the average treatment eect of an extra semester of math, science, etc.

But casual

observation, as well as the evidence from the NLS72 and other similar data sets, indicates that variation across schools
in the quantity of academic courses is positively related to both the level and quality of the courses and to the quality

13 Rumberger and Daymont (1984) is
14 For example, Table 1 of his paper

a noteworthy early study of the eects of curriculum on wages shortly after high school.
reports that cross-school variation accounts for 25.9%, 26.9% and 26.4% of the variation across

students in science, foreign language, and math, respectively.

16

of the students.

These associations would imply a positive bias in

Gw

and

Gs ,

because course quality and level is

not accounted for and the controls for family background, primary school preparation, and high school quality are
imperfect.
Altonji's IV estimates indicate that the eects of additional courses in academic subjects are small. Even when
controls for family background and ability are excluded, the combined eect of an extra year of science, math, foreign
language, English, and social studies is only 0.3 percentfar less than the value of a year of high school. The combined
eect of an extra year of science, math, foreign language is only 0.017 (0.012) when family background controls for the
student and the school are included. The point estimate for math is actually negative, -0.007 (0.015), although one
cannot rule out a substantial positive eect given the standard error. The IV estimates indicate that students who do
not go to college benet from vocational courses.
Altonji also reports OLS estimates with family background controls.

These are somewhat larger than the IV

estimates, but nevertheless also suggest that the value of additional courses is too small to account for the value of a

15 The conclusion is not very sensitive to how post-secondary education is treated, in part because

year of high school.

the courses have only have a modest eect on post-secondary education. Altonji's conclusion is not that courses have
little eect, but rather that the results, which are not easy to dismiss with an appeal to unobserved heterogeneity,
pose a challenge for researchers. He raises the possibility that the estimates for particular courses are aected by the
interaction of biases in the coecients on the curriculum variables and/or the control variables.
Levine and Zimmerman (1995) use a framework and methods similar to Altonji's. However, they use dierent data
sets (NLSY79 and High School and Beyond (HS&B)), focus on math and science classes, stress dierences by gender,
and look at a broader set of outcomes. They rely primarily upon OLS because their estimates using cross high school
variation in course taking are noisy.

Controlling for post-secondary education, their OLS estimates suggest that a

year of math raises the wage by between 0.028 and 0.056 log points for men and about 0.044 for women. The point
estimates vary within education group and are largest for female college graduates. The estimates of the eects of
science are mixed in sign and not statistically signicant.
Levine and Zimmerman nd that both math and science courses boost educational attainment. There is evidence
that additional math and science courses increase the probability of choosing a technical college major. This evidence
relates directly to the question of how the type of education one chooses at the high school level conditions the optimal
choice of education and occupation later. Additional math and science courses move women toward jobs that involve
more mathematical reasoning, although the evidence is stronger in HS&B than in NLSY79.
As the authors emphasize, the OLS estimates may be biased upward by selection in course-taking and the other
issues discussed in more detail in Altonji (1995).

Nevertheless, the ndings of the positive eect of math and the

evidence pointing to an eect of math and science on the probability that the individual majors in a technical eld
are interesting.

15 This

is true even through the coecients of separate OLS regressions relating the log wage to a year of science, foreign language, and

math with no controls are very large: 0.054, 0.040, and 0.072, respectively.

17

Rose and Betts (2004) use the 1982 senior cohort from HS&B to provide a more nuanced study of the return to high
school math. Their primary dependent variable is log earnings in 1991. They control for demographic characteristics
and family background variables in most of their analysis, include high school dropouts, and control for highest degree.
Their main innovation is to take advantage of detailed transcript information and dierentiate math courses by level
vocational math, pre-algebra, algebra/geometry, intermediate algebra, advanced algebra, and calculus. They nd that
a year of math substantially raises wage rates even when math GPA and math test scores are controlled for.

The

returns are larger for advanced math courses, particularly algebra and geometry. They obtain positive estimates using
OLS and using an IV approach based on cross-school variation, although the OLS estimates are stronger, perhaps in
part because they are more precise.
The math results are robust to including English, science, and foreign language. English courses enter positively,
and the OLS estimate suggests the return of 0.026 (0.013) to a semester of upper-level English, while the IV estimate
is 0.071 (0.036). The coecients on science courses are negative for lower-level courses and positive but not signicant
for upper-level physics, chemistry, and AP biology. The OLS estimates indicate that a student who takes a year of
calculus, English, chemistry, and foreign language would earn about 8.6% more than a 12th grade student who did
not take any courses. Consequently, Rose and Betts come closer than Altonji in accounting for the value of a year of
high school. On the other hand, the return to a year of low-level courses in the 11th grade and in the 12th grade is
small. Rose and Betts attempt to reconcile their OLS and IV results with Altonji's smaller estimates. They conclude
that the dierence stems from their disaggregation by course level in case of IV and disaggregation by course level and
their use of math GPA rather than test scores as a control in the case of OLS. On the other hand, Rose and Betts' IV
estimates are large and negative for several of the advanced math courses. Some of the dierences between the two
studies may reect sampling error. Furthermore, concerns remain about positive selection in who is taking advanced
courses. But overall, the study signicantly advances our understanding of the payo to dierent types of courses.
Joensen and Neilson (2008) estimate the return to advanced high school math by exploiting an educational reform
in Denmark in 1988 which allowed students to combine advanced math with chemistry rather than only with physics.
The reform was piloted at some high schools during the years 1984 through 1987.
exogenous for students who chose their school before the pilot was introduced.

These reforms were plausibly

The authors nd that taking the

advanced math course in combination with the advanced chemistry course increases earnings by 0.20 log points. The
estimate rises to 0.25 when they exclude schools that are able to unilaterally decide whether to implement the pilot
program because there is evidence of negative selection for that group. Interestingly, the OLS estimate is similar (0.23)
when detailed controls are included, as is the IV estimate based on the cross high school means

Ch .

There is not much

16 Controlling for post-secondary educational attainment eliminates most of the eect, in

evidence of selection bias.

contrast to the US studies.
In interpreting their estimates, Joensen and Neilson make the monotonicity assumption that students who had

16 The

OLS results are weighted toward students who took math in combination with advanced physics because the advanced math and

chemistry combination was only available in the pilot schools. Consequently, the OLS and IV estimators identify dierent parameters.

18

chosen advanced math when only the advanced math and physics combination was available would continue to take
an advanced math package following the introduction of the advanced math-chemistry option. This is reasonable, but
even if this assumption is true, their estimator does not have a LATE interpretation as the eect of advanced math.
This is because their IV strategy precludes controlling for whether the student took math in combination with physics
or math in combination with chemistry. Some of the students who were induced to choose the advanced math and
chemistry combination would have chosen a curriculum involving less math, while some would have chosen advanced
math with advanced physics.

Despite this ambiguity in the interpretation of the results, this study is a valuable

contribution that illustrates the potential for research that exploits sharp curriculum reforms.
Goodman (2009) exploits curriculum reforms inspired by

A Nation at Risk (1983).

In the years following the report,

a number of states established course requirements in core academic subjects or increased existing ones. Goodman's
instrument is the indicator

M athRef orm

for whether students in a given high school class from a given state were

subject to an increased math requirement relative to what prevailed for the high school class of 1982. Because the
state laws are not very powerful instruments, a large sample could help in improving precision if the within state error
correlation is limited. Goodman employs a Two Sample Instrumental Variables (TSIV) estimator that uses micro data
sets on student high school transcripts to estimate the rst stage and wage and educational outcome data from the
2000 Decennial Census to estimate the second stage. Controlling for state and high school cohort,

M athRef orm

is

associated with an increase of about 0.184 years of basic math and 0.214 years of advanced math for black males. The
impact for black females is somewhat smaller, and the impact for white males and females is about half as large and
is concentrated in basic math. The corresponding TSIV estimates of the eect of a year of math are -0.030 (0.048) for
white females and about 0.08 for the other three groups. About 40% of this eect is due to an increase in educational

17

attainment.

When education policy controls, economic controls, and census division level trends are added, the

TSIV estimates become 0.052 (0.018), 0.035 (0.030), 0.033 (0.030) and 0.005 (0.041) respectively. The eects tend to
be larger for disadvantaged groups, but one should not make too much of the dierences given the sampling errors. It
should also be kept in mind that the specication does not include controls for other courses. (The reform instruments
are not powerful enough to identify the eects of dierent courses.)

3.1 Conclusion about the eects of high school curriculum
Some progress has been made toward the goal of providing hard evidence on the eects of high school curriculum on
wages and educational attainment. Breaking out courses by level, as in the Rose and Betts study, indicates that taking
more advanced courses has a substantial economic return. While there are clear concerns about selection bias, their
result is reinforced by Joensen and Neilson's clever IV study, although it is worrisome that most of their large eect of
taking advanced math and chemistry is through post-secondary education independent of the eld of post-secondary

17 We

arrived at the 40% gure based on the fact that the reduced form coecients relating log earnings to

MathReform

fall from 0.028 to

0.019 (0.008) for black males, 0.026 to 0.016 (0.008) for black females, and 0.020 to 0.011 (0.010) for white males when education/graduating
class interactions are added to the baseline specication. The estimates are negative but not signicant for white females regardless of
whether education is in the model.

19

education. These results, along with Goodman's TSIV estimates and Levine and Zimmerman's results, suggest that
additional math courses have substantial value. There is also some evidence that vocational courses have value for
students who did not intend to go to college.

(See, for example, Altonji (1995) and Mane (1999) and additional

references that she provides.) However, there is still considerable uncertainty about the value of particular courses of
study, about how the courses aect post-secondary education, and about heterogeneity in these eects.
We have two suggestions for research. The rst is to make use of the huge student record data sets that have become
available in several US states and other countries. This information, combined with post-secondary education records
and earnings (as is possible, for example, for the states of Florida and Texas) and in conjunction with information about
specic reforms to curriculum at the high school and/or school district level, provides a way to address the problem of
endogeneity of curriculum. A panel data set on course graduation requirements and course availability will have to be
assembled for a large set of schools. Furthermore, the student record data sets can be used to study how curriculum
aects post-secondary eld, which has been dicult to do because of sample size considerations in the panel data
sets discussed above. The second is to integrate the study of curriculum choice into a dynamic model of educational
attainment and labor market outcomes, along with sources of exogenous of variation in curriculum. This would help
elucidate how courses are chosen and how education choices today inuence future opportunities. Furthermore, it will
provide a systematic way of addressing selection in course-taking in a dynamic setting when estimating the return to
curriculum.

4 Empirical evidence on the determinants of college major
The theoretical framework presented above implies that college major choice is inuenced by expectations of future
earnings, preferences, ability, and preparation. We discuss some of the evidence on the role of each of these factors,
drawing on both the small number of structural models and on the more extensive reduced-form approaches. First,
however, we document some trends.

4.1 Trends in college major
Patterns of college major choice have been relatively steady over the past twenty years.

Supplementary Figure 1

illustrates the trends across college graduation cohorts in the fractions of degrees accounted for by the ve most

18 In keeping with the high

popular aggregated college majors. The results are shown separately for men and women.

school course-taking trends, the fraction of science majors has shown a slight uptick in recent years. Taking a longer
view, the fraction of education majors has decreased substantially over the past forty years, while the proportion of
business and economics majors peaked about twenty-ve years ago, following a period of rapid growth in the 1980s.

18 Data

are from the 2009 ACS; respondents are assumed to graduate at age 22. Supplementary Figure 2 reports trends from 1984 to

2009 based on data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education System (IPEDS). There are some minor dierences that could be due
to recall bias in ACS, changes in IPEDS coverage, the fact that the ACS includes immigrants who received degrees abroad and IPEDS
includes degrees of foreign students who later return home, the fact that some individuals obtain more than one bachelors degree, and
dierences in aggregation of majors.

20

Later in this section we estimate the contribution of this change in composition to the growth of the college wage
premium in the 1980s.
Not surprisingly, women are far more prevalent in education, and men in engineering and in business and economics.
However, this gure disguises interesting within-category trends.

While women have caught up with men in the

sciences overall, Turner & Bowen (1999) point out that the disaggregated trends show a surge of women in biology,
for example, but not in the more mathematical sciences.

Similarly, the oft-used social sciences category includes

majors as dissimilar as economics and cultural studies. To address this, Figure 1 reports the trends over time in the
fraction female in selected majors relative to the fraction female across all majors. The trends in the relative fractions
are not aected by the rise in the share of women among all college graduates or changes in the general popularity of
particular majors. Remarkably, although the relative fraction of women in most science-related majors has increased

19

over time, the relative fraction female among computer science majors has actually dropped.

Table 1 describes various characteristics associated with some of the more common college majors: share enrolled,

20

fraction female, math and science course content, SAT scores, wages, and the share attending graduate school.

There is a great deal of variation across majors: engineers have among the highest SAT math scores, for example,
while elementary education majors have among the lowest. Similarly, wages tend to be high for engineers and low
for elementary education majors, suggesting that perhaps much of the wage dierences between majors are due to
dierences in mathematical ability and high school course work.
The table also reports the 10th and 90th percentiles of the hourly wage distribution. The size of the gap relative
to the mean varies substantially across majors. For example, mean earnings in economics is about 10 percent higher
than in mechanical engineering, but the 90-10 dierential is twice as large. Part of the variation in the 90th percentile
reects dierences across elds in the contribution of graduate school, but the basic pattern is present for those who

21

do not go to graduate school.

4.2 Expected earnings
The work on the impact of expected earnings on major choice uses three main approaches. The rst uses a rational
expectations-type framework in which expected future earnings are based upon a statistical model of earnings. Berger
(1988) is an early example of this. He models the utility from major
the present value of expected lifetime earnings in major

j.

j

as the consumption value of the major plus

In doing so he improves upon previous myopic models that

incorporate only rst-year post-college earnings. The coecient on expected earnings in the conditional logit model
has the expected positive sign.
However, Berger's model does not account for uncertainty about preferences, ability, or academic progress. Changes
in these factors will lead some students to leave school or change elds, as emphasized in the theoretical section. In

19 See

Goldin et al (2006) for an excellent overview of long-run trends in the educational attainment and high school curriculum and

college major choices of women.

20 The wage and share
21 For example, among

data are from the ACS, and the other data are from the 1993/2003 Baccalaureate & Beyond survey.
individuals without graduate degrees the mean, 10th percentile and 90th percentile values are 43.7, 14.3, and 80.6

for economics and 41.2, 20.1, and 61.9 for mechanical engineering. See Supplementary Table 2.

21

Altonji's (1993) model, uncertainty regarding ability and preferences leads to probabilistic major completion even if ex
post monetary payos are known. He emphasizes the distinction between the ex ante and ex post return to a particular
course of study. (Note that the estimates in the next section are all ex post returns; that is, returns contingent on
completion of a major.) The ex ante return is the return associated with starting a particular major, and includes the
possibility of dropping out entirely, switching majors, or proceeding on to a graduate degree. Altonji does not estimate

22 Montmarquette et

his theoretical model, but Arcidiacono's (2004) econometric model has some of the same features.

al (2002) break down expected (ex ante) returns into the probability of completing a major, and earnings contingent
on completing a major. They nd that expected earnings (the product of the two) has more predictive power than
either on its own.
While many papers include the expected wages associated with a terminal college degree in the choice equation,
Eide & Waehrer (1998) also incorporate the option value of graduate school. For both men and women the option
value of graduate school increases the likelihood of majoring in science or liberal arts relative to business, although
the magnitudes dier signicantly by gender.
A few recent papers directly measure expectations. They use specialized surveys (usually conned to one school)
to assess students' subjective expectations about wages. A more representative sample of colleges would be preferable,
but these studies provide unique insights into college students' decision-making.
Betts (1996) nds that University of CaliforniaSan Diego seniors are much better informed about wages than freshmen, suggesting that students may wait to learn about their abilities and preferences before investing in informationgathering.

This has implications for the timing and informativeness of information shocks about the labor market

in our model, relative to the preference and learning shocks

ζ

and

.

Given the diculty of majoring in science and

engineering if one does not lay the foundation in freshman and sophomore year, students may be obtaining the labor market information after it is too late. Betts also shows that students from lower-income families systematically
underestimate earnings for college-educated workers.
Arcidiacono, Hotz & Kang (2010) nd that major choice is based on comparative advantage, in that Duke sophomores expect to have higher earnings in the major in which they are currently enrolled than in other majors (with
the exception of economics, which all students believe would lead to higher earnings). Students also tend to be more
accurate about future earnings in their own major than in other majors. Zafar (2009b) (Northwestern sophomores)
and Betts (1996) nd similar results. Reassuringly, students' earnings expectations do correlate with actual earnings.
The literature on choice of major also considers risk aversion. With concave preferences, students should consider

22 Altonji estimates probit models for the probability of 19 post-secondary education outcomes as a function of demographic characteristics,
family background, high school curriculum, and a vector of 12th grade aptitude and achievement measures. He also estimates a model of
the wages associated with each of these outcomes. He uses the education outcome probabilities and the wage payos to compute the ex
ante return to starting college as a function of student characteristics. The ex post payos matter in proportion to the probability that
they will be realized. He provides estimates for men and women of the eects of family background, high school curriculum, and aptitude
and achievement on the ex ante return to starting college. Students with higher ex ante returns are more likely to start college and 12th
graders who expect to attend college have a higher ex ante return. Stange (2011) estimates a dynamic structural model of education choice
which shows that the option value of early choices can be substantial. See also Heckman et al (2008). Neither Stange nor Heckman et
al consider eld of study.

See Altonji (1993) for references to a few earlier papers that consider the implications of uncertainty about

completion probabilities in examining the demand for and return to education, including Manski (1989). Weisbrod (1962) introduced the
concept of the nancial option value of a year of education.

22

the variance as well as the mean of earnings associated with particular programs of study.

(Table 1 reports 10th

and 90th percentiles of wages by major.) Saks & Shore (2005) nd that students from wealthier families are more
likely to choose  riskier majors, as is implied by a model in which agents have decreasing absolute risk aversion.
Christiansen et al (2007) investigate the risk-return trade-o in major choice and conclude that many majors are not
at the ecient frontier. However, their model excludes eort costs and other costs, so the frontier interpretation may
be overly restrictive.

4.3 Preferences
A number of studies examine the eects of preferences for non-pecuniary aspects of majors and their associated
occupations on choice of major. Daymont & Andrisani (1984) make use of survey questions regarding the importance
an individual assigns to various job characteristics (being a leader, working with people, making lots of money, helping
others). They nd substantial gender dierences in in the measures. Their multivariate regression analysis indicates
that the preference measures account for nearly a third of the gender dierence in choosing a business major is explained
by these variables but play only a minor role other majors. However, this paper does not include ability controls or
test scores.
Blakemore & Low (1984) nd that women tend to choose majors that are subject to less atrophy, reducing the
costs of time away from the labor market for child care. Turner and Bowen (1999) also outline stark gender dierences
in major choice but point out this could be due to dierences in preferences or to the chilling eect of past labor
market discrimination. They also highlight the importance of ner degrees of disaggregation in major choice, pointing
out that biology and physics, while often grouped together, in fact require very dierent skill sets.
Zafar (2009a) is principally interested in decomposing gender dierences into dierences in abilities and preferences.
He nds that preferences play a strong role. For example, in addition to expected future earnings, students care about

23 Moreover, while the choices

enjoying coursework, parental approval, and the social status of future occupations.

of men depend roughly equally on pecuniary and non-pecuniary attributes, women's choices depend roughly twice
as much on non-pecuniary attributes than pecuniary ones. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2011) nd that student
preferences and ability play a crucial role in eld of study.

4.4 Ability and preparation
We have not yet said anything about how high school preparation and innate ability conditions choice of major. Turner
& Bowen (1999) show that the eects of SAT scores (math and verbal) are non-linear and, moreover, that the eects
dier by gender. These scores account for 45% of the gender gap in math/physical sciences, but only 8% in psychology,
leaving a great deal of room for gender dierences in preferences. Zafar (2009a) also rules out gender dierences in
beliefs about ability as a driver of gender dierences in choices.

23 Other

papers in the large literature in economics and other elds on gender dierences in major choice include Dickson (2010) and

Canes and Rosen (1995).

23

Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2011) use a unique panel data set on Berea College students to track student
major choices over time. Rather than asking students to state their expected major, they ask the students to assign
probabilities to completing various majors (see also Manski (1993) and Manski (2004)).

They nd that although

many students begin their college careers assigning a high probability to nishing a science major, many learn that
their abilities are not adequate.
performance shocks in college.

In our model, we incorporate this new information about one's abilities through
Ost (2010) echoes Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2011) and Arcidiacono (2004) in

documenting a positive relationship between grades and persistence in a particular major. However, Ost points that
physical science majors get higher grades in non-science courses than in science courses and thus may be tempted away
from science.

This eect is exacerbated by increasing grade ination in non-science elds relative to science elds.

He nds additionally that the presence of high-achieving peers in the physical sciences positively inuences one's own
persistence. It is somewhat articial to separate ability and preparation from preferences in determining major choice.
Ability to pursue a particular course of study with a reasonable level of eort and to perform well in related jobs
inuences the utility associated with the activity, holding wages constant.

5 Returns to college major: empirical evidence
Here we provide a partial survey of the literature on returns to college curriculum. We also present descriptive estimates
of returns to dierent majors using data from the ACS, supplemented with characteristics associated with dierent
majors (average SAT scores, numbers of math and science courses, etc) extracted from the Baccalaureate and Beyond
1993 dataset. We begin with a discussion of the estimation strategies used and possible alternative ones. We then
turn to the results.

5.1 Estimation strategies in the existing literature
Estimating the returns to college major is fraught with many of the same diculties that plague estimations of the
average return to schooling more generally. The main problems are omitted variables that inuence both choice and
earnings, and selection bias based on heterogeneity in returns. To the extent that students select into particular majors
on the basis of their anticipated future returns, OLS estimates of the returns will be biased as estimates of the causal
impacts of major choice. As such they will represent neither the average treatment eect, nor the eect of treatment
on the treated.

24 Most papers nevertheless use OLS and hope that controls are adequate.

Berger (1988) is one of the few papers that attempts to address this kind of selection. He uses a conditional logit
with ve major categories and nds that students choose majors on the basis of the present value of expected lifetime
earnings.

To obtain identication, he allows family background variables (father's occupation, parental education,

race, etc) to aect the choice of major without aecting earnings and allows ability measures (IQ, Knowledge of
World of Work) and cohort to aect major choice only through the earnings equation. Both of these assumptions are

24 Sample

selection bias associated with labor force participation is also an issue, as Hamermesh and Donald (2008) show (see below).

Few studies address it.

24

questionable. There is clear evidence that the psychic costs and benets of college depend on ability and performance
see for example Arcidiacono (2004). Furthermore, family background might easily aect general skills and may thus

25

inuence earnings as well as the payo to particular majors.

The coecient on the selection correction term is found to be signicant for only two majors within each specication
(education and liberal arts in the case of log wages; education and science in the case of log earnings). While Berger
interprets the signs on these coecients as indicative of positive selection, the lack of consistency across specications
and lack of signicance leaves room for doubt.
The nal approach is to use a dynamic discrete choice model along the lines of Section 2. Arcidiacono (2004) uses
this approach.

5.2 Possible alternative strategies
Other methods to control for selection in major choice do not appear to have been used.

If there were sucient

regional variation in oerings across colleges, such as the availability of an engineering school, a variant of Card's
(1995) distance to college instrument might be tried. Freeman (1976) and Siow (1984), among others, show that the
supply to specic occupations depends upon market conditions at the time that students choose a eld of study. More
work could be done using variation across time and place in the demand for particular types of majors. However, the
work of Lisa Kahn (2010), Paul Oyer (2006) and others indicates that market conditions at the time of labor market
entry have long-term eects on earnings prospects. Consequently, one might question whether labor market conditions
early in college can be excluded from wage equations even several years after graduation. Perhaps parental occupation
or college major could be used if parental earnings, assets, highest degree level, and ability are controlled for.
A natural approach would be to use a regression discontinuity (RD) design in situations where certain majors have
a test score cut-o or enrollment cap for entry. Some US universities use GPA cut-os as a way to ration access to
some programs. The opportunity for RD approaches is greater in countries that admit students to particular programs

26 However, because students are in fact making a sequence of

and particular colleges based primarily on test scores.

decisions about whether to remain in school and about which eld to choose (particularly in the US context), there is
an important distinction between ex ante and ex post returns to schooling decisions. Both of these returns to school
choice depend on when the choice is made.

The ex post return parameter to graduating in engineering identied

by a regression discontinuity design based on grades or test scores at the time of college entry is dierent from the
corresponding parameter identied using a grade cuto after the second year of college.
Another selection issue is selection into the labor force. Employment rates dier substantially across majors both
because of dierences in labor force attachment and dierences in the unemployment probability.

Insofar as this

problem is restricted to women, one solution is to estimate wage equations for men only, as is standard in the returns

25 See also Willis and Rosen (1979).
26 Depending on the institutional details,

one must address selection in the decision to apply to particular universities and programs. See

Carvalho and Magnac (2010) for an example of such a study of college and major choice for Brazil. With additional data, their analysis
could be extended to labor market outcomes. Bertrand et al (2010) apply an RD strategy based on admissions cut-o scores to engineering
colleges in India that vary across castes, although large sampling errors limit what they can conclude about earnings eects.

25

to schooling literature more generally. However, this sidesteps many interesting and important questions regarding
gender dierences in choice of, and returns to, college major, and it does not address dierential unemployment risk.

27

Hamermesh and Donald (2008) is the only paper we reviewed that explicitly corrects for selection into employment.

They nd that accounting for selection into the labor force reduces earnings dierentials across major by 10-20%.
Furthermore, this bias is most important for education majors, which is not surprising given the much larger proportion
of female education majors and the fact that Hamermesh and Donald pool men and women.

This points to the

importance of an integrated approach where both employment and earnings prospects play a role in choosing major
and employment selection is controlled for.

5.3 Estimates of the return to major
As we already noted, most studies use OLS with control variables rather than addressing endogenous selection into
college major with an IV strategy or a selection model with exclusion restrictions. The control variables range from
simple demographics, a small set of family background measures, and perhaps test scores, to detailed high school
transcript information. The case for controlling for high school grades, tests, and courses prior to college seems clear.
However, omitted variables bias in estimates of the eects of these variables could spill over into bias in estimates
of returns to major. Some studies control for college transcript information and college quality measures. Some also
include performance measures in college, arguing that insofar as ability diers by major, the returns to college major
may be conated with returns to ability. Whether one includes college variables, such as semesters of math, depends
on whether one wishes to measure the total eect of a particular college major (including human capital accumulation
in the form of coursework and grades) or the eect of the title of the degree, net of substantive skill dierences.
Hamermesh and Donald (2008) show that there is a substantial return to upper-level math and science credits and
grades holding eleven major categories constant. (Explaining dierences in the returns to majors with dierences in
course content and grades, as opposed to the credential eect of the eld of degree, is an interesting challenge for
research.) Controlling for occupation is hard to defend other than as part of a strategy to identify why majors pay
dierently.
Table 2 presents certain estimates from selected papers.

Aside from methodological concerns and dierences

in control variables, caution is urged in comparing results across studies for two main reasons.

First, the level of

aggregation of majors diers widely from study to study, ranging from four to over ten. Second, the time periods in
question vary somewhat, although many use the same data set (NLS72). The estimates shown are the coecients on

28 Coecients for men and women are presented

major dummies in OLS regressions with the specied control variables.

separately when available. For ease of comparison, coecients have been re-calculated, when necessary, relative to the
education major; signicance levels are not reported unless education was the original excluded category in the study.
As has been well-documented, the return to skill has increased substantially over the past few decades, particularly

27 They also model
28 The exception is

survey non-response, but nd that this has a negligible eect on results.
Berger (1988), who runs separate regressions for each major category. The estimates shown are the premiums (over

education) in predicted log wages.

26

in the 1980s. Grogger and Eide (1995) decompose this into a change in returns and a change in the composition of

29 In particular, they nd that the return to math ability increased substantially for women, while a trend

majors.

toward more technical subjects accounted for much of the increase for men. The coecients presented in the table
are the coecients on the major; however, the authors also include major interacted with experience and experience-

30

squared, whose coecients are not shown.

Overall, however, the relative results have remained remarkably consistent over time. In particular, engineering
consistently commands a high premium (around 0.40 relative to education), usually followed by business and science.
Humanities, social sciences, and education are further behind. Controlling for pre-college test scores and grades reduces
earnings dierentials substantially. Hamermesh and Donald (2008), for example, report a standard deviation of 0.305
points of log earnings dierences across twelve majors; this is halved when GPA, upper division math courses, upper
division math grades, annual hours worked and a few additional controls are included. Controlling for selection into
the labor force and non-response bias reduces the standard deviation somewhat further, to 0.139.
There has been speculation that the dierence in returns is due to dierence in math ability. Paglin and Rufolo
(1990), for example, explain 82% of the variance across college majors in entry-level wages on the basis of the average

31 Moreover, Grogger and Eide show that the return to math ability has increased over

GRE-math scores by major.

time: the eect of a one standard deviation increase in math ability grew from a 2% increase in wages in 1978 to 5%
in 1986, and from 3% to 7.5% for women.
There are also dierences across majors in hours worked. Hamermesh and Donald (2008) nd that controlling for
hours worked and selection into the workforce reduces earnings dierentials.
One might also be interested in the eects of college major on occupation, and in particular, the extent to which
human capital is major-specic.

Robst (2007) shows that students who are employed in a eld unrelated to their

eld of study suer a wage penalty, suggesting that this is at least partially the case; however, the wage penalty
varies by eld. The most specic elds, such as engineering, involve harsher penalties than elds which develop more
general skills, such as liberal arts. Malamud (2011), however, shows that the British system that requires students to
specialize early leads to greater eld-switching upon labor market entry than the Scottish system, which allows later
specialization. This suggests that delaying specialization to learn about one's preferences and comparative advantage
may outweigh any loss in eld-specic skills.
Not much is known about the eect of college major on opportunities at the graduate level. Black et al (2003)

29 These changes in composition are documented in Section 5.
30 Several other studies address the contribution of major choice

to the gender gap among college graduates, including the recent study

by Black et al (2008), who provide additional references. Black et al use the National Survey of College Graduates, which provides large
sample sizes, highly disaggregated major categories and a measure of full-time experience.

Results dier somewhat across race/ethnic

groups, but for whites the unexplained gender gap is -0.184 when highest degree, highest degree major eld, and age are controlled for,
compared to a total gap of -0.339. For workers with high labor force attachment, the unexplained gap is -0.086 and the total gap -0.297.
Black et al (2006) provide a similar analysis of the contribution of dierences in detailed major to race dierentials in the wages of highly
educated men. Among individuals who speak English at home, dierences in education and language prociency account for essentially all
of the small gap between white men and Hispanic men but only a quarter of the much larger gap between white men and black men. The
reduction in the gap is about the same for the two groups. However, they account for the entire gap for black men born outside the South
with parents who have some education.

31 See

also Weinberger (1999). Some of this reects the eect of major on math scores, and association between average math scores and

other student characteristics. In the ACS data we explain about 58% of the variance in the major-specic returns with SAT math and
verbal scores.

27

provide estimates of wage gaps by undergraduate major relative to economics for those who obtain an MBA or a
graduate law degree. With the exception of chemical engineers who obtain an MBA, economists earn more than their
counterparts from the other most common pre-MBA or pre-law majors.

These results illustrate the importance of

considering the options that an earlier education choice oers.

5.4 Descriptive evidence from the ACS on college major choice and returns
In this subsection we provide additional evidence on the relative returns to college major using the ACS. Unfortunately,
the data set lacks test scores and family background measures, and so the estimates we report almost certainly overstate
the relative return to majors that attract advantaged, high ability students. Nevertheless the large size of the ACS
permits one to examine very detailed major categories with and without 5-digit occupation controls and to examine
trends in major choice by graduation cohort and gender. Table 3 provides OLS estimates of major coecients separately
for men and women, with and without occupation controls. These regressions include dummy variables for advanced
degrees, a cubic in potential experience, and race/ethnicity as controls. The table reports only the 23 most popular of
the 171 major categories included in the regression. These twenty-three account for just over half of the college-plus
sample. The omitted category is General Education. Near the bottom of the table we also report the sample-weighted

32 The dierences across majors are large.

standard deviation of the major coecients adjusted for sampling error.

Consistent with results in the literature, the estimates show that engineers have the highest returns and education
majors the lowest. This is true even after controlling for occupation. In most elds the size of the premium over a
general education degree is higher for men than it is for women. The standard deviation is 0.177 for men and 0.146
for women. Thus, for men (women), a two standard deviation shift is associated with an increase of 0.354 (0.292) log

33 Almost all of the gender dierence in

points in earnings. To compare, the high schoolcollege dierential is 0.577.

the standard deviation is due to gender dierences in major choice rather than gender dierences in the dispersion of
the major coecients.
How have trends in major choice aected the gender gap holding the major coecients for men and women constant?
Figure 2 takes the major coecients from Table 3 and calculates their weighted average by age and gender. (General
education is the omitted category.) For individuals who graduated from college in the early 1970s, the weighted average
of the female coecients using the male major weights is about 0.1 above the value using the female weights. The gap
narrows for the later cohorts but does not move very much. The gap at the beginning of the period is even wider using
the male weights, but it narrows during the 70s. These results indicate that over most of the period, the dierences in
college major choice account for about a third of the gender gap in log wages.
The gure also show how changes in the composition of majors have aected the average return to a college degree.

32 The

sample is restricted to individuals between 23 and 59 years of age who worked more than 34 hours a week for more than 40 weeks

in the previous year and who had a college or advanced degree. All majors are included, not just those corresponding to the coecients
presented in the table. The full set of coecients are in Supplementary Table 3. See Carnevale et al (2011) for a descriptive analysis of the
returns to college major using the ACS.

33 This

is the coecient on a college degree dummy in a regression that excludes the college major indicators, includes education level

indicators and the other controls used in Table 3, and is estimated on a sample that includes high school graduates and above.

28

For both men and women, the curves show an increase of about 0.05 in the weighted average of the returns between the
early 1970s and about 1986. This is due to a shift toward more lucrative majors, particularly engineering and business,
with a peak in the mid-80s. The gure shows a decline of about 0.02 after that. These shifts in the distribution of
majors are illustrated in Supplementary Figure 1.
We have also estimated, but do not present, a set of regressions using major characteristics from the B&B and
the demographic and educational variables used above.
an increase of 0.06 over the

R2

Including 51 B&B major dummies yields an

R2

of 0.261,

of a model with only highest-degree indicators. Replacing the major dummies with

34 (math and verbal) or including counts of the average number of courses in 8 dierent

major-specic SAT scores

disciplines (math, business, etc) leads to

R2

values of 0.234 and 0.241, respectively. SAT scores account for 54.7% of

the variation in the return to college major across the B&B categories (weighted by frequency in the ACS sample).
We obtain 62.5% of the variation using average GRE math, verbal, and writing scores for graduate school applicants
in a smaller number of major categories. However, this overstates the role pre-existing ability dierences for reasons
touched upon earlier.
What is the role of occupation? For men, the standard deviation of the college major coecients is 0.177 when
occupation is excluded and 0.098 when it is controlled for.

Thus a substantial part of the dierence in pay across

majors is related to the occupations that they lead to. Part of this wage dierence represents compensating dierentials
for nonpecuniary factors, of course.
In summary, wages vary greatly across college major. The variation is large enough for the tendency for men to
choose high paying majors to be an important factor in the gender gap in wages. A substantial part of the dierences
in returns is almost certainly due to dierences in the market value of tasks that require the specic knowledge and
skills particular majors develop. However, pre-college dierences in skill and ability, as captured by the SAT scores,
and compensating dierentials for nonpecuniary attributes also play a role. Much remains to be learned about why
majors pay so dierently.

5.5 College major and occupational choice
35 For some majors, such as

In this subsection we discuss the empirical link between college major and occupation.

nursing and accounting, the path is clear. For others it is not. Supplementary Table 4 illustrates the proportion of
graduates in various majors employed in the three most common 5-digit occupations for that major. About 70% of
accounting or auditing majors aged 25-29 are employed in the top three occupations. Even among those aged 55-59,
the gure is 51%. For nursing, the comparable gures are 90 and 79%. On the other hand, history and psychology
are examples of majors that have high occupational dispersion at all ages. Overall, the table suggests a fanning-out
of occupations as individuals are promoted or switch occupations as their careers progress. Figure 3 provides further

34 SAT

Math and Verbal scores are predicted using the combined SAT Math and Verbal scores when the math and verbal scores are

missing.

35 Ransom

and Phipps (2010) provide related evidence on the link between major and occupation using the National Survey of College

Graduates.

29

evidence for this pattern. This gure reports the probability density (across majors) of the fraction of people in a major
who are in one of the top ten occupations for that major. The peak of the densities occurs when the fraction is about
0.43. However, the heavy right tail and lower peak for those aged 25 to 34 indicates that occupational concentration
is substantially larger for young workers.
The ip side of this analysis is the proportion of workers in an occupation accounted for by the three most common
majors for that occupation.

In Supplementary Table 5 we report this statistic for a few occupations by stage of

career. Not surprisingly, almost all registered nurses major in either nursing, biology, or psychology regardless of stage
of career.

The values for marketing and sales managers and for accountants and auditors are similar, though less

extreme. Post-secondary school teachers and marketing and sales are examples of occupations that draw on a wider
array of majors. With a large panel data set, one could go much further in examining the link between major and
career path. We have already noted that much the variance in the returns to majors is associated with dierences in
the pay of the occupations that they lead to. The clear message is that specicity of skill is important to a degree that
varies across occupation and major.

6 Conclusion
The demand for and return to

types

of human capital investments is an exciting research area that is highly relevant

for both education and labor market policy, as education and occupation choices dier greatly in the monetary and
non-monetary rewards that they bring.
Rather than summarizing the paper, we close by restating the questions for empirical research. The recent theoretical work on education and occupation choice that we have synthesized here emphasizes several key factors: the
sequential nature of the decision-making process; the partial irreversibility of some decisions because of the heterogeneity of human capital and the cumulative nature of human capital investment in many elds; the importance of innate
ability, preferences, and pre-high school learning in shaping the feasibility and non-pecuniary costs and benets of
particular education and occupation paths; and the essential role of uncertainty about ability, preferences, knowledge
accumulation, and wage rates at each stage. The theory has some very clear implications for empirical research. The
rst concerns the determination of preferences for schooling in general and types of schooling in particular, which we
touch on briey in Section 3. The second concerns the determination of the ability to do math, excel at science, write
well, etc. The third concerns estimation of the knowledge production function. How should skills and knowledge be
classied? How can they be measured using observables such as course content, grades, and tests? How much does
learning in school or on the job depend on the program or the occupation? The fourth is how grades, knowledge and
ability determine promotion and admission to colleges, a subject on which there is a substantial literature that we
have not touched on here. The fth is how best to model the agent's information set and learning about ability and
preferences.

The sixth is estimation of the ex post payo to knowledge, ability, and degree by level and eld.

We

summarized a number of papers that attempt this for college education and a smaller number that look at high school

30

curriculum. Much progress has been made, but there is a long way to go on the road to credible measures of the payo
to elds of study. We suggest several approaches that might prove fruitful.
The overriding question is the choice of education and occupation at each stage in the life course and the consequences of those choices. For example, how does the current utility and expected future utility of spending the rst
period of college in a pre-engineering curriculum versus a ne arts curriculum depend on preferences, ability, and the
stock of human capital at the start of college? The large earnings gaps across elds that attract students admitted
to the same universities with similar grades and test scores strongly suggests that compensating dierentials are of
critical importance.

References
[1] Altonji JG. 1993. The demand for and return to education when education outcomes are uncertain.

J.

Labor Econ. 11(1):4883
[2] Altonji JG. 1995. The eects of high school curriculum on education and labor market outcomes.

J. Hum.

Resour. 30(3):40938
[3] Altonji JG, Pierret CR. 2001. Employer learning and statistical discrimination.

[4] Arcidiacono P. 2004. Ability sorting and the returns to college major.

Q. J. Econ. 116(1):313-350

J. Econom. 121(1-2):34375

[5] Arcidiacono P, Hotz VJ, Kang S. 2010. Modeling college major choices using elicited measures of expectations and counterfactuals.

IZA Disc. Pap. 4738

[6] Berger MC. 1988. Predicted future earnings and choice of college major.

Ind. & Labor Relat. Rev.

41(3):41829

[7] Bertrand M, Hanna R, Mullainathan S. 2010. Armative action in education: evidence from engineering
college admissions.

J. Pub. Econ. 94(1-2):1629

[8] Betts JR. 1996. What do students know about wages?

Evidence from a survey of undergraduates.

J.

Hum. Resour. 31(1):2756
[9] Black DA, Haviland AM, Sanders SG, Taylor LJ. 2006. Why do minority men earn less? A study of wage
dierentials among the highly educated.

Rev. Econ. Stat. 88(1):300-13

[10] Black DA, Haviland AM, Sanders SG, Taylor LJ. 2008. Gender wage disparities among the highly educated.

J. Hum. Resour. 43(3):63059

[11] Black DA, Sanders S, Taylor L. 2003. The economic reward for studying economics.
41(3):36577

31

Econ. Inquiry

[12] Cameron SV, Heckman JJ. 1998. Life cycling schooling and dynamic selection bias: models and evidence
for ve cohorts of American males.

J. Pol. Econ. 106(2):262333

[13] Canes BJ, Rosen HS. 1995. Following in her footsteps? Faculty gender composition and women's choice
of college majors.

Ind. & Labor Relat. Rev. 48(3):486504

[14] Card DE. 1995. Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the return to schooling. In

Aspects of Labor Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp, ed. Christodes LN, Grant
EK, Swidinsky R, 20122. Toronto: University of Toronto Press

[15] Card DE. 1999. The causal eect of education on earnings. In

Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. Ashen-

felter O, Card DE, 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier

[16] Carnevale AP, Strohl J, Melton M. 2011. What's it worth? The economics value of college majors. Center
on Education and the Workforce, Georgetown University

[17] Carvalho JR, Magnac T. 2010. College choice and entry exams. Work. Pap., CAEN, Universidade Federal
do Ceara, Fortaleza, Brazil and Toulouse Sch. Econ., Toulouse, France

[18] Christiansen C, Joensen JS, Nielsen HS. 2007. The risk-return trade-o in human capital investment.

Labour Econ. 14(6):97186
[19] Currie J. 2009. Healthy, wealthy, and wise: socioeconomic status, poor health in childhood, and human
capital development.

J. Econ. Lit. 47(1):87122

[20] Daymont TN, Andrisani PJ. 1984. Job preferences, college major, and the gender gap in earnings.

J.

Hum. Resour. 19(3):40828
[21] Dickson L. 2010. Race and gender dierences in college major choice.

Annals Amer. Acad. Pol. & Soc.

Sci. 627(1):10824
[22] Eckstein Z, Wolpin KI. 1989. The specication and estimation of dynamic stochastic discrete choice
models: a survey.

J. Hum. Resour. 24(4):56298

[23] Eide E, Waehrer G. 1998. The role of the option value of college attendance in college major choice.

Econ.

Educ. Rev. 17(1):7382
[24] Farber HS, Gibbons R. 1996. Learning and wage dynamics.

Q. J. Econ. 111(4):100747

[25] Freeman R. 1976. A cobweb model of the supply and starting salary of new engineers.

Ind. & Labor Relat.

Re v. 29(2):23648
[26] Gardner DP. 1983. A nation at risk: the imperative for educational reform. Washington, DC: National
Commission on Excellence in Education

32

[27] Gathmann C, Schönberg U. 2010. How general is human capital? A task based approach,

J. Labor Econ.

28(1):150

[28] Goldin C, Katz LF, Kuziemko I. 2006. The homecoming of American college women: The reversal of the
gender gap in college.

J. Econ. Perspect. 20(4):13356

[29] Goodman J. 2009. The labor of division: returns to compulsory math coursework. Work. Pap., Harvard
Kennedy School

[30] Grogger J, Eide E. 1995. Changes in college skills and the rise in the college wage premium.

J. Hum.

Resour. 30(2):280310
[31] Hamermesh DS, Donald SG. 2008. The eect of college curriculum on earnings: an anity identier for
non-ignorable non-response bias.

J. Econom. 144(2):47991

[32] Heckman JJ, Honore BE. 1990. The empirical content of the Roy model.

Econom. 58(5):112149

[33] Heckman JJ, Lochner LJ, Todd PE. 2008. Earnings functions and rates of return.

J. Human Capital.

2(1):131

[34] Heckman JJ, Masterov DV. 2007. The productivity argument for investing in young children.

Appl. Econ.

Perspect. Pol. 29(3):44693
[35] Heckman JJ, Navarro S. 2007. Dynamic discrete choice and dynamic treatment eects.

J. Econom.

136(2):34196

[36] Heckman JJ, Robb R. 1985. Using longitudinal data to estimate age, period, and cohort eects in earnings
equations. In

Cohort Analysis in Social Research: Beyond the Identication Problem,

ed. Mason W,

Fienberg S. New York: Springer Verlag

[37] Imbens GW, Angrist JD. 1994. Identication and estimation of local average treatment eects.

Econom.

62(2):467-75

[38] Joensen JS, Nielsen HS. 2009. Is there a causal eect of high school math on labor market outcomes?

J.

Hum. Resour. 44(1):17198
[39] Kahn LB. 2010. The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in a bad economy.

Labour Econ. 17(2):30316
[40] Keane MP, Wolpin KI. 1997. The career decisions of young men.

[41] Lange F. 2007. The speed of employer learning.

J. Pol. Econ. 105(3):473522

J. Labor Econ. 25(1):135

[42] Lazear E. 2009. Firm-specic human capital: a skill-weights approach.

33

J. Pol. Econ. 117(5):914940

[43] Levine PB, Zimmerman DJ. 1995. The benet of additional high-school math and science classes for
young men and women.

J. Bus. & Econ. Stat. 13(2):13749

[44] Malamud O. 2011. Discovering one's talent: learning from academic specialization.

Ind. & Labor Relat.

Rev. 64(2):375405
[45] Mane F. 1999. Trends in the payo to academic and occupation-specic skills: the short and medium run
returns to academic and vocational high school courses for non-college-bound students.

Econ. Educ. Rev.

18(4):41737

[46] Manski CF. 1989. Schooling as experimentation: a reappraisal of the postsecondary dropout phenomenon.

Econ. Educ. Rev. 8(4):30512
[47] Manski CF. 1993. Adolescent econometricians: how do youth infer the returns to schooling? In

Studies

of Supply and Demand in Higher Education, 4360. NBER
[48] Manski CF. 2004. Measuring expectations.

Econometrica. 72(5):132976

[49] Meghir C, Rivkin SG. 2011. Econometric methods for research in education. In

Handbook of the Economics

of Education, ed. Hanushek E, Machin S, Woessmann L, 3(3):187. Elsevier
[50] Montmarquette C, Cannings K, Mahseredjian S. 2002. How do young people choose college majors?

Econ.

Educ. Rev. 21(6):54356
[51] Ost B. 2010. The role of peers and grades in determining major persistence in the sciences.

Econ. Educ.

Rev. 29(6):92334
[52] Oyer P. 2006. Initial labor market conditions and long-term outcomes for economists.

J. Econ. Perspect.

20(3):143160

[53] Paglin M, Rufolo AM. 1990. Heterogeneous human capital, occupation choice, and male-female earnings
dierences.

J. Labor Econ. 8(1):12344

[54] Papageorgiou T. 2010.

Learning your comparative advantages. PhD thesis. Yale Univ.

[55] Poletaev M, Robinson C. 2008. Human capital specicity: evidence from the dictionary of occupational
titles and displaced worker surveys 1984-2000.

J.Labor Econ. 26:

387-420.

[56] President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. 2011. Prepare and inspire: K-12 education
in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) for America's future. Executive Oce of the
President, Washington, DC.

[57] . 2012. Engage and excel:

producing one million additional college graduates with degrees in

science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Executive Oce of the President, Washington DC.

34

[58] Quandt RE. 1972. A new approach to estimating switching regressions.

J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 67(338):306

10

[59] Ransom M, Phipps A. (2010). Career and occupational implications of undergraduate majors: evidence
from the National Survey of College Graduates, Brigham Young University. May.

[60] Robst J. 2007. Education and job match: the relatedness of college major and work.

Econ. Educ. Rev.

26(4):397407

[61] Rose H, Betts JR. 2004. The eect of high school courses on earnings.

Rev. Econ. Stat. 86(2):397-513

[62] Rumberger RW, Daymont TN. 1984. The economic value of academic and vocational training acquired
in high school. In

Youth and the Labor Market, ed. M Borus, 15792. Kalamazoo:

WE Upjohn Institute

for Employment Research

[63] Siow A. 1984. Occupational choice under uncertainty.

Econometrica

52(3):63145

[64] Stange KM. 2011. An empirical investigation of the option value of college enrollment.

Am. Econ. J. In

press

[65] Stinebrickner TR, Stinebrickner R. 2011. Math or science?

Using longitudinal expectations data to

examine the process of choosing a college major. NBER working paper 16869

[66] Todd PE, Wolpin KI. 2003. On the specication and estimation of the production function for cognitive
achievement.

Econ. J. 113(485):F3F33

[67] Turner SE, Bowen WG. 1999. Choice of major: the changing (unchanging) gender gap.

Indus. & Lab.

Rel. Rev. 52(2):289313
[68] Violante G, Gallipoli G, Meghir C. 2005. Education decisions, equilibrium policies and wages dispersion.
2005 Meeting Papers 522, Soc. Econ. Dyn.

[69] Weinberger CJ. 1999. Mathematical college majors and the gender gap in wages.

[70] Weisbrod BA. 1962. Education and investment in human capital.

[71] Willis RJ, Rosen S. 1979. Education and self-selection.

Ind. Relat. 38(3):40713

J. Pol. Econ. 70(5):10623

J. Pol. Econ. 87(5):S7-36

[72] Yamaguchi S. 2012. Tasks and heterogeneous human capital.

[73] Zafar B. 2009. How do college students form expectations?

J. Labor Econ. 30(1):153

Sta Report 378, Federal Reserve Bank, New

York, NY

[74] Zafar B. 2009. College major choice and the gender gap.
York, NY

35

Sta Report 364,

Federal Reserve Bank, New

1

1.5
1.5
1.9
1.2
2.9
4.5
2.1
1.9
4.2
2.3
12.3
6.8
1.1
4.8
1.3
1.0
2.9
3.2
5.2
2.4
2.3
1.5
1.5
1.3
3.6

Share

%
female
0.4
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.8
0.4
0.3
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.7
0.8
0.3
0.9

Math
credits
27.7
12.3
12.3
12.0
11.4
5.8
5.6
4.9
3.9
4.0
3.1
3.7
3.6
2.7
2.3
2.9
1.6
2.0
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.0
1.5
1.8
1.0

Science
credits
13.7
66.1
66.5
57.2
11.1
56.1
6.3
5.1
3.7
5.1
7.1
4.3
21.1
8.2
6.5
19.9
5.8
7.2
6.1
6.2
6.0
6.9
5.2
5.7
13.0

SAT
M
592
613
606
604
582
577
597
563
571
526
488
522
546
530
539
520
512
514
540
542
558
555
460
567
488

SAT
V
538
566
571
597
556
575
573
534
534
514
496
510
549
540
575
518
537
526
592
571
595
592
487
595
497

Mean
wages
42.71
44.12
46.45
45.37
37.99
41.27
50.60
42.34
39.46
34.12
24.54
33.42
29.04
29.15
25.56
25.20
29.20
28.79
30.63
42.09
36.12
27.09
25.41
27.52
33.51

p10
wages
15.91
21.03
21.79
13.73
17.16
12.75
15.25
15.69
15.69
13.94
12.75
13.73
11.13
12.25
10.59
11.27
12.50
12.66
12.35
14.71
12.65
11.09
12.50
10.23
18.82

p90
wages
73.53
66.18
70.08
87.83
58.82
85.29
111.76
77.30
67.23
58.82
38.64
55.56
49.02
49.02
42.58
40.96
49.41
47.06
51.93
75.41
64.17
44.71
40.20
47.06
49.02

p90
wagesa
63.73
58.82
63.24
52.29
56.37
46.08
78.43
65.36
60.33
57.29
32.68
51.96
45.75
41.18
37.91
38.15
49.02
41.67
46.35
57.25
49.02
43.57
38.24
39.22
46.08

%
MA
33.9
31.4
33.8
22.1
22.1
20.2
26.6
20.4
18.6
11.8
39.2
16.5
15.8
30.8
27.7
19.4
14.2
25.7
25.8
21.1
27.9
21.2
34.0
28.3
18.2

Source: NCES B&B 1993/2003 for course counts and SAT scores. Majors with a share less than 1%, or missing
SAT scores, are not shown. Shares and hourly wage data are from the 2009 ACS, top- and bottom-coded at 5 and
400 USD per hour, respectively.
Sample selection: Wage observations are included if the individual has at least a bachelor’s degree, is working >34
hours per week and >40 weeks per year, and is 23-59 years old.
a
Excluding advanced degrees.
b
Professional degree.
c
Includes library science.

Mathematics
Mech. Eng.
Elec. Eng.
Chemistry
Comp. & IT
Bio. Sci.
Economics
Finance
Accounting
Marketing
Educ. (other)b
Bus. Mgmt & Admin.
Agr. & Agr. Sci.
Psychology
Music & Drama
Fit. & Nutr.
Comm.
Soc. Sci. (oth.)
Letters
Poli. Sci.
History
Art & Art Hist.
Social Work & HR
Phil. & Rel.
Nursing

Major

Table 1: College major characteristics

%
PhD
9.1
4.1
5.2
20.8
1.7
11.3
3.4
0.7
0.6
0.2
2.1
0.6
5.5
6.9
4.1
2.5
1.1
3.7
3.9
3.6
4.9
1.2
0.9
8.4
1.2

%
PDb
4.4
1.9
2.3
16.0
1.2
22.0
9.0
3.7
3.9
1.3
2.6
2.1
5.2
6.0
3.2
3.3
2.8
4.9
7.4
21.6
13.5
2.5
2.1
9.1
3.3

2

b

a

SAT, hs grades,
self-assessment of college
ability; various education
interactions; exp and
exp-squared; gender, race,
family background; hs
curriculum; post-grad deg.

family background, SAT, hs
rank, acad. track, math
credits, Catholic hs, various
college-level variables, labor
market variables; occupation
and industry dummies in (2)

log of yrs of exp, grad
yr−1900, and their
interaction; IQ score and
Knowledge of World of Work
score; US male unemp. rate,
race, health status, married,
smsa, South, enrolled in
school, log of annual wks
worked; selection correction

work experience; preferences;
father’s occupation; marital
status; highest degree; type
and size of community; race;
region

Controls

Without occupation or industry dummies.
With occupation and industry dummies.

NLS72; OLS

Altonji (1993)

NLSM;
conditional logit
and selection
correction in the
wage equation

Berger (1988)

NLS72 (men
only); WLS

NLS72; OLS

Daymont &
Andrisani
(1984)

James et al
(1989)

Data & Method.

Study

log of real hourly
wage; coefficients
on terminal
majors presented
not all presented)

1985 log annual
earnings

log hourly wages
for 1974 male
college graduates
in 1986 USD,
corrected for
selection bias

log hourly
earnings

Outcome variable

Bus.
Engineering
Phys. sci.
Math, CS
Life sci.
Soc. sci.
Humanities

Business
Engineering
Math & sci.
Soc. sci.
Humanities

Business
Engineering
Science
Lib. Arts

Business
Engineering
Math & sci.
Soci. sci.
Humanities

Majors

Table 2: Summary of selected empirical studies on the returns to college major

(2)b
.1452
.451
.1198
.1829
-.026
Women
.2422
.2836
.0743
.2325
.2057
.0117
-.0048

Men
.1796
.4119
.2432
.3887
.1231
.0975
.0646

12 yrs exp.
.1332
.3637
.2226
-.0719

1 yr exp.
.3473
.4130
.1237
.1045

(1)a
.262
.47
.1966
.2378
.059

Women
.17
.19
.25
.00
-.05
Men
.16
.33
.18
.06
.04

Outcomes

3
graduates of
UT-Austin,
1980-2000c ;
double selection
correction (into
employment and
survey
non-response)

Hamermesh &
Donald (2008)

pre-programme educ. level,
age, post-grad exp.,
self-employment status,
marriage/children, region,
language; adv. degree-holders
excluded
high-school background,
college achievement,
demographic, post-grad deg.,
hours worked, quadratic in
propensity scores for working
& survey response

std. tests, hs grades; family
income; experience; race;
educ. attainment (not shown:
with occupation controls),
full-time workers only

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
c
Selected years.

National
Graduate Survey
(Stats Can); OLS

Finnie &
Frenette
(2003)

NLS72, HSB;
GLS

Grogger &
Eide (1995)

log earnings
(selected majors
only presented)

log annual
earnings 1995

log hourly wage
1977-79, 86

Commerce
Eng & CS
Math & Sci.
Health
Soc. sci.
Arts & Hum.
Bus. (hard)
Bus. (soft)
Engineering
Nat. sci.
Soc. sci.
Humanities

Business
Engineering
Science
Soc. sci.

Business
Eng. & Sci.
Soc. sci.
Humanities

NLS72; OLS

Loury &
Garman
(1995)
ln weekly
earnings, 1979 or
1986

Business
Engineering
Sci. & math
Health
Soc. sci.

1987 log annual
earnings

family background, race,
GPA, private college, college
selectivity, labor market
variables

Survey of Recent
College graduates
(1987);
hierarchical linear
modeling, OLS

Rumberger
and Thomas
(1993)

college selectivity, years of
education, parental income,
GPA, SAT, weeks worked,
rural dummy

Majors

Outcome variable

Controls

Data & Method.

Study
Women
.2521
.5135
.3036
.4433
.1255
Blacks
.262
.549
-.097
.030
Women
.1057
.0659
.2152
.0168
Women
.04
.16
.09
.19
-.04
-.06

Men
.1839
.3913
.2552
.2984
.0765
Whites
.212
.374
.094
-.164
Men
.155
.2797
.0607
.0215
Men
.06
.22
.31
.06
-.12
-.15
.489***
.378***
.316***
.265***
.279***
.086

Outcomes

Table 3: Effects of college major on log wages by gender, with and without occupation
controls

Major

Major dummies only With occupation controls
Female
Male
Female
Male
0.202***
0.207***
0.063***
0.058**
0.441***
0.531***
0.161***
0.242***
-0.024*
-0.009
-0.015
0.009
0.556***
0.561***
0.258***
0.293***
0.554***
0.524***
0.265***
0.264***
0.107***
0.152***
0.026*
0.063***
0.073***
0.154***
0.021
0.055*
0.196***
0.302***
0.068***
0.114***
0.288***
0.426***
0.143***
0.224***
0.250***
0.366***
0.101***
0.193***
0.076***
0.226*** -0.013
0.076***
0.400***
0.517***
0.224***
0.275***
0.069**
0.135*** -0.001
0.053
0.246***
0.327***
0.112***
0.158***
0.077***
0.165***
0.012
0.075***
-0.021
0.017
-0.067**
-0.035
0.391***
0.408***
0.172***
0.243***
0.218***
0.339***
0.077***
0.142***
0.310***
0.431***
0.143***
0.199***
0.199***
0.292***
0.054***
0.104***
0.256***
0.356***
0.089***
0.150***
0.342***
0.518***
0.151***
0.243***
0.105***
0.167***
0.033*
0.064***
0.200
0.217
0.330
0.337
0.146
0.177
0.074
0.098
125794
140706
124858
139493

Communications
Computer Science
Elementary Education
Electrical Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
English Language And Literature
Liberal Arts
Biology
Mathematics
Chemistry
Criminal Justice And Fire Protection
Economics
Anthropology And Archeology
Political Science And Government
Sociology
Fine Arts
Nursing
General Business
Accounting
Business Management And Administration
Marketing And Marketing Research
Finance
History
R2
SD of major coefficients
N

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
All specifications include dummy variables for highest level of education attained, a
cubic in potential experience, and race dummies. Bachelor’s degrees are 4-digit; only a
selected sample of the 171 are shown. Wages are top- and bottom-coded at 5 and 400
USD per hour, respectively. General Education is the excluded category. Occupation
controls are 5-digit. SD is calculated over all majors using ACS weights.
Sample selection: Observations are included if the individual has at least a bachelor’s
degree, is working >34 hours per week and >40 weeks per year, and is 23-59 years old.

4

1.5
1970

1980

1990
Graduation year

2010

1970
Accounting
Marketing

1980

1990
Graduation year

Mechanical engineering
Computer science

2000

2010

Electrical engineering
Communications

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

.8

1

.8

1.2

1

1.4

1.2

General business
Business mgmt and admin
Finance

2000

0

.4

.6

.5

.8

1

1

1.2

Figure 1: Relative fraction female, by major

1970
1970

1980

1990
Graduation year

2010

1980

1990
Graduation year
Poli sci & govt
History
Psychology

Mathematics
Physics

2000

2010

Economics
Sociology

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Biology
Chemistry

2000

1970

1980

1990
Graduation year
Liberal arts
Elementary ed

2000

2010

English
General ed

Note: Relative fraction female is calculated by dividing the fraction female in a particular major in a particular year by the fraction of female college graduates that year,
then smoothed using a three-year moving average. Data are from the ACS.

5

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

.35

Figure 2: Average of major coefficients by age

1970

1980
Men
Women

1990
Graduation year

2000

Male weights with female coefficients
Female weights with male coefficients

6

2010

4

Figure 3: Occupational dispersion by age

0

1

Density
2

3

Age 25 to 34
Age 35 to 49
Age 50 to 59

.2

.4
.6
.8
Proportion of people in top ten occupations by major

Cell size ! 350

7

1

WEB SUPPLEMENTAL APPENDIX
Empirical evidence on choice of high school curriculum
There is relatively little empirical work in economics on how high school students choose curricula, particularly in comparison to research on choice of college major. The main margins of choice for a typical high
school student are among vocational, general, and academic curricula, and, within the latter, between a
focus in social sciences and humanities and a focus in mathematics and science. The level and number of
courses (subject to promotion and graduation requirements) are also choice variables. Contrary to popular
perception, the number and level of courses in academic subjects taken by high school students in America
have risen over the past thirty years. Data on course taking by high school seniors reported in Ingels et al
(2008) for the years 1982, 1992, and 2004 shows an increase from 1982, particularly in science. Supplementary Table 1 compares course-taking trends from 1990 to 2009 for high school graduates, as reported by Nord
et al (2011). Course-taking overall is up and in core academic subjects (mathematics, science, social science,
and English). Furthermore, the percentage of students taking more rigorous programs of study has increased
as well. Of course, one would expect curriculum choice to change over time as the occupational mix of labor
demand changes. As we discuss in Section 4, part of the trend is due to changes in state level graduation
requirements. It would be interesting to decompose trends in college attendance and major choice over the
past 40 years into the contribution of changes in high school curriculum and the contribution of changes in
the link between high school curriculum and major choice.
We are not aware of any study that has estimated a structural model of high school curriculum choice
along the lines sketched in the previous section. Zietz and Joshi (2005) use the NLSY (1997) to estimate
a two-period model of leisure maximization, subject to minimum consumption constraints. They find that
“academic aptitude, pre-high school academic performance, and lifetime consumption goals as driven by
peer pressure and family background are by far the most important determinants of program choice.” Meer
(2007), using the NELS88 data, finds that the principle of comparative advantage is at play when students
choose between academic and vocational high school curricula. In the remainder of this section, we briefly
summarize some of the descriptive evidence on the determinants of curriculum.
There is a substantial literature on the role of gender, race/ethnicity, and socio-economic status in
determining high school curriculum, which we touch on briefly here. Historically, girls tended to take less
math and science than boys, despite equal (or greater) opportunities or prior achievement (Oakes (1990),
Catsambis (1994), Ayalon (1995)). Girls tend to have less positive attitudes toward or fewer aspirations
for careers in math or science; they are less interested in math and less confident about their mathematics
1

abilities (Dick & Rallis (1991)). However, Goldin et al (2006) report that among graduating seniors the
male/female ratio of mean number of high school courses in math, science courses, and chemistry declined
from between 1.3 and 1.4 in 1957 to between 0.9 and 1.0 in 2000. In physics, the male/female ratio declined
from 3.1 to 1.21.
Students from high SES backgrounds tend to be streamed into more academic tracks; this can be explained
by a variety of factors including higher intrinsic ability (cognitive or non-cognitive), choice of school and
neighborhood, better preparation in primary school, peer eﬀects, or parental lobbying (Vanfossen, Jones &
Spade (1987)). Interestingly, African-American and Latino students have positive attitudes toward math,
despite low achievement (Catsambis (1994)). That said, minorities enroll in math-intensive courses at lower
rates than whites; however, this is mostly explained by SES and prior achievement (as measured, for example,
by GPA) (Ferguson (2009)).
Recent reports discussing student course taking and achievement with emphasis science, engineering,
technology and math, include President’s Council on Science and Technology (2011).

School-level influences
School policies, particularly course requirements, scope of oﬀerings, and tracking guidelines, are an important
influence on curriculum choice. These policies are in turn shaped in part by state and school district
regulations, as we document below. A substantial fraction of the variance in curriculum choice is across high
schools (see note 9).
To the extent that school behavior can be taken as independent of the unobserved characteristics of the
students that attend the school, such variation can be (and has been) used to identify the eﬀects of particular
high school curricula. In practice, however, school choice and cross school competition and specialization
(attracting particular parts of the student market) will undermine the credibility of such a strategy. In
Section 3, we discuss three studies that use curriculum reforms as a source of exogenous variation.
Peers, teachers and facilities (e.g., availability of science labs or a theater) may also influence curriculum
choice, but attempts to identify the causal eﬀect of these factors are subject to the same endogeneity problem.

References
[1] Ayalon H. 1995. Math as a gatekeeper: ethnic and gender inequality in course taking of the
sciences in Israel. Amer. J. Educ. 104(1): 34–56

2

[2] Catsambis S. 1994. The path to math: gender and racial-ethnic diﬀerences in mathematics
participation from middle school to high school. Soc. Educ. 67(3):199–215
[3] Dick TP, Rallis SF. 1991. Factors and influences on high school students’ career choices. J.
Research Math. Educ. 22(4):281–92
[4] Ferguson, RF. 2009. Do racially disparate advanced course enrollments cause opportunity-tolearn gaps in US high schools? Working paper, Harvard.
[5] Ingels SJ, Dalton BW, LoGerfo L. 2008. Trends among high school seniors, 1972-2004 (NCES
2008-320). Washington, DC: US Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics
[6] Meer J. 2007. Evidence on the returns to secondary vocational education. Econ. Educ. Rev.
26(5):559–573
[7] Nord C, Roey S, Perkins R, Lyons M, Lemanski N, Tamir Y, Brown J, Schuknecht J, Herrold
K. 2011. America’s high school graduates: results from the 2009 NAEP high school transcript
study (NCES 2011-462). Washington, DC: US Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics
[8] Oakes J. 1990. Multiplying inequalities: the eﬀects of race, social class, and tracking on opportunities to learn mathematics and science. RAND.
[9] Vanfossen BE, Jones JD, Spade JZ. 1987. Curriculum tracking and status maintenance. Soc.
Educ. 60(2):104–22
[10] Zietz J, Joshi P. 2005. Academic choice behavior of high school students: economic rationale
and empirical evidence. Econ. Educ. Rev. 24(3):297–308

3

Supplementary Tables and Figures

1

Supplementary Table 1: Trends in high school course-taking

Credits earned, total
Core academic, total
Core science
Core math
Core social science
Core English
Percentage taking curricula that are:
Rigorous
Midlevel
Standard
Below standard
Percentage taking STEM courses:
Algebra II
Calculus
Advanced biology
Chemistry
Physics

1990

2005

23.6
13.7
2.8
3.2
3.5
4.1

27.2
16.0
3.5
3.9
4.2
4.4

5
26
9
60

13
46
16
25

53
7
28
45
24

76
17
45
70
39

From 2011 NAEP report. All differences are significant
at 5%.

2

3

1.2
1.4
1.7
3.2
3.2
2.0
2.2
4.9
3.0
10.5
8.3
1.2
1.3
4.1
1.3
1.2
3.6
3.1
4.9
2.0
1.8
1.7
1.4
1.1
1.2
4.2

Share

%
female
0.4
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.6
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.8
0.4
0.3
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.7
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.9

Math
credits
27.7
12.3
12.3
11.4
5.8
5.6
4.9
3.9
4.0
3.1
3.7
3.6
3.0
2.7
2.3
2.9
1.6
2.0
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.0
1.5
1.8
1.1
1.0

Science
credits
13.7
66.1
66.5
11.1
56.1
6.3
5.1
3.7
5.1
7.1
4.3
21.1
6.7
8.2
6.5
19.9
5.8
7.2
6.1
6.2
6.0
6.9
5.2
5.7
5.5
13.0

SAT
M
592
613
606
582
577
597
563
571
526
488
522
546
529
530
539
520
512
514
540
542
558
555
460
567
496
488

SAT
V
538
566
571
556
575
573
534
534
514
496
510
549
527
540
575
518
537
526
592
571
595
592
487
595
533
497

Mean
wages
37.76
40.43
41.61
35.83
27.26
43.15
38.21
36.88
32.90
21.17
31.56
26.51
25.00
24.61
22.57
22.91
28.17
25.56
27.14
33.32
29.52
25.57
23.19
23.77
29.94
31.12

p10
wages
14.01
19.61
20.10
16.18
10.98
13.90
14.71
14.71
13.73
11.27
13.24
10.46
11.40
11.03
9.80
10.62
12.25
11.76
11.62
12.60
11.13
10.37
11.76
9.80
12.20
17.71

p90
wages
63.73
58.82
63.24
56.37
46.08
78.43
65.36
60.33
57.29
32.68
51.96
45.75
41.18
41.18
37.91
38.15
49.02
41.67
46.35
57.25
49.02
43.57
38.24
39.22
50.98
46.08

Source: NCES B&B 1993/2003 for course counts and SAT scores. Not all majors are shown; only those which
appear in Table 1 are presented. Shares and hourly wage data are from the 2009 ACS, top- and bottom-coded at
5 and 400 USD per hour, respectively.
Sample selection: Wage observations are included if the individual has a bachelor’s degree, is working >34 hours
per week and >40 weeks per year, and is 23-59 years old. Individuals with an advanced degree are excluded.
a
Includes library science.

Mathematics
Mech. Eng.
Elec. Eng.
Comp. & IT
Bio. Sci.
Economics
Finance
Accounting
Marketing
Educ. (other)b
Bus. Mgmt & Admin.
Agr. & Agr. Sci.
Comm. Arts
Psychology
Music & Drama
Fit. & Nutr.
Comm.
Soc. Sci. (oth.)
Letters
Poli. Sci.
History
Art & Art Hist.
Social Work & HR
Phil. & Rel.
Journ.
Nursing

Major

Supplementary Table 2: College major characteristics, no advanced degrees

Supplementary Table 3: Effects of college major on log wages by gender, with and without
occupation controls – all control variables and major coefficients reported

Major

Major dummies only
Female
Male
PhD
0.290*** 0.220***
Masters
0.204*** 0.173***
Professional degree
0.441*** 0.497***
Potential experience
0.083*** 0.097***
Potential experience2
-0.003*** -0.003***
Potential experience3
0.000*** 0.000***
Black, non-hispanic
-0.084*** -0.215***
Native American, non-hispanic
-0.163*** -0.171***
Asian, non-hispanic
-0.022** -0.099***
Pacific Islander, non-hispanic
-0.220** -0.159
Mixed raced, non-hispanic
-0.044** -0.085***
Any race hispanic
-0.088*** -0.205***
General Agriculture
-0.043
-0.059
Agriculture Production And Management
0.011
0.047
Agricultural Economics
0.074
0.150**
Animal Sciences
-0.079*
-0.078*
Food Science
0.255*** 0.236*
Plant Science And Agronomy
-0.027
0.026
Soil Science
-0.292
0.127
Miscellaneous Agriculture
0.053
0.154
Environmental Science
0.095**
0.162***
Forestry
0.250*** 0.157***
Natural Resources Management
0.047
0.112***
Architecture
0.238*** 0.272***
Area Ethnic And Civilization Studies
0.155*** 0.247***
Communications
0.202*** 0.207***
Journalism
0.174*** 0.183***
Mass Media
0.112*** 0.102***
Advertising And Public Relations
0.181*** 0.228***
Communication Technologies
0.188*** 0.165***
Computer And Information Systems
0.295*** 0.421***
Computer Programming And Data Processi -0.052
0.229***
Computer Science
0.441*** 0.531***
Information Sciences
0.410*** 0.421***
Computer Administration Management And 0.290*** 0.357***
Computer Networking And Telecommunicat 0.174**
0.258***

4

With occupation controls
Female
Male
0.296*** 0.264***
0.181*** 0.139***
0.254*** 0.259***
0.066*** 0.083***
-0.002*** -0.002***
0.000*** 0.000***
-0.052*** -0.137***
-0.132*** -0.139***
-0.000
-0.076***
-0.114
-0.089
-0.038** -0.059***
-0.037*** -0.130***
-0.094*
-0.068
-0.101*
0.034
-0.010
0.027
-0.074*
-0.060
0.110
0.120
-0.041
0.029
-0.280
0.103
-0.042
0.079
-0.032
0.036
0.162*** 0.048
-0.038
0.000
0.067*
0.086***
0.063*
0.122**
0.063*** 0.058**
0.029
0.033
0.013
-0.011
0.018
0.057
0.039
0.042
0.072**
0.160***
-0.091
0.043
0.161*** 0.242***
0.167*** 0.164***
0.076
0.134**
0.036
0.074

Major
Cosmetology Services And Culinary Arts
Educational Administration And Supervi
School Student Counseling
Elementary Education
Mathematics Teacher Education
Physical And Health Education Teaching
Early Childhood Education
Science And Computer Teacher Education
Secondary Teacher Education
Special Needs Education
Social Science Or History Teacher Educ
Teacher Education: Multiple Levels
Language And Drama Education
Art And Music Education
Miscellaneous Education
General Engineering
Aerospace Engineering
Biological Engineering
Architectural Engineering
Biomedical Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Computer Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Engineering Mechanics Physics And Scie
Environmental Engineering
Geological And Geophysical Engineering
Industrial And Manufacturing Engineeri
Materials Engineering And Materials Sc
Mechanical Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Mining And Mineral Engineering
Naval Architecture And Marine Engineer
Nuclear Engineering
Petroleum Engineering
Miscellaneous Engineering
Engineering Technologies
Engineering And Industrial Management
Electrical Engineering Technology
Industrial Production Technologies
Mechanical Engineering Related Technol

Major dummies only
Female
Male
-0.163*
-0.024
0.106**
0.069
-0.006
0.065
-0.024*
-0.009
0.051*
0.006
0.059** -0.002
-0.057*** -0.230
-0.017
0.018
0.031
0.010
0.081*** 0.105**
0.013
-0.014
-0.012
0.003
0.031
0.013
-0.004
-0.040
0.043*
0.052
0.417*** 0.392***
0.616*** 0.548***
0.224**
0.135*
0.542*** 0.357***
0.468*** 0.472***
0.526*** 0.614***
0.406*** 0.482***
0.562*** 0.606***
0.556*** 0.561***
0.715*** 0.429***
0.400*** 0.530***
0.342
0.639***
0.483*** 0.469***
0.341**
0.429***
0.554*** 0.524***
0.374*
0.452***
0.771*
0.412***
0.530**
0.360***
0.600**
0.651***
0.682*** 0.869***
0.260*** 0.394***
0.141
0.345***
0.298**
0.374***
0.150
0.315***
0.282*** 0.261***
0.481*** 0.262***
5

With occupation controls
Female
Male
-0.003
0.165*
0.072
-0.011
0.018
0.122
-0.015
0.009
0.020
0.015
0.046*
-0.002
-0.015
-0.164
-0.015
0.053
0.010
0.013
0.067*** 0.102**
-0.001
-0.016
-0.014
0.021
0.016
0.035
-0.007
0.000
0.015
-0.011
0.170*** 0.169***
0.274*** 0.272***
0.053
0.025
0.262**
0.171**
0.203**
0.171**
0.252*** 0.346***
0.138*** 0.240***
0.227*** 0.293***
0.258*** 0.293***
0.379**
0.235***
0.166*
0.267***
0.063
0.385***
0.221*** 0.227***
0.064
0.194***
0.265*** 0.264***
0.155
0.209***
0.590
0.215**
0.246*
0.147
0.364
0.406***
0.332*
0.590***
0.129
0.206***
0.010
0.143***
0.111
0.135**
-0.075
0.140***
0.146*
0.087**
0.186*
0.107**

Major
Miscellaneous Engineering Technologies
Linguistics And Comparative Language A
French German Latin And Other Common F
Other Foreign Languages
Family And Consumer Sciences
Court Reporting
Pre-Law And Legal Studies
English Language And Literature
Composition And Speech
Liberal Arts
Humanities
Library Science
Biology
Biochemical Sciences
Botany
Molecular Biology
Ecology
Genetics
Microbiology
Pharmacology
Physiology
Zoology
Miscellaneous Biology
Mathematics
Applied Mathematics
Statistics And Decision Science
Military Technologies
Intercultural And International Studie
Nutrition Sciences
Neuroscience
Mathematics And Computer Science
Cognitive Science And Biopsychology
Interdisciplinary Social Sciences
Multi-Disciplinary Or General Science
Physical Fitness Parks Recreation And
Philosophy And Religious Studies
Theology And Religious Vocations
Physical Sciences
Astronomy And Astrophysics
Atmospheric Sciences And Meteorology
Chemistry
6

Major dummies only
Female
Male
0.176*
0.327***
0.080*
0.172*
0.128*** 0.164***
0.081
0.117*
0.020
0.203***
0.289*
-0.013
0.139*** 0.234***
0.107*** 0.152***
0.090*
0.141**
0.073*** 0.154***
0.113*
0.113
-0.046
0.110
0.196*** 0.302***
0.262*** 0.308***
-0.012
0.008
0.196*** 0.260***
0.050
0.068
0.196**
0.178
0.185*** 0.228***
0.387**
0.168
0.157*** 0.193***
0.088
0.328***
0.154**
0.189***
0.288*** 0.426***
0.537*** 0.641***
0.473*** 0.523***
0.670*** 0.280
0.119**
0.192***
0.144*** 0.402***
0.088
0.160
0.722**
0.638***
0.164
0.367**
0.082*
0.195***
0.116*** 0.282***
0.018
0.045*
0.086*
-0.003
-0.242*** -0.304***
-0.085
0.130
0.438**
0.339**
0.196
0.335***
0.250*** 0.366***

With occupation controls
Female
Male
0.041
0.121***
0.001
0.047
0.066*** 0.070*
0.017
0.047
-0.002
0.102*
0.067
-0.014
0.017
0.117*
0.026*
0.063***
0.002
0.090*
0.021
0.055*
0.044
0.004
-0.036
0.073
0.068*** 0.114***
0.096**
0.111**
-0.062
-0.007
0.080
0.112*
-0.008
0.012
0.080
0.025
0.063
0.071
0.135
0.022
0.016
0.077
-0.005
0.153***
0.075
0.057
0.143*** 0.224***
0.286*** 0.375***
0.228*** 0.206***
0.761*** 0.099
0.019
0.061
0.081*
0.232*
-0.094
-0.032
0.444*
0.335***
0.022
0.137
0.019
0.081
0.015
0.110***
-0.034
0.005
0.028
-0.004
-0.172*** -0.142***
-0.163*
0.016
0.378*
0.212**
0.097
0.152**
0.101*** 0.193***

Major
Geology And Earth Science
Geosciences
Oceanography
Physic
Nuclear, Industrial Radiology, And Bio
Psychology
Educational Psychology
Clinical Psychology
Counseling Psychology
Industrial And Organizational Psycholo
Social Psychology
Miscellaneous Psychology
Criminal Justice And Fire Protection
Public Administration
Public Policy
Human Services And Community Organizat
Social Work
General Social Sciences
Economics
Anthropology And Archeology
Criminology
Geography
International Relations
Political Science And Government
Sociology
Miscellaneous Social Sciences
Construction Services
Electrical And Mechanic Repairs And Te
Precision Production And Industrial Ar
Transportation Sciences And Technologi
Fine Arts
Drama And Theater Arts
Music
Visual And Performing Arts
Commercial Art And Graphic Design
Film Video And Photographic Arts
Art History And Criticism
Studio Arts
General Medical And Health Services
Communication Disorders Sciences And S
Health And Medical Administrative Serv
7

Major dummies only
Female
Male
0.162*** 0.261***
0.332*
0.422***
0.025
0.244***
0.292*** 0.383***
0.155
0.276***
0.076*** 0.157***
-0.015
-0.098
0.149**
0.119
-0.095** -0.102
0.176**
0.466***
0.054
0.129
0.060
0.199**
0.076*** 0.226***
0.240*** 0.292***
0.204**
0.346***
-0.077** -0.016
-0.027
0.009
0.055*
0.166***
0.400*** 0.517***
0.069**
0.135***
0.123**
0.191***
0.154*** 0.212***
0.242*** 0.398***
0.246*** 0.327***
0.077*** 0.165***
0.340*** 0.364***
0.298*
0.430***
-0.550*
0.145*
0.122*
-0.003
0.292*** 0.259***
-0.021
0.017
-0.025
-0.089*
-0.109*** -0.034
-0.097
0.122
0.093*** 0.127***
0.014
0.082
0.132*** 0.263**
-0.020
-0.147*
0.163*** 0.183***
0.144*** 0.294***
0.197*** 0.242***

With occupation controls
Female
Male
0.018
0.117***
0.095
0.213**
-0.037
0.086
0.113*** 0.187***
0.000
0.112
0.019
0.051**
-0.026
-0.115
0.109
0.087
-0.100** -0.111
0.046
0.247***
-0.007
-0.028
-0.004
0.149*
-0.013
0.076***
0.051
0.098**
0.028
0.170*
-0.098*** -0.052
-0.034*
0.017
0.017
0.099**
0.224*** 0.275***
-0.001
0.053
0.052
0.064
0.004
0.085***
0.093**
0.229***
0.112*** 0.158***
0.012
0.075***
0.164**
0.213**
0.121
0.225***
-0.332
0.108
0.025
0.013
0.111
0.081**
-0.067** -0.035
-0.065*
-0.135***
-0.109*** -0.038
-0.084
0.028
-0.017
0.009
-0.012
0.007
0.064*
0.149
-0.031
-0.178**
0.032
0.105*
0.049*
0.138*
0.058
0.058

Major

Major dummies only With occupation controls
Female
Male
Female
Male
Medical Assisting Services
0.338***
0.315***
0.177***
0.152*
Medical Technologies Technicians
0.252***
0.360***
0.137***
0.266***
Health And Medical Preparatory Program
0.481***
0.496***
0.306***
0.190**
Nursing
0.391***
0.408***
0.172***
0.243***
Pharmacy Pharmaceutical Sciences And A
0.641***
0.626***
0.253***
0.406***
Treatment Therapy Professions
0.208***
0.220***
0.101***
0.095**
Community And Public Health
0.151***
0.226***
0.030
0.076
Miscellaneous Health Medical Professio
-0.042
0.083
-0.035
0.078
General Business
0.218***
0.339***
0.077***
0.142***
Accounting
0.310***
0.431***
0.143***
0.199***
Actuarial Science
0.632***
0.764***
0.160
0.337***
Business Management And Administration
0.199***
0.292***
0.054***
0.104***
Operations Logistics And E-Commerce
0.350***
0.403***
0.169***
0.181***
Business Economics
0.432***
0.458***
0.273***
0.204***
Marketing And Marketing Research
0.256***
0.356***
0.089***
0.150***
Finance
0.342***
0.518***
0.151***
0.243***
Human Resources And Personnel Manageme
0.203***
0.258***
0.037
0.064*
International Business
0.284***
0.398***
0.090**
0.149***
Hospitality Management
0.093**
0.095**
0.049
0.060
Management Information Systems And Sta
0.406***
0.485***
0.152***
0.223***
Miscellaneous Business & Medical Admin
0.063
0.363*** -0.037
0.192***
History
0.105***
0.167***
0.033*
0.064***
United States History
0.090
0.127
-0.061
-0.031
Constant
2.217***
2.214***
2.292***
2.235***
R2
0.200
0.217
0.330
0.337
N
125794
140706
124858
139493
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Bachelor’s degrees are 4-digit. Wages are top- and bottom-coded at 5 and 400 USD per
hour, respectively. General Education is the excluded category. Occupation controls
are 5-digit; coefficients not shown.
Sample selection: Observations are included if the individual has at least a bachelor’s
degree, is working >34 hours per week and >40 weeks per year, and is 23-59 years old.

8

9

History

Business
Mgmt. &
Admin.

Acct.

Nursing

Fine Arts

Poli. Sci. &
Govt.

Econ.

Psych.

Chem.

Biology

Elec. Eng.

Elem. Ed.

Comp. Sci.

Comm.

Major

20.2

18.9

70.2

89.8

21.9

20.6

18.7

20.5

37.8

19.4

39.3

77.3

51.7

11.0

%age

Accountants and Auditors
Supervisors/Managers, Sales Workers
Miscellaneous Managers
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Miscellaneous Managers

Accountants and Auditors
Financial Managers
Miscellaneous Managers

Computer Software Engineers
Computer Programmers
Computer Scientists and Systems
Analysts
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Preschool and Kindergarten Teachers
Education Administrators
Computer Software Engineers
Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Petroleum, Mining, Geol. Engineers
Physicians and Surgeons
Dentists
Postsecondary Teachers
Physicians and Surgeons
Miscellaneous Managers
Chemists and Materials Scientists
Counselors
Social Workers
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Miscellaneous Managers
Financial Managers
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Miscellaneous Managers
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Designers
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Artists and Related Workers
Registered Nurses
Med. & Health Services Managers
Nursing, Psych, Home Health Aides

Age 40-44
Top 3 occupations
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Marketing and Sales Managers
Miscellaneous Managers

Note: Occupations are 5-digit; only a selected sample shown.

Age 25-29
Top 3 occupations
Marketing and Sales Managers
Secretaries and Admin. Assts
Human Resources, Training, and
Labor Relations Specialists
Computer Software Engineers
Computer Programmers
Computer Scientists and Systems
Analysts
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Preschool and Kindergarten Teachers
Special Education Teachers
Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Computer Software Engineers
Petroleum, Mining, Geol. Engineers
Physicians and Surgeons
Postsecondary Teachers
Clinical Laboratory Techs
Postsecondary Teachers
Chemists and Materials Scientists
Physicians and Surgeons
Social Workers
Counselors
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Accountants and Auditors
Financial Analysts and Advisors
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Miscellaneous Legal Support Workers
Designers
Waiters and Waitresses
Retail Salespersons
Registered Nurses
Nursing, Psych, Home Health Aides
Licensed Practical and Licensed
Vocational Nurses
Accountants and Auditors
Financial Managers
Bookkeeping, Accounting, and
Auditing Clerks
Accountants and Auditors
Supervisors/Managers, Sales Workers
Miscellaneous Managers
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Secondary School Teachers
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
23.1

17.5

52.9

83.4

25.6

25.5

19.0

17.2

31.1

29.2

29.5

65.0

37.4

15.0

%age

Miscellaneous Managers
Accountants and Auditors
Supervisors/Managers, Sales Workers
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Postsecondary Teachers

Accountants and Auditors
Financial Managers
Chief Executives and Legislators

Computer Software Engineers
Computer Programmers
Computer Scientists and Systems
Analysts
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Education Administrators
Preschool and Kindergarten Teachers
Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Petroleum, Mining, Geol.Engineers
Miscellaneous Managers
Physicians and Surgeons
Postsecondary Teachers
Miscellaneous Managers
Physicians and Surgeons
Chemists and Materials Scientists
Postsecondary Teachers
Psychologists
Counselors
Social Workers
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Miscellaneous Managers
Accountants and Auditors
Lawyers, Judges, Magistrates, etc.
Miscellaneous Managers
Chief Executives and Legislators
Elem. & Middle School Teachers
Artists and Related Workers
Designers
Registered Nurses
Med. & Health Services Managers
Postsecondary Teachers

Age 55-59
Top 3 occupations
Miscellaneous Managers
Writers and Editors
Chief Executives and Legislators

Supplementary Table 4: Proportion of people in top three occupations by major

22.8

17.0

50.9

79.4

19.2

28.8

21.7

15.8

23.4

26.5

29.7

56.0

42.8

14.5

%age

10
Biology
Biochemical Sciences
Psychology
Nursing
Biology
Psychology
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
Marketing And Marketing Research
General Business
Marketing And Marketing Research
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business

Age 25-29
Top 3 majors
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Economics
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Marketing And Marketing Research
Political Science And Government
English Language And Literature
History
Marketing And Marketing Research
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
Communications
Finance
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Psychology
General Education
English Language And Literature
Accounting
Finance
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
Computer Science
Computer Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Psychology
Social Work
Sociology
Biology
Psychology
English Language And Literature
Elementary Education
General Education
Early Childhood Education
General Education
English Language And Literature
Art And Music Education

35.4

32.3

86.2

53.2

26.8

44.5

20.4

59.6

63.7

69.1

20.2

41.5

41.1

36.4

21.5

27.8

%age

Age 40-44
Top 3 majors
General Business
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
Accounting
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Electrical Engineering
Political Science And Government
History
English Language And Literature
Marketing And Marketing Research
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Accounting
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
Finance
General Education
Elementary Education
Psychology
Accounting
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
Finance
Computer Science
Electrical Engineering
Computer Engineering
Social Work
Psychology
Sociology
English Language And Literature
Biology
Psychology
Elementary Education
General Education
English Language And Literature
General Education
English Language And Literature
Physical And Health Education
Teaching
Biology
Chemistry
Biochemical Sciences
Nursing
Psychology
Multi-Disciplinary Or General Science
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Marketing And Marketing Research
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Marketing And Marketing Research

Note: Occupations are 5-digit; only a selected sample shown.

First-Line
Supervisors/Managers,
Sales Workers
Sales Representatives,
Wholesale and
Manufacturing

Registered Nurses

Physicians and
Surgeons

Secondary School
Teachers

Elementary and
Middle School
Teachers

Postsecondary
Teachers

Social Workers

Computer Software
Engineers

Accountants and
Auditors

Education
Administrators

Financial Managers

Miscellaneous
Managers, Including
Postmasters and Mail
Lawyers, and Judges,
Magistrates, and
Other Judicial
Workers
Marketing and Sales
Managers

Chief Executives and
Legislators

Major

37.4

30.7

82.9

53.0

24.4

45.2

20.9

59.3

45.4

72.1

24.3

46.1

32.1

38.8

19.7

27.0

%age

Biology
Chemistry
Health & Med. Prep. Progs.
Nursing
Psychology
Multi-Disciplinary Or General Science
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
General Education
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Marketing And Marketing Research

Age 55-59
Top 3 majors
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Accounting
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Biology
Political Science And Government
History
English Language And Literature
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
Marketing And Marketing Research
General Business
Accounting
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
General Education
Elementary Education
English Language And Literature
Accounting
Business Mgmt. & Admin.
General Business
Computer Science
Mathematics
Electrical Engineering
Social Work
Psychology
Sociology
English Language And Literature
Nursing
Biology
Elementary Education
General Education
Special Needs Education
General Education
Secondary Teacher Education
Elementary Education

Supplementary Table 5: Proportion of people in top three majors by occupation

30.7

26.1

81.9

53.3

26.2

50.7

19.2

52.9

41.7

65.8

28.9

45.4

28.5

40.3

19.0

24.9

%age

Supplementary Figure 1

5

Proportion of majors
10
15
20
25

30

Major trends, men

1970

1980

1990
College graduation year

Education
Liberal Arts
Business and economics

2000

2010

Engineering
Science

0

Proportion of majors
10
20
30

40

Major trends, women

1970

1980

1990
College graduation year

Education
Liberal Arts
Business and economics

Selected majors only. Data from ACS.

11

2000
Engineering
Science

2010

Supplementary Figure 2

0

Proportion of majors
10
20

30

Major trends, men

1985

1990

1995
2000
College graduation year

Education
Liberal Arts
Business and economics

2005

2010

Engineering
Science

0

Proportion of majors
5
10
15
20

25

Major trends, women

1985

1990

1995
2000
College graduation year

Education
Liberal Arts
Business and economics

Selected majors only. Data from IPEDS.

12

2005
Engineering
Science

2010

