                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT REIMBURSEMENT IN DRUG SHORTAGES

                                           Ali Yurukoglu
                                            Eli Liebman
                                           David B. Ridley

                                        Working Paper 17987
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17987


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




Previously circulated as "Medicare Reimbursements and Shortages of Sterile Injectable Pharmaceuticals."
We thank Lanier Benkard, Ernst Berndt, John Beshears, Tim Bresnahan, Jeffrey Clemens, Liran Einav,
Sherry Glied, Joshua Gottlieb, Gino Grampp, Mireille Jacobsen, Daniel Kessler, Michael Link, Michael
Malecki, Steve Mayer, Jeff Moe, Ted Okon, Mar Reguant, Peter Reiss, Fiona Scott Morton, Jesse
Shapiro, Robert Wilson, and Stefanos Zenios for comments. Ridley received research support from
Amgen. Yurukoglu and Liebman have no financial interests that relate to this research. Amgen provided
the IMS Health data and Erin Fox provided the shortage data. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Ali Yurukoglu, Eli Liebman, and David B. Ridley. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Government Reimbursement in Drug Shortages
Ali Yurukoglu, Eli Liebman, and David B. Ridley
NBER Working Paper No. 17987
April 2012, Revised February 2016
JEL No. I11,I18,L51

                                             ABSTRACT

Beginning in the mid-2000s, the incidence of drug shortages rose, especially for generic injectable
drugs such as anesthetics and chemotherapy treatments. We examine whether reimbursement changes
contributed to the shortages, focusing on a reduction in Medicare Part B reimbursement to providers
for drugs. We hypothesize that lower reimbursement put downward pressure on manufacturers’ prices
which reduced manufacturers’ incentives to invest in capacity, reliability, and new launches. We show
that, after the policy change, shortages rose more for drugs with (i) higher shares of patients insured
by Medicare, (ii) greater decreases in provider reimbursement, and (iii) greater decreases in manufacturer
prices.


Ali Yurukoglu                                       David B. Ridley
Graduate School of Business                         Duke University
Stanford University                                 Fuqua School of Business
Stanford, CA 94305                                  Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER                                            david.ridley@duke.edu
ayurukog@stanford.edu

Eli Liebman
Department of Economics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
ebs30@duke.edu
   Beginning in the mid-2000s, the incidence of drug shortages rose, especially for generic in-
jectable drugs (Figure 1). Examples include drugs used in chemotherapy, antibiotics and anesthe-
sia, as well as injectable electrolytes and vitamins. Shortages cause doctors and patients to seek
alternatives that are unfamiliar or inferior. When substitutes are unacceptable, doctors and patients
delay or forego treatment.1 Most of the drugs that experienced shortages were off-patent and had
previously been readily available.2
                                                             60,000
                             Shortage Molecule-Days per Year
                                20,000         40,000
                                                 0




                                                                      2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

                                                                                     Sterile Injectables      Other Drugs




 Figure 1: Shortage days per year across all drugs. Source: University of Utah Drug Information Service


   We investigate how declining reimbursement affected the rise of shortages of sterile injectable
drugs in the United States. One such change was the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) which
reduced Medicare reimbursement to the health care providers who administer these drugs.3 We
begin by specifying a theoretical model of how reimbursement policy and market size influence
shortages. Our model implies that the decision by manufacturers to invest in reliability and quality
depends on the expected returns.4 If the returns are sufficiently high, then manufacturers will
   1
      Metzger, Billett and Link (2012) provide clinical evidence that a commonly used substitute (cyclophosphamide)
used because of shortages of mechlorethamine resulted in higher relapse rates in patients with pediatric Hodgkin’s
lymphoma. The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), the American Society of Hematology (ASH), and
the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) have all separately detailed how drug shortages result in worse
patient outcomes, higher medical care costs, and delays in clinical trials for new therapies (American Society of
Clinical Oncology (2011), American Society of Hematology (2011), American Society of Anesthesiologists (2010)).
    2
      See Kaakeh et al. (2011) regarding the incidence of shortages. See Panel (2009); Rosoff et al. (2012) regarding
guidelines for dealing with shortages. See working papers by Conti and Berndt (2013) and Ridley, Bei and Liebman
(2016) regarding shortages of cancer drugs and vaccines, respectively.
    3
      Duggan and Scott Morton (2010) examine the effect of the MMA on prices in the retail market. Furthermore,
Jacobson et al. (2010) examine the effect of the MMA on treatment patterns by oncologists.
    4
      See also Woodcock and Wosinska (2012)


                                                                                                  2
double-source ingredients, perform monitoring and maintenance on manufacturing lines, and build
newer or more robust manufacturing lines. These actions can reduce the likelihood of shortages.

     Consistent with the theoretical model, the empirical results suggest supply-side responses to de-
creasing margins. We begin by showing that drugs which had greater exposure to the policy change
experienced greater increases in shortages. Exposure to the policy change is measured using the
Medicare market share (MMS) – the fraction of a drug’s revenue that comes from Medicare fee for
service patients. This metric is similar to the Medicare market share measure used by Duggan and
Scott Morton (2010) who study the effect of introducing Medicare Part D. Then, to explore our
theorized mechanisms by which the policy change could lead to more shortages, we test compara-
tive statics from the theoretical model. In particular, we show that drugs for which reimbursements
fell by more after the policy change had greater increases in shortages. These results hold whether
measuring reimbursement from Medicare to health providers (which was directly affected by the
policy, but an indirect measure of manufacturer profitability) or a manufacturers’ average revenue
per dose (which was indirectly affect by the policy, but a direct measure of manufacturer profitabil-
ity).

     These relationships are quantitatively important. We estimate that a sterile injectable drug
which has 10% less Medicare market share would have .66 fewer expected shortages days per
year after the policy change, from a mean of 60. Likewise, a 10% drop in reimbursements to
providers would increase the number of expected shortage days by 2.8 per year. The median drop
in reimbursement from Medicare to providers for generic sterile injectable drugs after the policy
change is roughly 50%.


 1      Background
     The pharmaceutical industry is highly regulated. A manufacturer must receive approval by
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before being allowed to produce a generic phar-
maceutical. To be approved, the manufacturer must persuade the FDA that its generic drug is
pharmaceutically equivalent to the branded drug and that the manufacturing process follows good
manufacturing practices including ensuring sterility for injectable dosage forms (Scott Morton,
1999). Entry into branded drugs is also highly regulated, requiring a new molecule to demonstrate
efficacy and safety compared to a placebo.

                                                   3
   Sterile injectable drugs are typically administered in a clinical setting, such as a physician’s
office or in a hospital. In the U.S. a typical generic sterile injectable drug is produced by three to
four of the seven big generic injectable manufacturers.5 Sterility is critical for injectable drugs be-
cause they are administered intravenously, intramuscularly, or subcutaneously rather than passing
through the gastrointestinal tract. Manufacturing lines can be contaminated by bacteria, fungus,
or mold which causes delays to clean up the problem. In some cases, remediation is so costly
relative to expected profit that the manufacturer stops producing the drug. Shortages might also
occur due to disruptions to supplies of active pharmaceutical ingredients. Once one manufacturer
stops producing, it falls to the other manufacturers to make up the supply difference. However, the
other manufacturers might not find it profitable to produce more units of the drug, or might not be
licensed to produce more of the drug, or might have been affected by the same supply shock as
the other manufacturer. According to our IMS Health data sample which we detail later, injectable
drugs totaled $83.3 billion dollars and 3.7 billion units in 2010.

   The supply chain for a typical sterile injectable drug is illustrated in Figure 2. Consider a
Medicare-eligible patient being treated for cancer. She visits her provider who administers a drug
through injection or infusion. The provider paid the price of the drug to a manufacturer (through
a wholesaler). The provider is reimbursed by Medicare for the drug. The difference between the
amount that Medicare reimburses for the drug and the manufacturer’s price is the gross margin
for the provider.6 Henceforth, “manufacturer’s price” will refer to a payment from a provider
to a manufacturer (through a wholesaler), while “reimbursement” will refer to a payment from
Medicare or a private insurer to a provider.

 1.1    Reimbursement Changes
   Medicare provides health insurance for seniors and the disabled. Medicare covers hospitals and
hospice (Part A), as well as physician visits and outpatient services (Part B). Under Part B, physi-
cians are reimbursed when they administer a drug (often a sterile injectable). Until 2005, Medicare
Part B reimbursed providers for drugs based on Average Wholesale Price (AWP). However, AWP
was a list price, not an actual average price. According to the Medicare Payment Advisory Com-
   5
     APP-Fresenius, Bedford-Ben Venue, Daiichi Sankyo, Hospira, Sandoz, Teva, and West-Ward. Several of these
manufacturers, as well as smaller manufacturers, experienced shortages.
   6
     Berndt (2002) describe the economics of the pharmaceutical industry. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (2011) provides more detail on the sterile injectable portion of the industry.

                                                     4
                    Manufacturer
                   (through wholesalers)



                      Drug          Price



                                                               Medicare,
                       Provider                Reimburse
                                                               Insurers

                             Drug




                        Patient



Figure 2: A provider purchases a drug from a manufacturer (through a wholesaler), then administers the
          drug to a patient. Medicare or a private insurer reimburses the provider for the drug.




                                                  5
mission (2003): “[AWP] does not correspond to any transaction price... AWP has never been
defined by statute or regulation. Individual AWPs are compiled in compendia like the Red Book
and First Databank”. As such, the AWP was often substantially higher than the actual transaction
price. Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2003) cited some dramatic examples: Vincasar,
a chemotherapy drug, had an AWP of $740, while being sold to physicians for $7.50.7 Berndt
(2005) provides a detailed history of AWP. By raising AWP, manufacturers could raise the prof-
itability of providers that chose their drug. However, the threat of litigation and new regulation
probably disciplined AWP.

   In 2003, the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) (officially known as the Medicare Prescrip-
tion Drug Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003) created the retail drug benefit known as
Medicare Part D and changed reimbursement under Medicare Part B. In 2004, MMA changed
Medicare reimbursement from the previously used 95% of AWP to 85% of AWP. Starting Jan-
uary 1, 2005, Medicare began to reimburse these drugs at 106% of the previous two quarter’s
Average Sales Price (ASP). The ASP is the volume-weighted average price across all manufac-
turers of a given drug to all buyers from two quarters prior. The ASP captures actual transaction
prices, including most discounts and rebates. A study by the Office of Inspector General found
that the median percentage difference between AWP and ASP was 50% (Office of Inspector Gen-
eral, 2005). The change resulted in decreases on the order of 50% of reimbursements for these
drugs to providers as seen in Figure 3. Furthermore the policy change clearly affected the level
of reimbursements paid by Medicare as shown in Figure 4. There is a clear drop in revenue paid
by Medicare in 2005, followed by below private growth in Medicare reimbursements. The ASP
regime is not a government price control, but rather cost-based reimbursement, however it resulted
in much less generous reimbursements than the previous AWP regime.8

   The reimbursement change only directly affected Medicare fee-for-service. Private insurance
and Medicare Advantage, which is administered by private insurers, were not directly affected.
Enrollment in Medicare Advantage grew during the sample period from 13 percent of Medicare
   7
     AWP was jokingly referred to as “Ain’t What’s Paid” (Mullen, 2007).
   8
     The fact that ASP is based on two quarters previous introduces some rigidity into the price mechanism which
likely doesn’t help alleviate shortages. However, ASPs frequently rise by more than 6% from quarter to quarter in the
data, so we conclude that this aspect of the switch to ASP is second order compared to the decrease in the realized
levels of reimbursements.



                                                         6
Figure 3: Reimbursement levels and changes for Medicare drugs. All drugs in this sample are off patent.
          The left panel is the distribution of the reimburse level for Medicare Part B. The right panel is
          the distribution of reimbursement changes. Each year, the reimbursement change is calculated as
          the reimbursement in year t minus the price in year t − 1, divided by the price in year t − 1, for
          each drug. The graph shows the percentiles of those values. All percentiles are calculated without
          weights across drugs.




Figure 4: Blue line is total revenue of reimbursement for Medicare Part B drugs. This is the entire sample
          of HCPCS codes starting with J in the Part B summary files. Reimbursements have been indexed
          to 2003. The number of drugs in sample is allowed to vary over time. The red line is revenue for
          the drugs in the IMS data which are in our sample.


                                                     7
enrollees in 2005 to 27 percent in 2012. However, it is quite common for private insurers to mimic
Medicare reimbursement, albeit with a lag (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2013). Indeed, in 2007, 21%
of surveyed private payers planned to mimic ASP, while 76% intended to use rates above ASP or
not use ASP (Mullen, 2007). In 2012, seven years after the change to ASP by Medicare, private
insurers were using ASP for 55% of patients, according to a survey (Magellan Rx Management,
2013). Private insurers were somewhat more generous than Medicare. In 2012, the average private
insurance markup over ASP was 18% (Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy, 2013, p.48). Hence,
while the change from AWP to ASP was immediate for the Medicare population, it was somewhat
more gradual for privately insured patients. Nevertheless, we can think of it as being caused by
government policy, because private insurers typically mimic Medicare. Enrollment in Medicare
Advantage grew in our sample period which would create a counter-vailing effect except that
private insurers gradually followed the lead of Medicare to ASP pricing.

    Another policy affected reimbursement during the sample period. The Medicaid 340b program
requires that drug manufacturers offer discounts to outpatient facilities that can be classified as
“safety-net providers” for low-income patients. The number of drugs purchased through 340b
covered entities grew during the period. Because these drugs are offered at a discount, the growth
implies lower revenue for drug manufacturers.9 While our estimates do not isolate the effect of
reduced incentives because of 340b, the mechanism at work – reduced incentives because of poli-
cies that lower payments to manufacturers – is the same. However, drug purchases under the 340B
Program account for about 2 percent of all U.S. drug purchases (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 2013, 311).

 1.2     Surplus for Providers and Manufacturers
    Because of the elevated reimbursement levels, prior to the policy change, both providers and
manufacturers could capture (short-run) surplus. For example, as much as half of an oncologists’
income may have come from the surplus on drugs. Likewise, branded manufacturers charged
   9
     Occasionally, large price increases for generic drugs make the news. Price increases tend to occur when manu-
facturers have market power due to exits or acquisitions. Our model (section 2) predicts higher generic prices when
there are fewer manufacturers. However, these cases of large price increases for generics are rare. According to Janine
Burkett of pharmacy benefits manager Express Scripts, “Price inflation among a few generic drugs has been in the
news lately,” but the “Express Scripts Prescription Price Index shows that, since 2008, the average price of brand drugs
has almost doubled, while the average price of generic drugs has been cut roughly in half” (Burkett, 2014).



                                                           8
prices considerably higher than marginal costs. Even generic manufacturers can charge prices
above marginal costs if fixed costs are large (some sterile injectable manufacturing requires costly
facilities), products are not identical (due to reputation, availability, and relationships), or long-run
equilibrium has not been reached.

     MMA caused providers to be reimbursed less. Furthermore, the reimbursement change com-
pressed the scope of price differentiation for manufacturers. With Medicare reimbursing at a 6
percent markup on average price, providers that paid a 7 percent markup on average price would
lose money with each purchase. Hence, both manufacturers and providers likely lost surplus. This
is consistent with previous research on vertical relationships suggesting that large firms on each
side of the market share the surplus (Crawford and Yurukoglu, 2012; Grennan, 2013; Ho and Lee,
2015). Through this channel, the decreased reimbursements to providers would reduced the prices
manufacturer’s receive as well. We investigate the relationship between provider reimbursement
and manufacturer price.


 2      Theory
     We use a model of entry and capacity choice with supply uncertainty to illustrate the change
in production incentives and underlying welfare economics associated with changing Medicare
reimbursement. This class of models has been studied by Carlton (1978), Deneckere and Peck
(1995), and Dana (2001) amongst others. We consider two regimes: list-price reimbursement
(AWP) and cost reimbursement (ASP). The AWP regime features reimbursement at a list price that
is higher than what would normally be the acquisition price of the drug. The ASP regime features
reimbursement based on costs to the provider.10

     Manufacturers, denoted by i, simultaneously choose capacity levels ki to produce an identical
medicine. After choosing capacities, each manufacturer is hit by a shock i which jointly follow a
distribution whose CDF is G(~). Manufacturer i’s new capacity is ki i .

     There is a mass of size M of patients which are all willing to pay up to pmax for the medicine.
Of those, Mgov are insured by Medicare. Under cost based reimbursement (ASP), if the total
  10
     ASP is therefore not a regulated price. However, because ASP is based on data from two quarter previous, it
does introduce some frictions into the flexibility of prices if health providers are unwilling to take a loss on individual
transactions in some quarters.



                                                            9
capacity in the market after the shocks is less than the market size M , then the market price of the
medicine is equal to pmax . If the total installed capacity is greater than the market size M, then the
price of the good is zero.
                                                    
                                                     p , PN k  < M
                                                       max  i=1 i i
                              pASP (~k,~, N, M ) =        PN
                                                            i=1 ki i ≥ M
                                                     0,


   Under AWP reimbursement, the government which reimburses hospitals at pmax no matter
what the price the hospital purchased the medicine at when they serve Medicare patients.11 The
government purchases up to Mgov units at pmax no matter what total industry capacity turns out to
be. Some fraction γ of that reimbursement rate will go to manufacturers. γ ∈ [0, 1] represents a
bargaining power parameter which is assumed to be the same across manufacturers.
                                              
                                                        PN
                                              
                                              
                                                pmax ,  i=1 ki i < M
                                              
              pAW P (~k,~, N, M, Mgov , γ) =            N
                                                        P
                                              
                                                γpmax ,  i=1 ki i ≥ M, Medicare
                                                       PN
                                                         i=1 ki i ≥ M, Non − Medicare
                                              
                                                  0


   Under ASP, manufacturer i solves:


                                      max E [pASP (~k,~)ki i ] − c(ki )
                                      ki ≥0



   where the expectation is over the joint distribution of shocks to capacity. How much each
manufacturer sells when total capacity is greater than the market size does not matter because price
drops to zero when the industry is not capacity constrained and the marginal cost of production is
zero up to the capacity constraint. Under AWP reimbursement, manufacturer i solves


                                   max E [pAW P (~k,~)Qi,AW P (~k,~)] − c(ki )
                                   ki ≥0



  where Qi is the quantity sold by manufacturer i. If total capacity is lower than market size
 P
( i ki i < M ), then this is equal to manufacturer i’s capacity. If the industry has more capacity
  11
       The manufacturers only receive the additional payment compared to the ASP regime on Medicare patients.



                                                         10
than necessary to serve the whole market, the manufacturers split the Medicare market according to
what fraction of total capacity they own.12 We assume that manufacturers produce up to capacity
and do not destroy any of their product even when the industry has over-produced. One could
consider variations to this game that accounted for that type of behavior. For example, once shocks
are realized, new capacities could be announced publicly followed by a simultaneous move game
where each manufacturer decides how much quantity to supply to the market. Depending on
the realization of the shocks, a single manufacturer may be large enough to unilaterally withhold
enough quantity to avoid the market price falling to zero. Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002)
document this type of behavior in the California electricity generation industry. However, there
will still be states of the world where this incentive does not exist, and Medicare’s reimbursement
under the AWP regime will affect investment incentives.

   The incentive to invest in capacity is determined by integrating prices over the joint distribution
of . Manufacturers must pay an entry cost F to produce and sell the good. The equilibrium number
of firms is given by the maximum number of firms such that the variable profits of each firm are
greater than F.

   We find a symmetric Nash equilibrium to the simultaneous capacity choice sub-game. If the
distribution of  has no mass points, then the symmetric equilibrium capacity per firm when N
firms are producing is the solution to the following equation under ASP:


                                  E [pASP (k ⊗ eN ,~, N, :)i ] − c0 (k) = 0


   where eN is the 1xN vector of ones. Under AWP reimbursement,
                                                            PN
                                       pmax i ,             j=1   ki < M
                   E [                 i ( N kj −dk)
                                            P
                                                             PN               ] − c0 (k) = 0
                             γpmax Mgov (Pj=1N        2
                                                         ,    j=1 ki ≥ M
                                              j=1 kj )




   We use numerical simulation to show how equilibrium quantities vary with model parameters.

   When γ > 0, equilibrium capacities and average prices are higher under AWP than ASP. Short-
ages occur less frequently under AWP than with ASP (Figure 5). Whether total welfare is higher
  12
     Because the price for non-Medicare buyers and marginal costs of production are both zero, how manufacturers
split the non-Medicare quantities does not affect their profits.

                                                        11
or lower is ambiguous. When a firm enters the industry, it does not capture the full social value of
its investment, because competition drives average price below pmax in some states of the world.13
In the other direction, the government must raise the funds to pay for the AWP reimbursement,
potentially distorting the decisions in some other area of the economy. Poorly designed AWP
reimbursement can also lead to over-entry and over-investment in capacity.

     The model’s predictions for levels are not surprising. The AWP reimbursement continues to pay
manufacturers for Medicare patients even when the industry over-produces. This implies higher
returns to investing in capacity for manufacturers, thus more total capacity and fewer shortages.
The model is useful for empirical analysis because it predicts a differential impact of the AWP
reimbursement depending on features of the drug. In particular, drugs with lower fixed costs and
that serve more Medicare patients will experience a greater increase in shortages moving from
AWP to acquisition cost based reimbursement as in ASP.

     The contracts negotiated between health providers, wholesalers, and manufacturers are more
complicated than the simple model put forth here. Contracts often have non-linearities due to
bundled discounts or quantity discounts or other material clauses. Modeling the nexus of non-
linear contracts between strategic agents would be an important advance to the maintained model.
However, it is unlikely that such a model would change the result that moving from AWP to ASP
reimbursement decreases incentives to invest in capacity. This is because in such models of the
nexus of linear contracts in other industries (for example Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012)) the price
to the upstream firm, the manufacturer in this paper, will depend strongly on the surplus created by
consumption of the good and competition. Non-linearities in the contracts may reduce or sharpen
this dependence, but there is no theoretical basis that they would overturn the dependence. Since
prices and demand for each product determine the incentives to invest in capacity, the simple model
here captures the first-order determinants of these investment decisions.


 3      Data
     An observation is a drug and year. We refer to a drug as an active ingredient or combination
of active ingredients. For example, the nutritional product Multiple Vitamins for Infusion (MVI)
  13
    In this model, conditional on having the socially optimal number of firms, the capacity choices are socially
optimal. This is because price rises to pmax immediately in a shortage. With less flexible pricing or competitive
pressures in shortage states, capacity investment could also be too low under ASP.


                                                       12
                                              Conditional on p                                                   Conditional on Market Size (M)
                                                                            max
            Shortage Frequency




                                                                                         Shortage Frequency
                                  1
                                                                                                              0.95
                                 0.8
                                                                                                               0.9

                                 0.6                                                                          0.85
                                                                                                               0.8
                                 0.4                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                               0.7
                                 0.2
                                                                                                              0.65
                                  0
                                       0     5     10        15        20     25   30                                0     10         20         30     40
                                                         pmax                                                                         M
                                           Conditional on Fixed Cost                    Conditional on Fraction of Medicare Patients
                                  1
                                                                                         Shortage Frequency
            Shortage Frequency




                                 0.8
                                                                                                               0.8
                                 0.6

                                 0.4
                                                                                                              0.75

                                 0.2

                                  0                                                                            0.7
                                       0      10        20        30         40    50                                0   0.2    0.4        0.6    0.8   1
                                                             F                                                                  Mgov/M



Figure 5: Model’s predictions of shortage frequency as functions of model parameters. The solid lines are
          predictions for the cost-based ASP reimbursement regime. The dashed-dotted lines are predictions
          under the AWP reimbursement regime. Increasing pmax makes capacity investment more desirable
          and can induce entry. Raising market size has two effects: (1) It makes entry more desirable as
          there are more consumers for the medicine. However, it also means that the industry needs to
          produce more to satisfy demand which can make capacity investment less attractive depending
          on the shape of the cost of capacity function. When fixed costs increase, fewer firms enter. This
          leads to higher margins and more capacity investment in equilibrium. Finally, when the share of
          Medicare patients rises, capacity investment becomes more attractive in the AWP regime while it
          is unaffected in the ASP regime.




                                                                                        13
is a combination of active ingredients that also exist as stand-alone drugs. We only consider drugs
whose route of administration is intravenous or injectable.

   We use five data sources. First, we use Medicare Part B revenue and quantity data from the
CMS Part B National summary files. Second, we use privately-insured outpatient hospital (anal-
ogous to Medicare Part B) revenue and quantity data from the MarketScan Commercial Claims
and Encounters Database. Third, we have total US drug revenue and quantity data across all pay-
ers (Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance) and settings (physicians, hospitals, retail) from IMS
Health. Fourth, we have shortage data by molecule and year from the University of Utah Drug
Information Service. Fifth, we have approval dates and the number of manufacturers per molecule
from FDA Orange Book.

   First, we use Medicare reimbursements and services given by the Part B national summary files.
The key variables are the total reimbursements by Medicare and number of services billed for a
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) code and year. Providers use HCPCS
codes to bill Medicare and private payers for procedures. A typical HCPCS code represents one
administration of a drug. For example, the spending by Medicare to a hospital or physician’s
office on a lymphoma patient being treated by chemotherapy agent Doxorubicin once a month for
three months would show up as three services of HCPCS code J9000. The same drug can have
multiple HCPCS codes representing different dosages. We use data from 2001 to 2012 and adjust
reimbursements for inflation to year 2010 dollars. CMS also provides data on the Average Sales
Price (ASP) by HCPCS code by quarter from 2005 to the present. The ASP is the quantity weighted
average sales price accounting for discounts and rebates in the previous two quarters. The data for
Q1 2005 provide a glimpse at payments manufacturers were receiving for two quarters under the
AWP based reimbursement scheme.

   Second, we use MarketScan Commercial Claims and Encounters database outpatient files.
These data are given at the claims-level, but we aggregate to the year and HCPCS code. The
data are not nationally representative, but rather they are a convenience sample of all claims from
large employers and insurance plans. The data only include enrollees who are under 65. As dis-
cussed later, we reweight the data to match the population of the commericially insured population
in the U.S. We use the years 2001-2009 to estimate the total non-Medicare spending, adjusted for



                                                14
inflation to year 2010 dollars, by year and HCPCS code as well.

    Third, we use IMS MIDAS data for estimates of a drug’s total revenue for the years 2003 to
2010. We use these data to esitmate sales to providers. These data contain all payers, including
private, Medicare, Medicare Advantage, and Medicaid.

    Fourth, we use shortage data from the University of Utah Drug Information Service (UUDIS)
which archives shortages that were reported to the FDA or the Association of Health System Phar-
macists (ASHP) by providers (hospitals or pharmacists) or manufacturers. In the data, a drug
shortage is defined as “a supply issue that affects how the pharmacy prepares or dispenses a drug
product or influences patient care when prescribers must use an alternative agent” (Fox et al.,
2009). A report of a shortage leads to a response from the FDA and ASHP which usually results
in recommendations for rationing drugs and alternative drugs that can be used. Manufacturers are
also contacted to determine which manufacturers, if any, have emergency supplies. This suggests
that the reporting of shortages is vetted by manufacturers and the FDA. Shortages are molecule
and form (injectable or not) specific and are for the entire U.S. We also have information on the
dates of shortage start and when they are resolved. We use shortage data from 2001 to 2012.14

    Fifth, we use the Food and Drug Administration’s Orange Book for the years 2001-2012 to
record how many approved manufacturers of a drug (active ingredient and route of administration
combination) exist in each year, and the number of years since the earliest approval of a manufac-
turer of the drug. The FDA Orange Book records each approved and active manufacturer15 of a
given drug in a given year. Because the analysis is at the drug level, we collapse the observations of
a given drug into one observation per year. The Orange Book does not track biological pharmaceu-
ticals which are made by a biological process rather than chemical synthesis (e.g. insulin). These
drugs have a more complicated manufacturing process and have been subject to some shortages.
Most biologicals are still on patent. This paper focuses on chemically-synthesized compounds
which make up the majority of administered drugs.
  14
      An alternative set of vaccine shortage data are offered by the FDA. The FDA uses a stricter definition of a shortage
than the UUDIS. However, historical FDA data are not available. The UUDIS measures of shortages are widely used
in the pharmaceutical literature Fox et al. (2009); Fox, Sweet and Jensen (2014).
   15
      Approved products whose manufacturers no longer actively market the product are listed as “discontinued” in
the Orange Book. The number of manufacturers variable we construct from the Orange Book only counts active
manufacturers.




                                                           15
 3.1     Medicare Market Share (MMS)
    MMS is the fraction of a drug’s revenue from Medicare Part B. We use MMS to identify which
drugs will be more impacted by the Medicare reimbursement change. Hence, for MMS, cardinality
is not particularly important, but ordinality is.

    We use two estimates of MMS. For both measures, the numerator is Medicare Part B sales
to physicians. These were the only sales directly affected by the policy change of switching to
ASP pricing.16 The two MMS measures vary according to the denominator: total drug revenue.
In the first measure of MMS, the denominator is the sum of revenue for each drug from the IMS
database. In the second measure of MMS, the denominator is the sum of revenues for each drug
in the MarketScan database plus the revenues to Medicare Part B. The number of people in the
MarketScan data rises from around five million in 2001 to 37 million in 2009. To create the
MarketScan-based estimate of MMS for each year, we scale the revenue by drug as if the sample
were nationally representative.17 For example, suppose there are 10 million individuals in a given
year in the MarketScan data. We scale the revenue of each drug by the US population minus the
number of individuals insured by Medicare and/or Medicaid divided by 10 million.

    Medicare serves seniors and those with kidney failure. Consistent with this, the drugs with the
highest MMS include inhalants for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (a progressive disease
caused by smoking), Pegaptanib Sodium (for age-related macular degeneration) and Triptorelin
Pamoate (for prostate cancer). Other drugs with the highest Medicare share are immunosuppres-
sants used in kidney transplants which are covered by Medicare for all ages. The drugs with
the lowest Medicare share are those used by a younger population, including Somatrem (human
growth hormone for children), Glatiramer Acetate (for multiple sclerosis), two drugs which treat
hyper-thyroidism, and Urofollitropin (a fertility drug).

    While the data used to construct the numerator, reimbursements from Medicare Part B, are
all the payments affected by the policy change, we adjust our methods to handle imperfect data
in the denominator. The IMS measure is not perfect as it mixes revenues to manufacturers with
  16
      The Medicare Part B data do not include Medicare Advantage payments. In 2012, Medicare Advantage accounted
for 27% of all Medicare enrollees.
   17
      The data vendors do not claim that the data are nationally representative of the private insurance market. However,
Dunn, Liebman and Shapiro (2014) find evidence that reweighting MarketScan data improves the representativeness
of the sample.


                                                          16
revenues from Medicare to doctors. Nonetheless, it is a measure of the relative importance of
Medicare revenues to non-Medicare revenues. For example, if revenue to a manufacturer is a
constant fraction of reimbursements to doctors, then this measure would be equal to the true MMS
times a constant. As such, drugs which derive more of their revenue from Medicare would have
relatively higher values of this variable. While not ideal for interpreting units, the first-order role
of this variable is to detect differences in the change in shortages between drugs which are more
or less reliant on Medicare. The MarketScan measure might have some error because it is only a
convenience sample of the under-65 private insurance market and misses sales to other payers like
Medicare Advantage, Medicaid, etc. and sales in other settings like retail or inpatient hospital.18
As we discuss in section 4.1, we use an instrumental variables strategy to address this measurement
error.

 3.2     Sample Definition
    To combine these data sources, we begin with all HCPCS codes beginning with J (“HCPCS
J Codes”), which indicates drug administration,19 in the period 2000 to 2012 that we observe in
some year’s Medicare Part B National Summary File. For each of the 690 observed unique HCPCS
J codes,20 we determine the relevant active ingredient(s) and route of administration by examining
the HCPCS description and searching the FDA Orange Book when possible.21 This leaves 496
unique HCPCS J codes whose active ingredient(s) and route of administration have a match in
the FDA Orange Book. We keep drugs whose route of administration is “injection,” leaving 396
HCPCS J codes. Some drugs have multiple dosages with different HCPCS J codes. The 396
HCPCS codes correspond to 327 drugs.

    We join this set of drugs to the shortage data by year, active ingredient(s), and route of admin-
istration, keeping all unmatched observations. If an observation from the matched set of drugs
with HCPCS code J does not match to any shortage observation, we record that drug as not having
shortages in the period of the sample. We join these data to the collapsed FDA Orange Book by
  18
     Missing sales to other settings is less of concern because most drugs get most of their revenue from one setting.
For example, a drug mostly used in retail would not usually have large sales in a hospital setting.
  19
     Codes J0000 - J0849 indicates “Drugs other than Chemotherapy” and Codes J8521 to J9000 indicate “Chemother-
apy Drugs.”
  20
     The average HCPCS J code contains 15.12 10-digit National Drug Code (NDC) codes.
  21
     The Orange Book does not cover biologics, vaccines, and some nutritional products that did not require FDA
approval.


                                                         17
active ingredient(s) and route of administration and year, keeping only matched observations. In
addition to the HCPCS J code drugs which don’t appear in the Orange Book22 , this excludes all the
FDA Orange Book approval data for drugs which are never allocated an HCPCS code beginning
with J.23 The final sample consists of 308 drugs. Of the 308 drugs in the sample, 62 are always
on-patent, 120 are always off-patent, and the other 126 switch from on-patent to off during the
sample period. The full list of drugs in the sample is in Appendix A.

     Next, we join this set of drugs to the IMS MIDAS data by year, active ingredient(s), and route
of administration. Ten drugs were dropped because their MMS was greater than 1. This leaves
the sample of drugs which have a MarketScan MMS and Medicare Reimbursement information at
298. An additional two drugs do not have Medicare reimbursement associated with them. With the
IMS data, because we are merging by ingredient name, there is not perfect overlap, for 42 drugs
we were unable to match an IMS observation to that ingredient. This leaves the sample of drugs
which have IMS MMS and payment information at 256.

     Finally, we join these data to the Medicare reimbursements from the Part B National Summary
File by HCPCS code and year, average ASP by HCPCS code and year24 , and private payments from
MarketScan data by HCPCS code and year. There are seventeen additional active ingredient(s)
and route of administration combinations which never manifest in the MarketScan data. These are
nearly all on patent at some point in the sample period, and so do not affect the major results of the
paper.25


 4      Empirical Analysis
     We begin by using a differences-in-differences identification strategy to show that drugs that
had greater exposure to the Medicare policy change, measured using the Medicare market share
(MMS), had the greatest increases in shortages (section 4.1). Ultimately, our model suggests that
shortages result from reduced manufacturer’s prices, which we hypothesize results from lower
reimbursements to providers. We show that reduced reimbursement to providers, caused by the
  22
      There are seven such HCPCS J codes. These drugs all were matched by ingredient, but the indicated route of
administration does not exist in the Orange Book.
   23
      These are the majority of all drugs, such as prescription tablets taken at home.
   24
      Because of data availability, the matching begins in 2004.
   25
      We also ran the analysis assigning this subset of drugs an MMS of 1 and a degenerate age distribution at 60. The
results of the paper are not sensitive to this assignment.


                                                         18
policy change, is correlated with increased shortages (section 4.2). Then consistent with our pre-
diction that reduced incentives to manufacturers would lead to more shortages, we show that lower
prices to manufacturers are correlated with more shortages (section 4.3). Following the discus-
sion of vertical markets with bargaining power on each side (section 1.2), we show that lower
reimbursements to providers are correlated with lower manufacturer’s prices (section 4.4).

   Throughout this section the unit of analysis is a drug and year. We log Medicare market share
because the observed distribution of MMS is skewed. Similarly, we log prices throughout the
analysis. To reduce noise in the measure of the Medicare market share, and because the sample
period for the IMS data is shorter than the whole sample, we average across years to get compute
one measure for each drug.

 4.1    Shortages Conditional on Medicare Market Share
   First, we test the hypothesis that those drugs most affected by the ASP reimbursement, drugs
which derive a large fraction of their revenues from Medicare Part B, experience larger increases
in shortages. We use a difference-in-difference model where the treatment used is the Medicare
(Part B) Market Share (M M Si ) of drug i and the second difference is before and after the policy
change. The specification is motivated by the assertion that Medicare Market Share is a feature
of the diseases that the drug treats, and is not affected by post-policy changes in the unobservable
determinants of shortage days. The first set of regressions uses a binary pre and post period,
where the treatment was assumed to be applied in 2005, when ASP based pricing went into effect.
Formally, this is modeled as:




          Shortageit = αi + δt + βP ostt × log(M M Si ) + γ 1(Of f P atentit ) + it             (1)


Shortageit is the number of shortage days in year t. αi and δt are drug and year fixed effects, which
control for time-invariant differences across drugs, including the main effect of log(M M Si ), and
a general time trend. Then, assuming parallel trends without treatment, β is the treatment effect
– the extra shortage days caused by having higher MMS post-regulation. 1(Of f P atentit ) is an
indicator for whether that drug and year observation was off patent. We classify a drug as off patent


                                                 19
if it has been at least 15 years since the molecule was approved.26

    As discussed in (Section 3.1) we are concerned about error in our measures of MMS. Under the
assumption of classical measurement error, the coefficient on the interaction term, β, will be at-
tenuated towards zero. We therefore employ instrumental variables to deal with the measurement
error. Because we ultimately interact MMS with the ASP reimbursement dummy variable, we
follow the suggestion in Procedure 21.1 of Wooldridge (2010) to first use the MarketScan based
MMS estimate and the mean age of patients who receive the drug in the MarketScan database as
instrumental variables for the IMS database-based MMS estimate.27 We then interact predicted
MMS with the ASP reimbursement dummy variable. This interacted value serves as the instru-
mental variable for the interaction of the ASP reimbursement dummy variable and the IMS MMS
measure in a standard two stage least squares procedure.

    We then run a number of falsification tests and robustness checks. First, if drugs with higher
Medicare market shares were experiencing an increase in shortages prior to the policy change, then
the coefficient estimate would be misinterpreted as evidence that the policy change had led to an
increase in shortages. We assess whether such an effect exists by running the same specification as
equation 1, but limiting the sample to 2001 to 2004, and considering 2003 and 2004 as a pseudo-
“ASP Reimbursement” period.

    In addition, we use a flexible difference-in-difference method to see whether there are pre-trend
effects and observe the dynamics of the treatment effect over time. This is modeled as:




           Shortageit = αi + δt + βt Y eart × log(M M Si ) + γ 1(Of f P atentit ) + it                           (2)


where Y eart are indicators for each year, that is interacted with the MMS which is constant across
years.
  26
      This is consistent with Grabowski, Long and Mortimer (2014) who found that, for drugs experiencing initial
generic entry between 2000 and 2012, the mean time since launch (which usually follows a few months after approval)
was about 13 years with a standard deviation of about 3 years. Our results are not sensitive to varying the threshold
from 15 to 12 or 18.
   27
      The MarketScan data covers patients who are under 65. The logic is that if the drugs are taken by older patients
in the MarketScan data, then they are more likely to be taken by Medicare patients as well.




                                                         20
   As shown in the model, because of their lower margins, off patent drugs should be more affected
by the change to ASP than on patent drugs. To test this, we interact an indicator for patent-status
with an indicator for post-regulation status. Then, we interact those indicators with Medicare
market share to test whether the importance of Medicare is largest for the off patent drugs. This is
modeled as:




              Shortageit = αi + δt + βP eriodt × 1(P atent Statusit )

                              + βP eriodt × 1(P atent Statusit ) × log(M M Si ) + it            (3)


where P eriodt × 1(P atent Statusit ) is the cross product of period (pre and post-regulation) and
patent status (on and off).

 4.2    Shortages Conditional on Reimbursements to Health Providers
   Previously, we discussed why declining reimbursements to providers would affect a manufac-
turer’s profit (section 1.2). In this section, provide indirect evidence of this effect, by checking
whether the reduced reimbursements to providers increase the rate of shortages. Under the as-
sumption that a majority of the variation in price was due to the policy change (see figure 3),
then most of the variation in price can be considered exogenous which allows us to use OLS. The
specification we use is:




                Shortageit = αi + δt + β1 log(Reimbursement per serviceit )

                                + β2 1(P atent Statusit ) + it                                  (4)


where Reimbursement per serviceit is the mean reimbursement (revenue divided by quantity)
by Medicare in year t for drug i. In practice, this should be similar to the AWP or ASP during
the respective reimbursement regimes. Drugs which go into shortage experience increases in price
which translate into increased Medicare reimbursements after 2005 with ASP based reimburse-
ment. Therefore, the OLS regression will underestimate the effect of drug prices that have risen in


                                                  21
response to shortage. To control for this we use one-year lagged reimbursement values to control
for this effect of shortages on prices.

   We also condition on the patent-status (1(P atent Statusit )) since it plays important roles in
the theory. Finally, αi and δt are drug and time fixed effects.

   One possible worry in this regression is that unobservable demand shocks are driving both
prices and shortages. However, a positive demand shock would lead to higher prices and more
shortages, holding supply fixed. This biases the estimates in the opposite direction of what we
ultimately find, which is that higher prices are correlated with fewer shortages.

 4.3    Shortages Conditional on Manufacturer’s Prices
   In the previous section, we analyzed changes in shortage frequency with variation in reimburse-
ments to health care providers. While the law directly affected reimbursements to providers, our
model suggests that shortages depend on manufacturers’ incentives. In this section, we analyze
the effect of manufacturer’s prices on shortages. To do this, we use the IMS data, which measures
wholesale prices. Similar to section 4.2, we regress shortages on the price manufacturers receive.
We also try lagged price to control for shortages raising prices of drugs. Formally, the specification
we use is:




                          Shortageit = αi + δt + β1 log(IM S priceit )

                                          + β2 1(P atent Statusit ) + it                         (5)


   Because the Medicare market is a smaller portion of the market, overall price changes may not
be solely determined by the MMA. However, as discussed above, there is evidence that private
insurers followed Medicare into ASP pricing. If private insurers did this without any lag, then
we could again think of price changes as exogenous. Figures 6 and 7 demonstrate the identifying
variation. In particular, there were considerable price declines for the most expensive high MMS
drugs, those that were most likely to have inflated AWP and where the reduced reimbursement
would affect the largest share of sales by the manufacturer.



                                                   22
Figure 6: Price levels and changes for IMS drugs. All drugs in this sample are off patent. The left is the
          distribution of the price level for IMS. The right panel is the distribution of price changes for IMS.
          Each year, the price change is calculated as the price in year t minus the price in year t−1, divided
          by the price in year t − 1, for each drug. The graph shows the percentiles of those values. All
          percentiles are calculated without weights across drugs.




                                                      23
Figure 7: On the left are price levels for drugs in the top quartile of MMS, meaning used by seniors. The
          prices are falling for the highest price drugs targeted at seniors. On the right are price levels for
          the bottom quartile of MMS, meaning used by younger patients. All percentiles are calculated
          without weights across drugs.




                                                      24
 4.4     Correlation in Payments to Providers and Manufacturers
     As discussed in (section 1.2) the mechanism relies on the assumption that the manufacturer’s
prices were reduced for drugs where the reimbursement to providers was reduced. To test this
assumption, we regress the Medicare reimbursement per service, a measure of reimbursement to
providers, on the IMS price, a measure of manufacturer’s prices. Also, to show that this effect is
strongest for drugs where Medicare plays a larger role, we interact the MMS with the Medicare
reimbursements. Formally, this is modelled as:




          log(IM S P riceit ) = β0 + δt + β1 log(Reimbursement per serviceit )                   (6)

                                   +β2 M M Si × log(Reimbursement per serviceit ) + i



 5      Results
     The top panel of Table 1 gives summary statistics for the main sample – all drugs which we
were able to merge with IMS data. Table 13 in the appendix gives summary statistics for all the
drugs with Medicare reimbursement data, a sample which is used in some specifications when the
IMS data are not used. There are 256 drugs in the main sample. The lower panel gives summary
statistics for off and on-patent drug year observations separately. The average time that a drug is
in shortage was 60 days (unconditional on being in shortage), but was 79 days and 9 days for off-
and on-patent drugs, respectively. 72 percent of drug-year observations are off-patent. The average
number of manufacturers for an off-patent drug is 3.54. Using the IMS data, the average MMS is
0.09 and using the MarketScan data the average MMS is 0.14. The MarketScan MMS measure
is larger because it does not include spending by payers like Medicare Advantage, Medicaid or
Veteran’s Affairs or payments from settings like inpatient hospitals in the denominator. There are
fewer values of Medicare reimbursement because we do not always observe prices for these drug-
year combinations. Also, there are fewer values for the revenue per standard units because that
data are only available from 2003-2010. In the MarketScan data, the mean patient age is 45.

     Figures 3 and 6 gives the distribution of prices for generic drugs in Medicare and IMS, respec-



                                                 25
tively. For both figures, the left panel is the distribution of price levels, for example, 75 percent of
Medicare drugs had prices below 10 in 2003 and below 6 in 2010. The right panel is the distribu-
tion of price changes, for example 25 percent of Medicare drugs had price declines of 50 percent
in 2005 (compared to 2004), while 25 percent of drugs had declines of 25 percent in 2010 (com-
pared to 2009). The price declines appear isolated to 2005, suggesting that they are due to the
law change. Figures 8 and 9 in the appendix show the distribution for all drugs, which has similar
patterns, though less pronounced.

   On the other hand, IMS prices are less affected in 2005. This may be because the impact of
Medicare is diluted in this market. To provide some evidence of this, Figure 7 shows the price
distribution for the top and bottom quartile of Medicare market share drugs. The left panel shows
prices for drugs which get the smallest share of their sales from Medicare, the right are the drugs
in the top quartile. We see large, slow price declines in drugs which have a lot of Medicare sales
versus those which don’t. This suggests that while not all drugs are affected by the law change,
those most affected were those where the Medicare population plays the largest role. This is
consistent with the idea that Part B isn’t a huge part of the market (Medicare is roughly 30 percent
of the market and 30 percent of Medicare is in Medicare Advantage), but for drugs where it is
important, overtime prices fall in all markets as other payers switch to ASP. This may help explain
the lag in shortages after the law change.

 5.1    Results for Shortages Conditional on Medicare Market Share
   Table 2 presents the difference-and-differences relationship between shortages and Medicare
market share. Columns (1) and (2) OLS and IV give the estimates without age in the instrument
set. Because the specification has year indicators, we have differenced out the time-trend in the
results. The OLS estimate of β is 5.7, while the IV estimate is 6.6. As expected, the IV estimate is
larger due to the correction of measurement error. The results imply that an increase in the MMS
from the mean of .09 to .1 leads to a 0.63 and .73 day increase in the number of shortage days,
for the OLS and IV estimates, respectively. Column (3) is a robustness check where we include
age and age-squared in the instrument set. Column (4) and (5) use the MarketScan MMS as the
endogenous variable, where column (4) is the OLS estimate and column (5) is the IV which uses
the IMS MMS as an instrument. Using the MarketScan MMS gives larger point estimates and


                                                  26
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics



                            source           count mean    sd    min             max
  Shortage Days             Univ. Utah       2949 59.88 120.53 0.00            365.00
  Number of Manufacturers Orange Book        2949  2.80   2.91   0.00           25.00
  MMS                       IMS              2949  0.09   0.16  0.00            1.00
  MMS                       MarketScan       2949  0.14   0.18  0.00            0.85
  Medicare Reimbursement Part B              2544 54.92 216.32 0.01           2500.62
  Mean Age                  MarketScan       2949 44.91   7.48  12.83          57.39
  Off Patent                Orange Book      2949  0.72   0.45  0.00            1.00
  Revenue per Standard Unit IMS              1837 208.50 584.77 0.01          12533.00
  Observations                               2949

                                                  Off Patent              On Patent
                          source          count    mean       sd    count mean        sd
Shortage Days             Univ. Utah      2130     79.29 133.69      819    9.37    47.97
Number of Manufacturers Orange Book       2130      3.54     3.12    819    0.88     0.32
MMS                       IMS             2130      0.08     0.15    819    0.11     0.17
MMS                       MarketScan      2130      0.12     0.15    819   0.19     0.23
Medicare Reimbursement Part B             1956     32.98 122.12      588 127.88 382.26
Mean Age                  MarketScan      2130     44.13     7.27    819   46.93     7.67
Off Patent                Orange Book     2130      1.00     0.00    819   0.00     0.00
Revenue per Standard Unit IMS             1316     99.27 386.63      521 484.39 850.24
Observations                              2130                       819

  Summary statistics from 2001 to 2012 for the 256 drugs in the sample. MMS is Medicare
  Market Share.




                                           27
implied magnitudes. The IV coefficient of 9.6 implies a change from .14 to .15 in MMS, leads
to a 1.03 day increase in the number of shortages. These estimates show that for a number of
specifications, drugs with higher Medicare market share were more likely to be in shortage after
the MMA went into effect.28

    Table 3 gives the initial first stage result, where we regress the log of IMS MMS on the instru-
ment set. Table 4 gives the first-stage in the main regression, where the interaction of predicted
MMS with the ASP reimbursement dummy serves as an instrument for log of IMS MMS interacted
with the ASP reimbursement. In each table, column (1) uses the log of IMS MMS as the endoge-
nous variable and the log of MarketScan MMS as the instrument, (2) includes age and age-squared
in the instrument set and (3) uses the log of MarketScan MMS as the endogenous variable and the
log of IMS MMS as the instrument. For the initial first stage, the F-statistic is well above 10, the
usual rule of thumb for instrument relevance in each specification.

    In Table 5, we check the impact of the definition of an off-patent drug. We vary the years
since first approval we use to define a drug as off-patent from 18 years in columns (1) and (2), 12
years in columns (3) and (4), and 2 years in columns (5) and (6). Furthermore, unlike our standard
definition of off-patent, we do not redefine drugs with multiple manufacturers as off-patent as well.
The odd columns are OLS results while the even numbered columns are IV results. Changing the
patent variable leads to differences in the OLS estimate of the treatment effect from 5.5 to 5.7 and
the IV estimate of the treatment effect from 6.2 to 6.8. In summary, we find the that varying the
patent status variable within reason matters little for our coefficients of interest.

    If drugs with higher Medicare market shares were experiencing an increase in shortages prior
to the policy change, then the coefficient estimate would be misinterpreted as evidence that the
policy change led to an increase in shortages. Table 6 presents a falsification test by choosing
a “pseudo”-regulation period and seeing whether our specification picks up the results. We use
2003 as the regulation year, rather than 2005, and drop all data starting in 2005. Thus, 2001 and
2002 are the fake pre-period and 2003 and 2004 are the post-period. The OLS coefficient from the
MMS interacted with a post regulation indicator falls from 5.7 to .6 in this falsification test and
loses statisitical significance. Likewise, the IV coefficient falls from 6.6 to 2.6 and loses statistical
  28
     In the first two columns of Table 14 in the Appendix, we report the results using levels instead of logs. The results
are qualitatively similar.


                                                           28
significance as well. These results suggest in the pre-period, the parallel trends assumption holds, a
check that is often used in the literature to justify the parallel trends-assumption during the sample
period.

   To better understand how the effects of MMS change overtime, Table 7 presents the OLS and
IV estimates of our specification using yearly treatment indicators interacted with the MMS. The
OLS coefficient for 2007 is 5.215, which suggests a .58 day difference in shortages for drugs with
.09 MMS versus those with .1 MMS, compared to the omitted year of 2001. The coefficients prior
to 2004 are insignificant. In 2004 the magnitudes of both the OLS and the IV start growing and
the coefficient estimates start becoming statistically different than zero. This corresponds to the
switch from 95% AWP to 85% AWP in 2004 to ASP + 6% in 2005. Afterwards, the coefficients
stabilize at higher levels, roughly 7 for the OLS and 9 for the IVs until the end of the sample. This
highlights how consistent the coefficients are – results aren’t due to just one year – and highlights
some lag time for the MMA to matter for drug shortages.

   Finally, since our theoretical model suggests that the MMA should impact off-patent drugs
more than on-patent drugs with higher margins, we interact the patent indicator with pre and post
regulation indicators and the MMS measure. Column (1) and (2) of Table 8 shows the OLS and
IV estimates, respectively. The OLS coefficient estimate for off patent, post-regulation is 25 –
suggesting that on average off-patent drugs in the post regulation period experience 25 days more
of shortage than on patent drugs, prior to the regulation. The coefficient for off-patent, post-
regulation interacted with the MMS of suggests that an off-patent drug with an MMS of .1 would
have .83 more average days of shortage than a drug with an MMS of .09, relative to the difference
between a comparable set of drugs, with the same MMS difference, that are on-patent and in the
pre-regulation period. This is much larger than the same effect for drugs on patent, post-regulation
(coefficient of 2.0) or off-patent but before ASP (coefficient of .06). Column (3) and (4) of Table
8 provide a falsification test where we show the result using 2 years after earliest approval as the
definition of off patent. The magnitudes of the coefficients are smaller (7.45 to 1 for the OLS, 8.24
to .31 for IV) and no longer significantly significant. While previous results provided evidence for
the role of MMA in shortages, this table corroborates our theory that off-patent drugs should be
most affected by MMA, which we hypothesize is due to low reimbursement.



                                                 29
              Table 2: OLS and IV Estimates of the Effect on MMS on Shortage Days
                       Dependent variable: Shortage Days in a Year

                                              (1)     (2)     (3)                 (4)         (5)
         Off Patent                          -4.302 -4.423 -4.441                -8.390      -5.897
                                            (11.96) (11.91) (11.91)             (12.27)     (11.90)

         Year ≥ 2005 × Log MMS                5.666*** 6.554*** 6.687*** 7.047*** 9.624***
                                            (1.641) (2.023) (2.014) (2.207) (2.811)

         Constant                             21.97**                             23.55***
                                            (8.509)                             (8.479)
         Observations                          2949    2949           2949         3429    2949
         # Drugs                                256     256             256         296      256
         R2                                   0.161   0.161           0.161       0.136    0.161
         Drug Fixed Effect                      Yes     Yes             Yes         Yes      Yes
         Year Fixed Effect                      Yes     Yes             Yes         Yes      Yes
         IV Regression                           No     Yes             Yes          No      Yes
Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. Off patent is 15 years since Orange Book earliest
approval. Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and IV estimates using the IMS MMS as the treatment variable, re-
spectively. Column (3) includes age in the instrument set. Column (4) and (5) are the OLS and IV estimates using
the MarketScan MMS as the treatment variable. Each regression contains molecule fixed effects and indicator
variables for each year from 2002 to 2012. Column (4) has more observations because the MarketScan data had
associated HCPCS codes which improved our matching compared to name matching.

                        Table 3: First Stage - MarketScan MMS on IMS MMS

                                                    (1)       (2)       (3)
                      Log MMS                       1.279*** 1.233*** 0.583***
                                                 (0.0469)   (0.0512) (0.0214)

                      Mean Age                                   -0.0368
                                                                (0.0974)

                      Mean Age Squared                        0.000850
                                                              (0.00116)

                      Constant                     -0.831*** -1.089             -0.316**
                                                  (0.181)    (2.061)           (0.126)
                      Observations                    256        256               256
                      R2                            0.746      0.751             0.746
                      F-stat                        744.7      253.3             744.7
Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. First step in IVs, OLS with log of MarketScan
MMS as the independent variable and log of IMS MMS as the dependent variable. Column (1) is the single
instrument case. Column (2) adds age instruments. Column (3) uses log of MarketScan MMS as the dependent
variable and log of IMS MMS as the independent variable.


                                                     30
           Table 4: First Stage - Interaction of Predicted MMS with ASP Reimbursement

                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)
                       Off Patent                      -0.173        -0.204        0.166*
                                                      (0.159)       (0.150)     (0.0844)

                       Predicted Log MMS               0.982*** 0.984*** 1.010***
                                                    (0.0378) (0.0365) (0.0576)
                       Observations                     2949     2949     2949
                       # Drugs                           256      256      256
                       R2                              0.920    0.921    0.915
                       F-stat                          217.4    220.4    171.0
Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. This is the first-stage in 2SLS where the instrument
is predicted MMS from Table 3 interacted with ASP Reimbursement. The first column in the main specification.
The second is using age as an additional instruments. The third uses the MarketScan MMS instead of the IMS
MMS. Each regressions also contains indicator variables for each year from 2002 to 2012, which are omitted from
the table.



                        Table 5: Robustness Check: Different Patent Definitions
                                 Dependent variable: Shortage Days in a Year

                                          (1)      (2)      (3)                (4)          (5)      (6)
   Off Patent                             58.28*** 58.19***-18.13             -17.98       -35.91***-36.29***
                                        (16.95) (16.83) (11.38)              (11.30)      (8.618) (8.653)

   Year ≥ 2005 × Log MMS                  5.536*** 6.213*** 5.600*** 6.478*** 5.789*** 6.797***
                                        (1.615) (1.966) (1.658) (2.047) (1.640) (2.033)

   Constant                              -9.252               30.15***                      52.08***
                                        (9.730)             (7.998)                       (8.667)
   Observations                            2949       2949    2949     2949                 2949     2949
   # Drugs                                  256         256     256      256                  256      256
   R2                                     0.171       0.171   0.163    0.162                0.164    0.164
   Drug Fixed Effect                        Yes         Yes     Yes      Yes                  Yes      Yes
   Year Fixed Effect                        Yes         Yes     Yes      Yes                  Yes      Yes
   IV Regression                             No         Yes      No      Yes                   No      Yes
Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. This is table varies the years since earliest approval
used as patent expiration. Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and IV estimates with off-patent defined as 18 years
since Orange Book earliest approval. Columns (3) and (4) are the OLS and IV estimates with off-patent defined
as 12 years since Orange Book earliest approval. Columns (5) and (6) are the OLS and IV estimates with off-
patent defined as 2 years since Orange Book earliest approval. Each regression contains molecule fixed effects
and indicator variables for each year from 2002 to 2012.



                                                        31
                      Table 6: Falsification Test: Using 2003 as regulation year
                               Dependent variable: Shortage Days in a Year

                                                               (1)         (2)
                          Off Patent                           18.79       17.42
                                                             (20.88)     (20.96)

                          Year ≥ 2003 × Log MMS                0.637   2.642
                                                             (1.604) (1.853)

                          Constant                             11.80
                                                             (14.65)
                          Observations                           925        918
                          # Drugs                                240        233
                          R2                                 0.0517      0.0496
                          Drug Fixed Effect                      Yes        Yes
                          Year Fixed Effect                      Yes        Yes
                          IV Regression                           No        Yes
Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. This regression uses 2003, rather than 2005, as
a false policy year. 2003 and 2004 are considered treatment years, data from 2005 and onwards are dropped.
Off patent is 15 years since Orange Book earliest approval. Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and IV estimates
using the IMS MMS as the treatment variable, respectively. Each regression contains molecule fixed effects and
indicator variables for each year from 2002 to 2012.




                                                    32
                       Table 7: OLS and IV Year By Year Coefficient Estimates
                                Dependent variable: Shortage Days in a Year

                                                               (1)     (2)
                            Off Patent                        -3.681 -4.590
                                                             (11.96) (12.02)

                            Year=2002 × Log MMS               -0.473     0.0642
                                                             (1.938)     (2.080)

                            Year=2003 × Log MMS                0.232       1.418
                                                             (2.293)     (2.667)

                            Year=2004 × Log MMS                1.321       4.777**
                                                             (2.071)     (2.314)

                            Year=2005 × Log MMS                4.050* 6.103**
                                                             (2.136) (2.584)

                            Year=2006 × Log MMS                3.478* 5.007*
                                                             (2.057) (2.601)

                            Year=2007 × Log MMS                5.215** 7.271***
                                                             (2.037) (2.786)

                            Year=2008 × Log MMS                6.474*** 9.180***
                                                             (2.236) (2.671)

                            Year=2009 × Log MMS                6.097** 9.889***
                                                             (2.385) (2.725)

                            Year=2010 × Log MMS                7.073*** 9.784***
                                                             (2.483) (2.588)

                            Year=2011 × Log MMS                8.105*** 10.18***
                                                             (2.905) (3.147)

                            Year=2012 × Log MMS                7.201** 8.229**
                                                             (3.067) (3.258)

                            Constant                           21.56**
                                                             (8.545)
                            Observations                        2949    2949
                            # Drugs                              256     256
                            R2                                 0.163   0.162
                            F-stat                             9.778   9.843
                            Drug Fixed Effect                    Yes     Yes
                            Year Fixed Effect                    Yes     Yes
                            IV Regression                         No     Yes
                                                     33
Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and IV estimates,
respectively. Each regression contains molecule fixed effects and indicator variables for each year from 2002 to
                        Table 8: Interacting Patent Status and Treatment Status
                                 Dependent variable: Shortage Days in a Year

                                                            (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)
        Off Patent, Year ≥ 2005                             24.57   27.06 -64.09***-62.20***
                                                          (18.41) (18.11) (8.198) (8.240)

        Off Patent, Year<2005                              -3.173     -7.742      -42.69***-51.06***
                                                          (21.88)    (23.96)     (13.16) (12.26)

        On Patent, Year ≥ 2005 × Log MMS                    2.031      2.291* 2.703** 1.570
                                                          (1.272)    (1.366) (1.273) (2.252)

        Off Patent, Year ≥ 2005 × Log MMS                   7.450*** 8.237*** 1.086            0.307
                                                          (2.481) (2.251) (1.038)            (2.217)

        Off Patent, Year<2005 × Log MMS                   0.0698 -0.929 -4.906***-6.729**
                                                          (3.487) (3.941) (1.826) (2.890)

        Constant                                            21.68**                35.90***
                                                          (9.226)                (11.93)
        Observations                                         2949   2949            2949    2949
        # Drugs                                               256     256            256      256
        R2                                                  0.163   0.163          0.165    0.165
        Drug Fixed Effect                                     Yes     Yes            Yes      Yes
        Year Fixed Effect                                     Yes     Yes            Yes      Yes
        IV Regression                                          No     Yes             No      Yes
Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. This table interacts the off-patent variable with
the post MMA indicator and MMS. Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and IV estimates with off-patent defined
as 15 years since Orange Book earliest approval. As a falsification test, columns (3) and (4) are the OLS and IV
estimates with off-patent defined as just 2 years since Orange Book earliest approval. Each regression contains
molecule fixed effects and indicator variables for each year from 2002 to 2012.




                                                     34
        Table 9: OLS and lagged OLS Estimates of Medicare Reimbursement Effect on Shortages

                                        (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)                  (6)
       Log Reimbursement               -23.00***-23.53***-24.66***-25.66***-8.325               -11.88
                                      (3.845) (4.669) (5.297) (6.333) (9.201)                  (12.45)
       Off Patent                      -12.99 -21.44
                                      (12.80) (14.98)
       Constant                         72.50*** 57.28** 77.08*** 47.25* -2.923                  49.48*
                                      (11.79) (27.17) (10.98) (27.30) (14.79)                  (28.78)
       Observations                     2915     2693     1355     1249       390                 351
       # Drugs                            296      296      119      119       58                   58
       R2                               0.197    0.193    0.263    0.269 0.0743                0.0829
       Lagged Reimbursement                No      Yes       No      Yes       No                  Yes
   Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
   Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. Regresses Medicare reimbursement amounts on
   shortage frequency. Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and 1-year lagged OLS estimates for all drugs. Off-patent
   defined as 15 years since Orange Book earliest approval. Columns (3) and (4) are the OLS and 1-year lagged
   estimates for drugs off-patent throughout the sample period. Columns (5) and (6) are the OLS and 1-year lagged
   estimates for drugs on-patent throughout the sample period. All regressions include year and ingredient fixed
   effects.


 5.2    Results for Shortages Conditional on Reimbursements to Health Providers
   Table 9 shows the results for shortages conditional on reimbursements to providers. Columns
(1) and (2) show the log and lagged-log price coefficients. The coefficient on lagged price suggests
that a 1 percent (roughly 55 cents per unit) decrease in price leads to .24 more shortage days.
Columns (3) and (4) show the same results keeping only drugs which were off-patent throughout
the sample while columns (5) and (6) show the on patent results. Consistent with our theory, off-
patent drugs were most affected by prices. The statistically significant coefficient on 1 year lag of
log price for an off-patent drug of -28.34 suggests that a 1 percent decrease in price (roughly 33
cents per unit) leads to .28 more shortage days. The on-patent drugs’ results were not statistically
significant, which is consistent with our theory that these drugs had higher margins. The change
in estimates moving from current price to the 1 year lagged price (−23.5 to −28.3) are consistent
with correcting the downward bias caused by the reverse causality problem described above.

 5.3    Results for Shortages Conditional on Manufacturer’s Prices
   Table 10 shows the results for shortages conditional on manufacturer’s prices. Columns (1)
and (2) show the log and lagged-log price coefficients. The coefficient on lagged price suggests



                                                      35
that a 1 percent (roughly 2.09 dollars per unit) decrease in price leads to .38 more shortage days.
Columns (3) and (4) show the same results keeping only drugs which were off-patent throughout
the sample while columns (5) and (6) show the on patent results. Again, off-patent drugs were
most affected by prices. The statistically significant coefficient on 1 year lag of log price of -32.57
suggests that a 1 percent decrease in price (roughly 99 cents per unit) leads to .33 more shortage
days. The on-patent drugs’ results, as in the case with reimbursements to health providers, were
not statistically significant. In summary it appears that lower prices to manufacturers are correlated
with more shortages.

               Table 10: OLS and lagged OLS Estimates of IMS Price Effect on Shortages

                                  (1)      (2)      (3)              (4)     (5)           (6)
            Log IMS Price        -21.87** -37.91***-0.194           -32.57** 1.599         0.424
                                (8.704) (7.520) (17.01)            (14.61) (4.065)       (4.651)

            Off Patent           -3.196      -39.14***
                                (14.17)     (14.47)

            Constant              163.9*** 300.8*** 77.71** 114.2*** 8.822 19.57
                                (32.30) (30.11) (37.94) (31.91) (24.06) (21.63)
            Observations          1773     1773      780      780      344  344
            # Drugs                243       243     101      101       54    54
            R2                  0.0726     0.206 0.0951     0.269 0.0262 0.0307
            Lagged Price            No       Yes      No      Yes       No   Yes
   Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
   Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. Regresses IMS prices on shortage frequency.
   Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and 1-year lagged OLS estimates for all drugs. Off-patent defined as 15 years
   since Orange Book earliest approval. Columns (3) and (4) are the OLS and 1-year lagged estimates for drugs
   off-patent throughout the sample period. Columns (5) and (6) are the OLS and 1-year lagged estimates for drugs
   on-patent throughout the sample period. All regressions include year and ingredient fixed effects.



 5.4    Results for Correlation in Payments to Providers and Manufacturers
   Table 11 reports the correlation in payments. On average, a ten percent decline in Medicare
reimbursement would reduce the manufacturer’s price by 1.74 percent. Drugs which have higher
Medicare market share should be more affected by Medicare price changes. To account for this, we
interact the share of revenue coming from Medicare. The interaction term, while just below con-
ventional thresholds for statistical significance, is large in magnitude. Added to β1 , the coefficient
implies that a 10 percent decline in Medicare reimbursement could reduce the price a manufacturer


                                                      36
                      Table 11: Effect of Medicare Reimbursement on Price to Manufacturers

                                                                               (1)      (2)
                        Log Medicare Reimbursement                             0.188*** 0.156***
                                                                            (0.0433) (0.0453)

                        Log Medicare Reimbursement × MMS                                      0.245
                                                                                            (0.189)

                        Constant                                               1.904*** 1.896***
                                                                            (0.0784) (0.0759)
                        Observations                                             806      806
                        # Drugs                                                  107      107
                        R2                                                     0.135    0.147
       Stars indicate statistical significance: *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01
       Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. This table regresses Medicare prices on IMS prices.
       Column (1) is simply log Medicare price on IMS price, with year and ingredient fixed effects. Column (2) adds an
       interaction between Medicare market share with the Medicare price. This sample only contains off patent drugs.


gets by close to 4.1 percent near the maximum on MMS. This is suggestive of the magnitude of
pass-through in reimbursement reductions from the law to manufacturers.


 6        Discussion
     We provide evidence that higher reimbursement could reduce drug shortages. A 10% increase
in Medicare reimbursement for an off-patent drug is associated with 2.8 fewer days of shortage
(Table 9). A 10% increase on all off-patent drugs is about $3.27 per service (Table 1). With roughly
50 million services per year (699 million services across 12 years), and at $3.27 per service, that
equals $165 million dollars to avert 2.8 days of shortages. That said, if the payment increases target
the lower price drugs, as would be sensible according to our model, then a reduction in shortages
could be much more cost effective.29 A payment increase of 10% for off-patent drugs under the
90th percentile of reimbursement levels would amount to $0.71 per service. For off-patent drugs
below the 50th percentile, the increase would be $0.12 per service. Focusing on these least cost
drugs, for example by targeting drugs in the lower half of the reimbursement level distribution,
would allow for a reduction in total shortages of 12.5 days at a cost of about $50 million dollars.30
  29
      In columns (3) and (4) in Table 14 in the Appendix, we show that the main regression results hold within the
sample of lower price generic drugs as defined by prices below the median.
   30
      The total cost to society depends on how private payment reacts as well. If private payment follows Medicare
reimbursement, then it would be more expensive. In fact, not all private insurers changed and even those that changed
did not move all the way down to ASP plus 6%, so the cost would be less than $750 million.


                                                             37
   The Medicare reimbursement change created an approximately 50% decline in prices which
would create 15 days of shortage. The mean days of shortage are 60, so about 25% of shortage
days are due to the Medicare reimbursement change.

   Other factors may also be associated with drug shortages. First, declining drug prices resulted
not only from Medicare changes, but also from the expansion of 340B pricing (as discussed in sec-
tion 1.1). However, the scale of the 340B program is much smaller than the scale of Medicare. Sec-
ond, industry consolidation could cause shortages. However, consolidation among manufacturers
has ambiguous effects. Consolidation could make shortages less likely as consolidation increases
market power and margins. Alternatively, depending on the covariance of shocks to manufacturing
lines of different firms, consolidation could lead to increased shortages. Third, shortages could be
caused by grey market distributors and stockpiling by hospitals. However, these practices are rel-
atively rare and are symptoms of shortages, rather than causes. Finally, increased FDA regulatory
scrutiny appears to be associated with drug shortages (Stomberg, 2015). However, some of this
increased scrutiny could be a reaction to less investment in reliability by the manufacturers. Never-
theless, the aforementioned factors may be complementary hypotheses but are not valid competing
hypothesis. It would have to be the case that, for example, the FDA increased scrutiny after the
policy change disproportionately on generic drugs which served more Medicare patients.

   The policy change was implemented in 2005, but shortages did not become large until 2009.
However, the empirical analysis shows an increase in shortages for drugs with higher MMS starting
in 2006. Furthermore, as described in section 1.1, private insurers are known to mimic Medicare
with a lag. Finally, some manufacturers probably continued to produce these low-margin drugs
until other opportunities arose, such as following a large wave of patent expirations in 2007.

   The generic sterile injectable markets shares several features with electricity generation which
has faced similar issues. First, timing is critical, because delays can be costly to patient health.
Likewise, electricity supply and demand must be in equilibrium at each instant to avoid power
system failures. Second, storage is costly. Sterile injectables are sensitive to light and temperature.
Likewise, storing electricity by battery or with hydro-storage is currently considered prohibitively
costly in most cases. Third, there is little product differentiation, so price competition can be fierce.
The solution in electricity generation has been a mixture of rapid price adjustment and government



                                                   38
regulation. Details on how electricity markets deal with shortages are in Cramton and Stoft (2005).


 7      Conclusion
     We examine how a reduction in reimbursement to health providers was passed to manufacturers
and played a role in the large increase in shortages of generic sterile injectable drugs. Drugs that
were more affected by the change in policy experienced a greater increase of shortages. The drugs
that were more affected were drugs which treat diseases with older patient populations, because
Medicare predominantly covers older patients. While Medicare reimbursement can not directly
explain the full increase in shortages, the evidence is consistent with a theoretical model in which
declining Medicare reimbursement decreases the returns to investing in capacity and leading to an
increased level of shortages.

     To alleviate the shortage problem, Medicare could increase reimbursements. Indeed, both the
theoretical model and the empirical results suggest that firms with market power (and thus higher
prices) tend to invest more in capacity and have fewer shortages. However, there is a tension
between creating market power and high prices, and having fewer shortages. The optimal number
of shortages is clearly not zero if it requires extremely high prices.

     Contracts could also reduce drug shortages. In theory, if contracts imposed harsh penalties on
manufacturers for failure to supply, then stock outs would fall and average prices would rise. In
practice, harsh penalties have been considered difficult to enforce. Indeed, while contracts might
include “failure to supply” clauses, the contracts usually void the penalty in case of nationwide
shortages (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2011). Furthermore, contracts might
be difficult to enforce due to information asymmetries or gaming. Another concern with contracts
is that they might induce shortages. If the buyer does not receive sufficient supply from the seller,
then the seller must pay a penalty. This might motivate the buyer to hoard and create a shortage.
Alternatively, competing sellers might want to hoard to create a shortage and then supply the
product when price rises. Because the shortage problem is relatively recent, contracts might not
have had sufficient time to be refined to account for these outcomes. Furthermore, perhaps FDA
could be a party to the contracts. FDA could condition approval on maintaining sufficient supply,
and require extensive notification before discontinuing production. Indeed, the Food and Drug
Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA) of 2012 requires that manufacturers notify

                                                  39
FDA of potential discontinuances.


 References
Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy. 2013. “AMCP Guide to Pharmaceutical Payment Meth-
  ods, 2013 Update.”

American Society of Anesthesiologists. 2010. “The Anesthesia Perspective: The Impact of Drug
 Shortages on Patients and Practitioners.” Presentation to FDA. September 27, 2010.

American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2011. “Testimony of W. Charles Penley, MD.” Subcom-
 mittee on Health of the Committee on Energy and Commerce: Hearing Examining the Increase
 in Drug Shortages. September 23, 2011.

American Society of Hematology. 2011. “Prescription Drug Shortages: Examining a Public
 Health Concern and Potential Solutions.” Testimony to Committee On Health, Education, La-
 bor and Pensions, U.S. Senate. December 15, 2011.

Berndt, Ernst R. 2002. “Pharmaceuticals in U.S. Health Care: Determinants of Quantity and
  Price.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4): pp. 45–66.

Berndt, Ernst R. 2005. “Report of Independent Expert Prof. Ernest Berndt to Judge Patti B. Saris.”
  United States District Court of Massachusetts.

Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. 2002. “Measuring Market Inef-
  ficiencies in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market.” The American Economic
  Review, 92(5): pp. 1376–1405.

Burkett, Janine. 2014. “The Reality Behind Generic Drug Inflation.” Drug Options.

Carlton, Dennis W. 1978. “Market Behavior with Demand Uncertainty and Price Inflexibility.”
  The American Economic Review, 68(4): pp. 571–587.

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2013. “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s Influence
  on Private Payment Systems.” National Bureau of Economic Resarch Working Paper No. 19503.

Conti, Rena M, and Ernst R Berndt. 2013. “Anatomy of U.S. Cancer Drug Shortages: Technol-
  ogy, Market Structure and Price Competition.” NBER Working Paper.

Cramton, Peter, and Steven Stoft. 2005. “A Capacity Market that Makes Sense.” Electricity
  Journal 18, 43-54.

Crawford, Gregory S, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2012. “The Welfare Effects of Bundling in Multi-
  channel Television Markets.” The American Economic Review, 102(2): 643–685.

Dana, James D., Jr. 2001. “Competition in Price and Availability When Availability is Unobserv-
  able.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 32(3): pp. 497–513.



                                               40
Deneckere, Raymond, and James Peck. 1995. “Competition over Price and Service Rate When
  Demand is Stochastic: A Strategic Analysis.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 26(1): pp. 148–
  162.
Duggan, Mark, and Fiona M. Scott Morton. 2010. “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharma-
 ceutical Prices and Utilization.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 590–607.
Dunn, Abe, Eli Liebman, and Adam Hale Shapiro. 2014. “Developing a Framework for Decom-
 posing Medical-Care Expenditure Growth: Exploring Issues of Representativeness.” In Measur-
 ing Economic Sustainability and Progress. , ed. Dale W. Jorgenson, J. Steven Landefeld and
 Paul Schreyer, 545–574. University of Chicago Press.
Fox, Erin R, Annette Birt, Ken B James, Heather Kokko, Sandra Salverson, and Donna L
  Soflin. 2009. “ASHP Guidelines on Managing Drug Product Shortages in Hospitals and Health
  Systems.” American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy, 66: 1399–1406.
Fox, Erin R, Burgunda V Sweet, and Valerie Jensen. 2014. “Drug Shortages: A Complex Health
  Care Crisis.” Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 89(3): 361–73.
Grabowski, Henry G., Genia Long, and Richard Mortimer. 2014. “Recent Trends in Brand-
 Name and Generic Drug Competition.” Journal of Medical Economics, 17(3): 207–214.
Grennan, Matthew. 2013. “Price Discrimination and Bargaining: Empirical Evidence from Med-
 ical Devices.” The American Economic Review, 103(1): 145–177.
Ho, Kate, and Robin S Lee. 2015. “Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets.” CEPR Discus-
 sion Papers.
Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2010. “How Medi-
  care’s Payment Cuts For Cancer Chemotherapy Drugs Changed Patterns Of Treatment.” Health
  Affairs, 29(7): 1391–1399.
Kaakeh, Rola, Burgunda V Sweet, Cynthia Reilly, Colleen Bush, Sherry DeLoach, Barb
 Higgins, Angela M Clark, and James Stevenson. 2011. “Impact of drug shortages on US
 health systems.” American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy, 68(19).
Magellan Rx Management. 2013. “Medical Pharmacy Trend Report.”
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. 2003. “Report to Congress: Variation and Innovation
 in Medicare.” Chapter 9: Medicare Payments for Outpatient Drugs Under Part B. June 2003.
Metzger, Monika L, Amy Billett, and Michael P Link. 2012. “The Impact of Drug Shortages on
 Children with Cancer: The Example of Mechlorethamine.” New England Journal of Medicine,
 367(26): 2461–2463.
Mullen, Patrick. 2007. “The Arrival of Average Sales Price (ASP).” Biotechnology Healthcare.
 June 2007.
Office of Inspector General. 2005. “Medicaid Drug Price Comparison: Average Sales Price to
  Average Wholesale Price.” OEI-03-05-00200. June 2005.

                                             41
Panel, ASHP Expert. 2009. “ASHP guidelines on managing drug product shortages in hospitals
  and health systems.” Am J Health-Syst Pharm, 66: 1399–406.

Ridley, David B., Xiaoshu Bei, and Eli Liebman. 2016. “No Shot: Shortages in the United States
  Vaccine Market.” Health Affairs, 35(2).

Rosoff, Philip M, Kuldip R Patel, Ann Scates, Gene Rhea, Paul W Bush, and Joseph A
  Govert. 2012. “Coping with Critical Drug Shortages: An Ethical Approach for Allocating
  Scarce Resources in Hospitals.” Archives of Internal Medicine, 172(19): 1494–1499.

Scott Morton, Fiona M. 1999. “Entry Decisions in the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry.” The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 30(3): pp. 421–440.

Stomberg, Chris. 2015. “Drug Pricing, Reimbursement, and Drug Shortages.” In Measuring and
  Modeling Health Care Costs. , ed. Ana Aizcorbe, Colin Baker, Ernst R Berndt and David Cutler.
  University of Chicago Press.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2011. “Economic Analysis of the Causes of
  Drug Shortages.” Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. October 2011.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2013. “Justification of Estimates for Appro-
  priations Committees. Fiscal Year 2014.”

Woodcock, Janet, and Marta Wosinska. 2012. “Economic and Technological Drivers of Generic
 Sterile Injectable Drug Shortages.” Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 93(2): 170–176.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT press.




                                              42
 A      Appendix




Figure 8: Reimbursement levels and changes for Medicare drugs. These graphs are for the entire sample of
          drugs. The left panel is the distribution of the reimburse level for Medicare Part B. The right panel
          is the distribution of reimbursement changes. Each year, the reimbursement change is calculated
          as the reimbursement in year t minus the price in year t − 1, divided by the price in year t − 1, for
          each drug. The graph shows the percentiles of those values. All percentiles are calculated without
          weights across drugs.




                                                      43
                                              Table 12: List of Drugs in the Sample


Abarelix                           Dexamethasone Acetate              Ibandronate Sodium              Penicillin G Potassium
Acetazolamide Sodium               Dexamethasone Sodium Phosphate     Ibutilide Fumarate              Penicillin G Procaine
Acetylcysteine                     Dexrazoxane Hydrochloride          Idarubicin Hydrochloride        Pentazocine Lactate
Acyclovir Sodium                   Diazepam                           Ifosfamide                      Pentobarbital Sodium
Adenosine                          Diazoxide                          Imiglucerase                    Pentostatin
Alatrofloxacin Mesylate            Dicyclomine Hydrochloride          Irinotecan Hydrochloride        Phenytoin Sodium
Alprostadil                        Digoxin                            Iron Dextran                    Porfimer Sodium
Amifostine                         Dihydroergotamine Mesylate         Itraconazole                    Potassium Chloride
Amikacin Sulfate                   Dimenhydrinate                     Ixabepilone                     Pralidoxime Chloride
Aminophylline                      Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride      Kanamycin Sulfate               Prednisolone Acetate
Amiodarone Hydrochloride           Dipyridamole                       Ketorolac Tromethamine          Procainamide Hydrochloride
Amitriptyline Hydrochloride        Dobutamine Hydrochloride           Lanreotide Acetate              Prochlorperazine Edisylate
Amphotericin B                     Docetaxel                          Lepirudin Recombinant           Progesterone
Ampicillin Sodium                  Dolasetron Mesylate                Leucovorin Calcium              Promethazine Hydrochloride
Apomorphine Hydrochloride          Dopamine Hydrochloride             Leuprolide Acetate              Propranolol Hydrochloride
Aripiprazole                       Doripenem                          Levetiracetam                   Protamine Sulfate
Arsenic Trioxide                   Doxercalciferol                    Levocarnitine                   Pyridoxine Hydrochloride
Atropine Sulfate                   Doxorubicin Hydrochloride          Levofloxacin                    Ranitidine Hydrochloride
Azacitidine                        Droperidol                         Levoleucovorin Calcium          Regadenoson
Azithromycin                       Dyphylline                         Lidocaine Hydrochloride         Risperidone
Bendamustine Hydrochloride         Enoxaparin Sodium                  Lincomycin Hydrochloride        Ropivacaine Hydrochloride Monohydrate
Benztropine Mesylate               Epinephrine                        Linezolid                       Secretin Synthetic Human
Betamethasone Sodium Phosphate     Epirubicin Hydrochloride           Lorazepam                       Sincalide
Bivalirudin                        Epoprostenol Sodium                Magnesium Sulfate               Somatrem
Bleomycin Sulfate                  Eptifibatide                       Mecasermin Recombinant          Somatropin
Bortezomib                         Ertapenem Sodium                   Mechlorethamine Hydrochloride   Spectinomycin Hydrochloride
Buprenorphine Hydrochloride        Erythromycin Lactobionate          Medroxyprogesterone Acetate     Streptomycin Sulfate
Busulfan                           Estradiol Cypionate                Melphalan Hydrochloride         Streptozocin
Butorphanol Tartrate               Estradiol Valerate                 Meperidine Hydrochloride        Succinylcholine Chloride
Caffeine Citrate                   Ethanolamine Oleate                Mepivacaine Hydrochloride       Sumatriptan Succinate
Calcitriol                         Etoposide                          Meropenem                       Tacrolimus
Carboplatin                        Fentanyl Citrate                   Mesna                           Temsirolimus
Carmustine                         Floxuridine                        Metaraminol Bitartrate          Terbutaline Sulfate
Caspofungin Acetate                Fluconazole                        Methadone Hydrochloride         Teriparatide Acetate
Cefazolin Sodium                   Fludarabine Phosphate              Methocarbamol                   Testosterone Cypionate
Cefepime Hydrochloride             Fluorouracil                       Methotrexate Sodium             Testosterone Enanthate
Cefotaxime Sodium                  Fluphenazine Decanoate             Methyldopate Hydrochloride      Testosterone Propionate
Cefoxitin Sodium                   Fomepizole                         Methylergonovine Maleate        Theophylline
Ceftazidime                        Fomivirsen Sodium                  Methylprednisolone Acetate      Thiotepa
Ceftizoxime Sodium                 Fondaparinux Sodium                Metoclopramide Hydrochloride    Thyrotropin
Ceftriaxone Sodium                 Fosaprepitant Dimeglumine          Micafungin Sodium               Tigecycline
Cefuroxime Sodium                  Foscarnet Sodium                   Midazolam Hydrochloride         Tinzaparin Sodium
Chloramphenicol Sodium Succinate   Fulvestrant                        Mitomycin                       Tirofiban Hydrochloride
Chloroprocaine Hydrochloride       Furosemide                         Mitoxantrone Hydrochloride      Tobramycin Sulfate
Chlorothiazide Sodium              Gallium Nitrate                    Morphine Sulfate                Topotecan Hydrochloride
Chlorpromazine Hydrochloride       Ganciclovir Sodium                 Moxifloxacin Hydrochloride      Torsemide
Cilastatin Sodium; Imipenem        Gatifloxacin                       Nalbuphine Hydrochloride        Triamcinolone Acetonide
Ciprofloxacin                      Gemcitabine Hydrochloride          Naloxone Hydrochloride          Triamcinolone Hexacetonide
Cisplatin                          Gemtuzumab Ozogamicin              Nandrolone Decanoate            Trimethobenzamide Hydrochloride
Cladribine                         Gentamicin Sulfate                 Nelarabine                      Trimetrexate Glucuronate
Clofarabine                        Glatiramer Acetate                 Nesiritide Recombinant          Triptorelin Pamoate
Colistimethate Sodium              Glucagon Hydrochloride             Octreotide Acetate              Urea
Corticorelin Ovine Triflutate      Gonadorelin Hydrochloride          Ondansetron Hydrochloride       Urofollitropin
Corticotropin                      Granisetron Hydrochloride          Orphenadrine Citrate            Urokinase
Cosyntropin                        Haloperidol Decanoate              Oxacillin Sodium                Vancomycin Hydrochloride
Cyclophosphamide                   Haloperidol Lactate                Oxaliplatin                     Verteporfin
Cytarabine                         Heparin Sodium                     Oxymorphone Hydrochloride       Vinblastine Sulfate
Dacarbazine                        Histrelin Acetate                  Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride   Vincristine Sulfate
Dactinomycin                       Hyaluronidase                      Oxytocin                        Vinorelbine Tartrate
Dalteparin Sodium                  Hydralazine Hydrochloride          Paclitaxel                      Voriconazole
Daptomycin                         Hydrocortisone Acetate             Palonosetron Hydrochloride      Ziconotide
Daunorubicin Hydrochloride         Hydrocortisone Sodium Phosphate    Pamidronate Disodium            Zidovudine
Decitabine                         Hydrocortisone Sodium Succinate    Paricalcitol                    Ziprasidone Mesylate
Deferoxamine Mesylate              Hydromorphone Hydrochloride        Pemetrexed Disodium             Zoledronic Acid
Desmopressin Acetate               Hydroxyzine Hydrochloride          Penicillin G Benzathine




                                                                     44
Figure 9: Price levels and changes for IMS drugs. These graphs are for the entire sample of drugs. The left
          is the distribution of the price level for IMS. The right panel is the distribution of price changes for
          IMS. Each year, the price change is calculated as the price in year t minus the price in year t − 1,
          divided by the price in year t − 1, for each drug. The graph shows the percentiles of those values.
          All percentiles are calculated without weights across drugs.




                                                       45
                                      Table 13: Summary Statistics




                          source                       count mean    sd    min                       max
Shortage Days             Univ. Utah                   2915 59.47 120.65 0.00                      365.00
Number of Manufacturers Orange Book                    2915  2.88   2.92   0.00                     25.00
MMS                       IMS                          2544  0.09   0.16  0.00                      1.00
MMS                       MarketScan                   2915  0.14   0.17  0.00                      0.85
Medicare Reimbursement Part B                          2915 49.64 202.71 0.01                     2500.62
Mean Age                  MarketScan                   2915 45.00   6.91  12.83                    57.39
Off Patent                Orange Book                  2915  0.78   0.42  0.00                      1.00
Revenue per Standard Unit IMS                          1667 193.60 594.95 0.01                    12533.00
Observations                                           2915

Summary statistics from 2001 to 2012 for the 296 drugs for which we have Medicare reim-
bursement data. Data sources include the University of Utah Drug Information Service, Orange
Book, Medicare Part B National Summary Data files, and IMS Health.

              Table 14: OLS and IV Estimates of the Effect on MMS on Shortage Days
                        Dependent variable: Shortage Days in a Year

                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
              Off Patent                           -4.676      -5.682       0.436       2.858
                                                  (12.11)     (12.20)     (32.58)     (32.04)

              Year ≥ 2005 × MMS                     79.28** 139.8*
                                                  (32.35) (75.55)

              Year ≥ 2005 × Log MMS                                         6.309* 9.278*
                                                                          (3.665) (4.784)

              Constant                              21.83**         38.22
                                                  (8.643)         (29.10)
              Observations                           2959   2959     1492               1492
              # Drugs                                 257     257     126                 126
              R2                                    0.157   0.155   0.197               0.197
              Drug Fixed Effect                       Yes     Yes     Yes                 Yes
              Year Fixed Effect                       Yes     Yes     Yes                 Yes
              IV Regression                            No     Yes      No                 Yes
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. Off patent is 15 years since Orange Book earliest
approval. Columns (1) and (2) are the OLS and IV estimates using the IMS MMS in levels, rather than logs,
as the treatment variable, respectively. Columns (3) and (4) are use log of MMS again, but only include drugs
whose median price is below the sample median drug price. Each regression contains molecule fixed effects and
indicator variables for each year from 2002 to 2012.


                                                     46
                        Table 15: First Stage - MarketScan MMS on IMS MMS

                                                           (1)      (2)
                               Marketscan MMS              0.495***
                                                        (0.0443)

                               Log MMS                                    1.144***
                                                                       (0.0788)

                               Constant                   0.0204** -1.293***
                                                        (0.0102)   (0.308)
                               Observations                  257       126
                               R2                          0.330     0.630
                               F-stat                      125.3     211.2
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. First step in IVs, OLS of MarketScan MMS on
IMS MMS. Column (1) runs both MMS measures in levels rather than logs. Column (2) is in logs, but only
includes drugs whose median price is below the sample median drug price.




           Table 16: First Stage - Interaction of Predicted MMS with ASP Reimbursement

                                                               (1)          (2)
                             Off Patent                       0.0126       -0.722**
                                                            (0.0111)      (0.319)

                             Predicted MMS                     1.027***
                                                             (0.212)

                             Predicted Log MMS                             0.975***
                                                                        (0.0638)
                             Observations                     2959          1492
                             # Drugs                            257          126
                             R2                               0.475        0.937
                             F-stat                           10.53        166.7
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the drug level. This is the first-stage in 2SLS where the instrument
is predicted MMS from Table 15 interacted with ASP Reimbursement. Column (1) runs both MMS measures in
levels rather than logs. Column (2) is in logs, but only includes drugs whose median price is below the sample
median drug price. Each regression also contains indicator variables for each year from 2002 to 2012, which are
omitted from the table.




                                                       47
