                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 DEFAULTS AND ATTENTION:
                                   THE DROP OUT EFFECT

                                           Andrew Caplin
                                           Daniel J. Martin

                                        Working Paper 17988
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17988


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Andrew Caplin and Daniel J. Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Defaults and Attention: The Drop Out Effect
Andrew Caplin and Daniel J. Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 17988
April 2012
JEL No. D01,D03,D04,D82

                                             ABSTRACT

When choice options are complex, policy makers may seek to reduce decision making errors by making
a high quality option the default. We show that this positive effect is at risk because such a policy
creates incentives for decision makers to "drop out" by paying no attention to the decision and accepting
the default sight unseen. Using decision time as a proxy for attention, we confirm the importance of
this effect in an experimental setting. A key challenge for policy makers is to measure, and if possible
mitigate, such drop out behavior in the field.


Andrew Caplin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
andrew.caplin@nyu.edu

Daniel J. Martin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
daniel.martin@nyu.edu
                 Defaults and Attention: The Drop Out E¤ect

                                  Andrew Capliny and Daniel Martinz


                                                April 4, 2012




                                                  Abstract

          When choice options are complex, policy makers may seek to reduce decision making errors
      by making a high quality option the default. We show that this positive e¤ect is at risk because
      such a policy creates incentives for decision makers to “drop out”by paying no attention to the
      decision and accepting the default sight unseen. Using decision time as a proxy for attention,
      we con…rm the importance of this e¤ect in an experimental setting. A key challenge for policy
      makers is to measure, and if possible mitigate, such drop out behavior in the …eld.

          Key Words: Default E¤ects, Nudges, Bounded Rationality, Limited Attention, Rational
      Inattention, Mistakes




1    Introduction

When choice options are complex, consumers may be confused and thus make mistakes. Figure
1 shows that even a simpli…ed presentation of the available Medicare plans in the U.S. requires
decision makers to process a signi…cant amount of information. For those seeking to understand
    We thank Ste¤en Altmann, Nabil Al-Najjar, Douglas Bernheim, Ann Caplin, Gabriel Carroll, David Cesarini,
Mark Dean, Je¤ Ely, Sen Geng, Paul Glimcher, Muriel Niederle, Leonardo Pejsachowicz, Aldo Rustichini, Andy
Schotter, Natalia Shestakova, Jonathan Weinstein, Ruth Wyatt, and seminar participants at SITE, Stanford, and
Brown for valuable comments.
   y
     Center for Experimental Social Science and Department of Economics, New York University and National Bureau
of Economic Research.
   z
     Center for Experimental Social Science and Department of Economics, New York University.



                                                       1
                                Figure 1: Screenshot from www.medicare.gov



the options and make a suitable choice, “spending an hour or two is not going to get the job done”
(Thaler and Sunstein [2008], p.168).

      In such complex decision environments, it is common for policy makers to make one option the
“default”, and to implement this option unless the decision maker actively opts out. In the past,
it has been common for policy makers to use little or no discretion in selecting which alternative
will be the default. This leaves decision quality somewhat to chance, since many decision makers
appear reluctant to opt out of defaults (Madrian and Shea [2001]).1

      Rather than set defaults in an essentially random manner, Thaler and Sunstein [2008] propose
instead that policy makers deliberately select a default option that is as good as possible for those
who blindly accept it. The policy goal in so selecting the default is to “help people who make
errors while having little e¤ect on those who are fully rational” (O’Donoghue and Rabin [2002],
p.186). Just such a policy was implemented for Medicare choice in Maine, where in an e¤ort to
identify an appropriate default, “the ten plans meeting state coverage benchmarks were evaluated
according to three months of historical data on prescription use” (Thaler and Sunstein [2008], p.
172). Analogous policies are now being considered, developed, and applied in many arenas, from
choice of savings plan, through choice of consumer …nancial products, to choice of medical insurance
options. Also under consideration is the “active choice”policy of Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian,
and Metrick [2009], which places the onus directly on the decision maker to make a choice, without
  1
      See also Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick [2009] and Beshears, Choi, Madrian, and Laibson [2011].



                                                         2
singling out a particular option as the default. Models of these various policies are advancing as
well. Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick [2009] model performance of these policies
when decision makers have self-control problems and can delay decisions, while Carlin, Gervais,
and Manso [2011] analyze how default policies impact social learning.2

       In this paper, we model and measure experimentally the impact of deliberately set defaults
on decision quality. In our model, when a policy maker deliberately makes an option the default,
this designation provides information concerning the value of that option.3 While we allow private
attentional e¤ort to provide further information on which choice is best, we …nd that there is a
strong incentive to accept an informative default sight unseen. This “drop out” behavior, which
operates on the extensive margin of attentional choice, contrasts with behavior in standard economic
models of production and consumption, in which adjustment typically takes place on the intensive
margin.4 Strikingly, we …nd experimentally that informative defaults lead to a signi…cant increase
in such drop out behavior.

       While the main channel in our theory of default e¤ects is informational, there are other factors
that contribute to drop out behavior. In particular, we …nd that somewhat fewer subjects drop out
with the active choice policy than when they have a completely uninformative default, despite the
informational equivalence of these policies. This means that the requirement of active choice per
se may reduce drop out behavior and have a positive e¤ect on decision quality. Our model is silent
on the mechanism underlying this additional e¤ect.

       While drop out behavior may be mitigated by the active choice policy, it is nevertheless prevalent
in all of our experimental treatments. In keeping with the aphorism that “you can lead a horse to
water, but you can’t make it drink,” it appears you can lead a subject to choose, but you can’t
make him think. The prevalence of drop out behavior implies that choice data alone cannot identify
the impact of defaults on choice quality when preferences are unknown. If few individuals opt out,
   2
       Our model is complementary with both of these approaches. The random draw of “time cost” in Carroll, Choi,
Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick [2009] is analogous to the marginal cost of attention in our model (see section 2),
and the social bene…t to attentional e¤ort in Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011] could be added to the attentional
production function in our leading example (again see section 2).
   3
     The information content of defaults has been studied also by Madrian and Shea [2001], Brown and Krishna [2004],
McKenzie, Liersch, and Finkelstein [2006], and Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011].
  4
    Given their focus on social learning, Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011] exogenously …x the population division
between attentive and inattentive DMs. There are a number of other important di¤erences between our formulations,
in particular what is learned through attentional e¤ort (see section 3).


                                                          3
it may mean that many found the default option personally suitable, but it may also mean that
many failed to attend to the choice.

       This uncertainty surrounding improvements in choice quality raises a policy challenge. On
the one hand, if decision makers are rational inattentive, as they are in our model, then even
with the drop out e¤ect, informative defaults are always welfare maximizing. On the other hand,
default policies are often justi…ed solely on the basis that they improve choice quality. Thaler
and Sunstein [2008] argue that “setting default options, and other similar seemingly trivial menu-
changing strategies, can have huge e¤ects on outcomes, from increasing savings to improving health
care to providing organs for lifesaving transplant operations” (p. 19).

       Our work suggests a possible answer to this challenge: when choice data are enriched with a
suitable measure of attentional e¤ort, it is possible to separate out any drop out e¤ects. In our
experiment, we …nd that decision time, a particularly simple measure, serves as an excellent proxy
for attention and is capable of identifying attentional drop outs.5 While decision time can be cleanly
recorded in the controlled environment of the experimental laboratory, it may be di¢ cult to pin
down in the …eld. Researchers interested in understanding the impact of default policies in the …eld
will likewise need to develop measures of attentional e¤ort appropriate for the settings they study.

       In section 2 we present our model of attentional choice and begin our analysis of drop out
behavior in the context of a simple example. In the following section, we model the policy setting.
Section 4 generalizes the model and formalizes the “Drop Out Hypothesis”, which asserts that
the replacement of a random default with an informative default increases the number of inatten-
tive decisions. Section 5 presents the complementary experimental design and identi…es the e¤ect
of an informative default on decision quality. Section 6 con…rms the Drop Out Hypothesis and
shows that this increase in inattentiveness signi…cantly impacts decision quality. Section 7 presents
experimental …ndings on the active choice policy. Section 8 concludes.
   5
       We thank Muriel Niederle for pressing us to explore the validity of decision time as an attentional proxy. The
time taken to reach a decision is regularly studied in psychology, in part because drift di¤usion models explicitly
include it (see Ratcli¤ and McKoon [2008]). However, decision time has been little studied in economics. Exceptions
include Wilcox [1993], Rubinstein [2007], Geng [2011], and Reutskaja, Nagel, Camerer, and Rangel [2011].




                                                           4
2     Attentional Choice and Drop Out Behavior

In this section, we use an example to introduce our information theoretic model of the costs and
returns to attentional e¤ort. We show in this example that drop-out behavior, in which attentional
e¤ort is set to zero, is optimal when costs are high enough. We show in section 4 that this insight
concerning the role of the extensive margin of attentional choice is far more general.

    Looking beyond the example, it is clear that the precise trigger for inattention is situation-
speci…c. It depends both on the di¢ culty of learning in the problem at hand and on the extent of
the information that is available absent attentional e¤ort. We illustrate in this section how these
forces shape the level of attentional e¤ort that is chosen.



2.1   Costs of Attention

Choice does not require understanding. On the one hand, decision makers (DMs) can accept the
default option, or select a di¤erent option, understanding little to nothing about the available
options. On the other hand, they can choose to devote attention to gain greater understanding of
these options. For example, in the case of Medicare, they can read in detail the description of each
plan, match it to personal health circumstances, join on-line discussion forums, etc. To capture
this, we allow DMs to choose whether or not to attend to a given choice, and if so, how much
attentional e¤ort to make. The chosen level of attention is captured by intensity measure         0,
with higher levels of     corresponding to more intense e¤ort to clarify the precise payo¤s of the
available options.

    We assume for simplicity that the attentional decision is made just once before an option is
chosen and cannot be revised. The costs of attentional e¤ort (in expected utility units) are assumed
linear in the level of attention,
                                            K( ) = k :

The parameter k > 0 is the marginal utility cost of attentional e¤ort. This parameter is allowed to
vary both across individuals and across time, yet is assumed known to each DM when the level of
attentional e¤ort is chosen.




                                                  5
2.2    Payo¤ Uncertainty and Signals: An Example

We model DMs who face uncertainty concerning the payo¤s to a set of available choices and can
reduce this uncertainty by expending attentional e¤ort to obtain informative signals about the state
of the world. The resulting reduction in payo¤ uncertainty improves the quality of …nal decisions
and thereby raises expected utility.

   Our main example involves two actions, choose the option on the left (aL ) or choose the option
on the right (aR ), and two prizes, a good one (x1 ) and a bad one (x2 ), with normalized expected
“prize”utility of U (x1 ) = 1 and U (x2 ) = 0. The DM knows that one and only one of the two actions
will yield the preferred prize x1 . Which action yields x1 is determined by state ! 2 f! L ; ! R g. In
state ! L the preferred prize is on the left, while in state ! R it is on the right. We assume that the
good prize is ex ante more likely to be on the right, with,

                                                               2
                                                    Pr (! R ) = :
                                                               3

   A fully-informed DM who knows the true state of the world would always pick a utility maxi-
mizing option. Errors are made only because DMs do not perfectly perceive the state of the world,
so they do not fully understand the consequences of the available actions. Before making an action
choice, the DM can get up to two signals about the state of the world. Each signal either suggests
that the good prize is on the left (    L)    or on the right (         R ).   When the good prize is actually on the
left, the signal is correct with probability 34 , and when the good prize is actually on the right, the
signal is also correct with probability 43 , so that,

                                                                                3
                                       Pr (    L j! L )   = Pr (   R j! R )    = :
                                                                                4


2.3    The Bene…ts of Attention

Choice of attentional e¤ort depends on a production function that turns this e¤ort into a probability
distribution over the number of signals received. We assume that there are logistic returns to
                                                                   1
attention: signals are received with probability             1+e   (6    6)   , and if signals are received, there is an
equal probability of getting 1 or 2 signals. This re‡ects initial increasing returns to attention and
then decreasing returns.

   To compute optimal attention, we …rst determine the expected prize utility for di¤erent signal

                                                             6
realizations by calculating posterior beliefs (after receiving any signals and before making an action
choice) about the location of the good prize for all available actions. In the example, when no
signals have been received, the right action aR is more likely to yield the good prize and is therefore
the best choice. The corresponding expected prize utility is,

                                                           2
                                                       V0 = .
                                                           3

   The best choice with one signal depends on its direction. If it indicates that the good prize is
on the right (a signal of       R ),   this con…rms aR as the better choice. If it indicates that the good
prize is on the left (   L ),   then aL becomes the better choice since the signal is more informative
than the prior. Overall, the good prize is chosen if and only if the state is ! L and the signal is                   L

or the state is ! R and the signal is        R,   so the corresponding expected prize utility is,

                                                     2 3 1 3  3
                                             V1 =       +    = :
                                                     3 4 3 4  4

   The outcome with two signals is clear. If they are both                     R   or one is   R   and the other is   L,

then aR is chosen. If they are both          L,   then aL is chosen. Overall, the expected prize utility with
two signals is,
                                                2        1    1 9   39
                                         V2 =     (1       )+      = :
                                                3       16    3 16  48

   Combining the signal production function with the results above yields the AVF,

                                                              1             25
                                            V( )=             (6   6)
                                                                               :
                                                       1+e                  32

   This AVF is presented in Figure 2. Note that the AVF resembles a logistic function: it starts
out convex and then becomes concave.



2.4   Optimal Attention and Drop Out Behavior

To determine the optimal level of attention, the DM weighs the costs of attention, given by K( ),
against the bene…ts of attention, given by V ( ). The simple calculus of optimal attention is
illustrated in Figure 2. The only possible optima are to put in zero attentional e¤ort or to put in
an e¤ort level that creates a tangency (at the e¤ort level              0   in the …gure) with marginal cost on the
concave boundary of the convex hull of the AVF (shown with a dashed line in the …gure). To work


                                                          7
             EU




            23
                        V( )




                                                            K( )

                                                                                   Attention
                                                  '


                        Figure 2: Example of the costs and bene…ts of attention



out which of these is superior, one compares the horizontal di¤erence V (0) K(0) to V ( 0 ) K( 0 ).
When K( ) = :03 , as in Figure 2, the optimal level of attention equals approximately 1.5. The
expected utility given by the AVF at this optimal level of attention indicates average choice quality
for a speci…c marginal cost of attention.

   As indicated above, we allow for heterogeneity in the costs of attentional e¤ort. We introduce
the function V^ (k) to capture the relationship between the marginal cost of attention and choice
quality,
                                             V^ (k) = V (   );

where      2 arg maxa    0 fV   ( )   k g.

   In Figure 3, we plot V^ (k) for the AVF computed in the example above. Note that as the cost
of e¤ort rises above zero, there is a gradual reduction in decision quality as the DM chooses lower
levels of attentional e¤ort. At a critical cost level, marked as k in the …gure, it is optimal to drop
out altogether and to choose zero attentional e¤ort. At this point, we see rational inattention.

   The key …nding above is that optimal e¤ort is zero for costs of attention above a critical
threshold k. We show in section 4 not only that such a threshold exists in all reasonable cases, but
also that the cuto¤ threshold is generally reduced when there is an informative default. This result
is formalized in the Drop Out Hypothesis.

                                                      8
             EU
                                                                              ^
                                                                              Vk
           23




                                                                                        Cost
                                                                         _
                                                                         k


                             Figure 3: Choice quality given e¤ort cost



3     Policy and Decision Quality

In this section, we add a policy context to our model in order to explore the impact of defaults on
attentional choice. We then extend the example of the previous section to capture policy e¤ects.
To do so, we …rst make explicit the information theoretic underpinnings of our general model of
attentional choice.



3.1   Modeling Uncertainty

Note in the example that we separated out action choices, aL and aR , from the utility-relevant
consequences of these actions, which is receipt of either prize x1 or x2 . In our policy setting, we
follow Caplin and Martin [2012] in allowing for an arbitrary set A = fam j1        m   M g of available
actions and an entirely distinct …nite set of prizes X = fxn j1    n         N g, over which DMs have
preferences. Each action corresponds to a position in a list, a location on a computer screen, a
particular slot machine, etc. In the example above, the set of available actions was to choose
the option on the left or the right. Importantly, these action-de…ning properties should be easily
observable as they assumed to be objectively identi…ed and understood by all DMs immediately
upon being faced with the choice problem.


                                                 9
       The state of the world is the true underlying assignment of prizes to actions, f : A ! X. In
the example above, the assignment was whether the prize x1 was on the left or the right.6 We
assume that this assignment is set by the policy maker, but not fully known by DMs, who apply
attentional e¤ort to improve their understanding of the mapping. DMs start out with a prior on
the set of states,       2    (F), with F       ff : A ! Xg.7

       However natural it may be in the context of complex choices, this separation of actions from
prizes is not standard. Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011] use the more standard approach in
modeling states of the world where the objective consequences of all actions are clear, yet how much
prize utility each action provides the DM is unknown. While one could in principle derive precisely
the same results in this alternative framework, our model allows uncertainty to relate to objectively
measurable data rather than subjective types. This both guides experimental implementation and
suggests obvious comparative static properties. In our framework, an increase in the complexity
with which given objects are displayed directly impacts returns to attentional e¤ort. Similarly,
making it hard to view all options simultaneously lowers attentional returns. A standard type-based
model does not naturally accommodate these e¤ects, since the maintained assumption is that all
objective consequences are perfectly understood regardless of how clearly they are presented.



3.2       Policy Options

The policy maker starts with a …xed set X C of options, which is the choice set that will be presented
to all DMs.8 The identity of X C is the private information of the policy maker, but it is common
knowledge that X C is a subset of the grand prize set X and that the size of X C is M . There is a
corresponding …xed action set of the same cardinality A = fa1 ; ::; aM g, where a …xed action a 2 A
is the default action, which is also common knowledge. In this setting, the policy maker’s only
choice concerns which prize to assign to the default action. One possible policy is to set a random
default.
   6
       This separation of actions from prizes also characterizes the classical “bandit” problem, in which an act is the
choice of a bandit arm and choice is guided by the DM’s beliefs concerning the rewards and information provided
by taking each action. The bandit model has been fruitfully developed as a model of boundedly rational choice by
Bolton and Faure-Grimaud [2009].
   7
     Note that what we de…ne here as states of the world are referred to as “frames” in Caplin and Martin [2012].
   8
     This model can be extended to make choice of this set endogenous.




                                                           10
         Random Default: In this policy, all prizes in X C are assigned to the default action with
         equal probability. Thus, the policy maker knows that a DM who blindly chooses the default
         action is equally likely to get any prize in X C . To complete the description of this policy, we
         assume that all prizes in X C are equally likely to be assigned to any other action.


       The informative default policy is the policy maker’s alternative to a random default policy.
Given our focus on attentional e¤ort with informative defaults, we follow Carroll, Choi, Laibson,
Madrian, and Metrick [2009] and Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011] in assuming that there is no
con‡ict between the preferences of the policy maker and of the decision makers.9 Hence if all DMs
have identical preferences, the policy maker will simply select a utility maximizing option as the
informative default option. With population heterogeneity, the policy maker needs to aggregate
heterogeneous preferences. We assume it is commonly understood that the policy maker will
maximize overall choice quality if all were to accept the default.10 To formalize this, we assume
that there is some decision maker type space T and that the policy maker’s goal is to maximize a
population weighted average of some normalized type-speci…c EU functions, U : X ! R+ . As in
Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick [2009] and Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011], the
policy maker knows the population distribution                  2    (T ).11


         Informative Default: In this policy, the prize x 2 X C assigned to the default action
         maximizes the average level of normalized utility across the population if all were to accept
         it,
                                                                 X
                                              x 2 arg max                ( )U (x):
                                                         x2X C
                                                                    2T

         In this policy, all other prizes in X C are equally likely to be assigned to any other action.
   9
       By way of contrast, the classical sender-receiver model of Crawford and Sobel [1982] analyzes how the motive of
the policy maker impacts the feasibility of transmitting informative messages. Altmann, Falk, and Grunewald [2012]
study default selection and reaction to defaults in the sender-receiver framework and show that default e¤ects depend
on the extent of the alignment in preferences between sender and receiver.
  10
     This is similar to the optimal choice rule for policy makers in Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011]. Other rules for
selecting informative defaults could be considered, but this one seems plausible and simpli…es the strategic consider-
ations.
  11
     In our model, it is not necessary to specify the correlation between types and attentional costs. In principle, both
the random processes generating marginal costs of attention and the AVFs could be type speci…c.




                                                           11
       We assume that the policy maker must publicly and irrevocably commit either to the random
default policy or the informative default policy. This policy rule is applied at a broader level than
the individual decision problem under current consideration, so that policy makers cannot set a
di¤erent default for di¤erent types.



3.3       Information Asymmetries and Default Policy

The model involves a natural asymmetry of information. The policy maker knows the set of prizes
XC         X available to DMs and determines the mapping f from actions to prizes. By contrast,
while DMs know the grand set of prizes X, the set of available actions A, that a 2 A is the default
action, and the nature of the default policy, they may be quite uncertain about the contents of X C
and the mapping f from actions to prizes. Prior beliefs about f , and thus how likely each action
is to yield each prize, will depend on the policy itself, as detailed below.

       In our model, DMs know their precise type and hence their utility functions. However, they
know less than the policy maker about the population distribution of types. Their beliefs about
the population distribution impact their interpretation of an informative default because that dis-
tribution determines the prize assigned to the default action.

       To analyze the impact of DM beliefs about the population distribution of types on the informa-
tion conveyed by the default, we extend the example of the last section. In this extension, we use
the simplifying assumption that DMs all regard themselves as more likely to be in the largest group,
precisely according to the proportions in the broader population. Hence, all believe ex ante that
the informative default is the best option for them.12 It is only when they attend to the decision
problem that they may come to understand that, while it may be suitable for others, the default
does not suit their particular tastes.



3.4       Random and Informative Defaults: An Example

In the two action, two prize, two state, two signal example of the last section, let aR be the default
action.
  12
       It is not necessary in the model to have such stark beliefs. Decision makers could have richer information about
the distribution of types than in the example. They may, for example, suspect that they are in the minority and
therefore have an incentive to switch away from the default.


                                                           12
     We assume that there are two di¤erent types with distinct preferences. We specify that the
policy maker knows that 2/3 of the population is of type                   1   and prefer x1 to x2 , while 1/3 of the
population is of type      2   and has the reverse preference. For simplicity, we assume that the policy
maker applies a simple normalization in which they are e¤ectively interested in maximizing the
probability that the best prize is picked regardless of type,

                                    U1 (x1 ) = U2 (x2 ) = 1; U1 (x2 ) = U2 (x1 ) = 0:

What this means is that, in the informative default condition, the optimal choice for the policy
maker is to have the default action yield prize x1 , so that,

                                                     f (aR ) = x1 :


     As mentioned above, DMs all believe that their preference is likely to be in the 2/3 majority:
those who prefer x1 to x2 are correct, while those who prefer x2 to x1 mistakenly assume that they
are in the majority. Hence all DMs believe that there is a 2/3 chance that they will prefer the
default action if they have seen no signals. Hence all will pick aR and receive x1 with the result
that expected prize utility with no signals when there is an informative default is,
                                                  2          1          2
                                             V0I = U1 (x1 ) + U2 (x1 ) = :
                                                  3          3          3

     The optimal choice with one signal depends on the DM’s prize utility type and the direction
of the signal. If the signal is         R,   suggesting that x1 is on the right, it con…rms aR as the better
choice for those of type       1,   but suggests a change to aL for those of type            2.   If the signal is   L,   it
con…rms aR as the better choice for those of type                 2,   while inducing type        1   to switch to aL . In
both cases, the type-speci…c best object is chosen if and only if either the state is ! L and the signal
is   L,   or the state is ! R and the signal is       R,

                                     3                        1                       3
                           V1I =       [U1 (x1 ) + U2 (x2 )] + [U1 (x2 ) + U2 (x1 )] = :
                                     4                        4                       4
By analogous logic, the expected prize utility for an informative default and two signals is just as
in the previous example,
                                                                39
                                                       V2I =       :
                                                                48
Figure 2 summarizes the expected AVF based on this informational default just as it did the
individual AVF. These coincide because the prior in the previous example matches the prior induced
by the informative default in this example.

                                                           13
   With a random default, each action is equally likely to produce either good, so that absent
attention, each individual correctly regards each choice as having a 0.5 chance of delivering their
preferred good,
                                   1                        1                       1
                           V0R =     [U1 (x1 ) + U2 (x2 )] + [U1 (x2 ) + U2 (x1 )] = :
                                   2                        2                       2
The optimal choice with one signal depends on the direction it points. If it points to the right, this
suggests that aR is the better choice for        1,   aL for    2.   If it points to the left, these type choices are
reversed. In all cases, the probability of picking the best action depends only on how informative
is the signal, so that,
                                                            3
                                                       V1R = :
                                                            4
Choice behavior with two signals continues in this vein. If they are both                R   (5/16 chance), then aR
is the choice for   1,   aL for   2.   If they are both   L    (5/16 chance), the choices are reversed. In both
                     9
cases, there is a   10   chance that the correct choice is made, since according to the signal process
two   L/ R   signals are nine times more likely in state ! L /! R than in the opposite state. Finally, if
the two signals point in di¤erent directions (6/16 chance) then any choice is equally likely to yield
either prize. Hence,
                                                    5 9   3 1  3
                                            V2R =       +     = :
                                                    8 10 8 2   4

   Given the signal production function that turns attention into a probability distribution over
the number of signals received, we can derive the function V R ( ) as,

                                                               1            3
                                            V R( ) =            (6     6)
                                                                              :
                                                        1+e                 4

   The functions V R ( ) and V I ( ) are illustrated in Figure 4.



3.5    Which Policy Maximizes Expected Choice Quality?

In Figure 5 we show expected choice quality as it depends on the marginal cost of attention with
the informative default and with the random default. Note that the critical level of attentional cost
at which it is optimal to drop out is strictly lower when there is an informative default than when
the default is random,
                                                       kR > kI :




                                                          14
 EU



       VI
23


      VR
12




                                                K( )


                                I       R                              Attention
                                    '       '


      Figure 4: Example of optimal attention in policy setting




 EU

                                                                ^
                                                                VI k
23

                                                                ^
                                                                VR k
12




                                                                            Cost
                           _                               _
                           kI                              kR


      Figure 5: Choice quality given e¤ort cost in policy setting




                                        15
    There are three distinct attentional cost regions in terms of decision quality. For high levels of
cost, k > k R , there is no attentional e¤ort with either form of default. In this range, the higher
information content in the default implies that average decision quality is higher. For low levels of
cost, k < k I , there is attentional e¤ort with both the informative and the uninformative default, and
once again higher decision quality. The most interesting region is where there is positive attention
only with the uninformative default,
                                            k 2 kI ; kR :

In this case, Figure 5 shows that choice quality is higher with the random default, given the
attentional e¤ort it induces, than with the informative default, for which drop out behavior is
optimal. On balance, which policy produces higher choice quality depends on the distribution of
attentional costs.



3.6   The Policy Maker’s Objective

The analysis above shows that there may be circumstances in which so many DMs drop out in the
face of an informative default that decision quality actually falls as a result. In such circumstances,
a policy maker concerned with improving decision quality would choose the random default over
the informative default. On the other hand, if the policy maker seeks to maximize expected utility
(considering both the bene…ts and costs of attention) regardless of choice quality, it is always best
in our model to use the informative default because decision makers are rationally inattentive.
Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick [2009] and Carlin, Gervais, and Manso [2011] show
that this conclusion is fragile to the inclusion of self-control problems and social learning e¤ects,
and the same is to be expected if these approaches were combined with ours in a hybrid model.



4     The Drop Out Hypothesis

In this section, we establish that the impact of the informative default in incentivizing additional
drop out behavior generalizes far beyond the simple example above.




                                                  16
4.1     The Attentional Value Function

We now introduce a general attentional value function to summarize the relationship between at-
tentional e¤ort and expected prize utility. The assumptions on this function are minimal: that
additional e¤ort cannot reduce expected prize utility, and that there is a bounded return to atten-
tional e¤ort at zero e¤ort. The fact that this function maps into [0; 1] is due to the normalization
of expected prize utility: the best prize has an expected prize utility of one and the worst prize has
an expected prize utility of zero.


Condition 1 The attentional value function (AVF) V : R+ ! [0; 1] satis…es:


     1. Weak Monotonicity:      1   >    2   =) V (   1)        V(   2 ).


     2. Non-Triviality: 9   1   >   2   such that V (      1)   >V(         2 ).


     3. Bounded Returns: 9K > 0 such that, for                  = 0 and             > 0,

                                                 V( + )              V( )
                                                                                   < K.


     As illustrated in Figure 4, the example of the last section produces AVFs that satisfy Condition
1.

     In practice, the shape of the AVF will be highly context speci…c. For instance, in the case of
Medicaid choice, one might expect an initial region in which little if any learning takes place. This
is re‡ected in the low initial rate of learning in the example. In even simpler environments, the
AVF may be entirely concave, with the most rapid learning taking place at the lowest levels of
attentional e¤ort.



4.2     A Drop Out Cost Lemma

Figures 3 and 5 illustrate the …rst key feature of our general model, which is that there is an
attentional cost k > 0 such that optimal attention is zero if and only if costs are at or above this
level. We provide a geometric proof of this result below, noting also that optimal e¤ort is increasing
as costs fall further below this critical level.



                                                            17
Lemma 1 For any AVF V : R+ ! [0; 1] satisfying Condition 1, there exists k such that           = 0 is
an optimal choice if and only if k    k.


   To establish this result, note …rst that when the AVF is concave, Condition 1 implies that the
AVF is right di¤erentiable at    = 0 as the limit of an increasing sequence that is bounded above
by K,
                                           V( )   V (0)
                                     lim                  2 [0; K]:
                                      &0

The concave case is more general than it appears. Given the linearity of the cost function, it is
clear that the optimal choice of attentional e¤ort cannot lie on any convex portion of the AVF.
This implies that the minimum optimal attentional e¤ort level is unchanged if one uses the concave
boundary of the convex hull of the AVF instead of the AVF.

   Figure 2 illustrates the geometric construction for the given AVF which is non-di¤erentiable
and neither convex nor concave. By taking the convex hull of the graph, it becomes geometrically
clear that all optima for the given AVF are also optimal for the concave boundary of the convex
hull of the graph. The tangent lines also reveal that the optimal attention levels are at least weakly
decreasing in the marginal cost of attention.

   The Lemma applies not only with linear costs of attentional e¤ort, but more generally with
any cost function that is strictly increasing in attentional e¤ort and has bounded returns at zero
attention. Given such a strictly increasing cost function, one can identify a strictly monotone
transformation of the attention argument with a bounded derivative such that the composite cost
function is linear in the transformed e¤ort variable. The value is unchanged if one correspondingly
transforms the AVF. Condition 1 is maintained under this transformation, and the result follows.
In that sense, one can regard linearity of the attentional cost function as a normalization used to
de…ne the level of attention rather than as a substantive restriction.



4.3     Drop Out Comparative Statics

We establish under broad conditions that the informative default incentivizes additional drop out
behavior.


Proposition 1 For V I and V R that satisfy Condition 1, if (i) V I (0) > V R (0) and (ii) V I ( )


                                                  18
V R ( ) 2 [0; V I (0)   V R (0)] all   > 0, then the drop out cost is at least as high with the random
default as with the informative default, so that k I    kR .


    The proof of Proposition 1 follows directly from the geometric construction used in Lemma 1
applied to the convex hulls of the graphs of the two functions V I and V R .

    The …rst condition requires that with no attention whatever, the informative default raises
expected prize utility. This is generically the case in a very wide class of models. The reason for
this is that, by de…nition, the uninformative default leaves the DM indi¤erent between all choices ex
ante. Unless this precise indi¤erence is sure to be maintained in the face of the updating induced by
the speci…cation of a default, the expectation must be that there will be contingencies in which one
action yields strictly higher than prior average prize utility when there is an informative default.

    The second condition comes in two parts. The …rst part asserts that the improvement in
expected prize utility with no information is never reversed: expected prize utility associated with
the decision is always at least as high when there is a default than when there is no default. The
second part asserts that the increase in expected prize utility never be higher than when there is no
attention. This makes sense if the impact of the prior reduces with attentional e¤ort. Both parts
of this condition are satis…ed in the example.

    This proposition directly gives rise to our Drop Out Hypothesis.


De…nition 1 The Drop Out Hypothesis is that replacement of a random default with an informative
default induces an increase in the number of inattentive decisions.



5     Experimental Design and Decision Quality

5.1    Measuring Decision Quality

The main goal of our experiment is to test the Drop Out Hypothesis. One requirement is to have
a simple measure of decision quality. To achieve this, we use a task in which the subject has to
identify which of three options has the highest numeric value. In this context, a natural measure of
decision quality is the proportion of experimental runs in which the “best” option (highest value)



                                                   19
                                       Figure 6: Screenshot of a typical round



was chosen.13 The only intricacy is that the value of each option is hard to assess since it is expressed
in words as the sum of twenty integers (as in Caplin, Dean, and Martin [2011]). Subjects were told
that each of the 20 numbers was drawn independently and uniformly from integers between -18
and 18 (see online appendix for complete instructions). Figure 6 shows three such options.



5.2       Defaults and Beliefs

The …rst option is always the default option, meaning that it was preselected when each round
began.14 Subjects were allowed to change which option was selected at any time and as many
times as they wished before clicking a button that was labeled “Finished.”

       We remove the policy making role from our experimental test because we are primarily interested
in the behavior of DMs given di¤erent priors about the suitability of the default. Thus, we directly
announce the probability that the default is best. We interpret knowledge of these probabilities as
the end process of either direct knowledge of the rule used to select a default, as in the model, or
experience with the default.

       Subjects faced three treatments in each session, each of which represents a di¤erent probability
that the default is best. In the “33%, 33%, 33%” treatment, subjects were informed that the
default option had a 33% chance of being the highest valued option because a number was drawn
randomly from three 1’s, three 2’s, and three 3’s, and that the highest valued option was placed
in the corresponding position in the list. They were also told that the remaining two options were
randomly placed in the remaining positions and that this resulted in an equal chance of the option
  13
       In just 4 of 1908 rounds, more than one option has highest value in that round, so there are two "best" options.
  14
       While it is potentially interesting to consider cases when the default option is not …rst in the list, this seems less
common in practice.



                                                              20
in each position having the highest value. In the “40%, 30%, 30%” treatment, subjects were given
a similar mechanism, but which resulted in the default option having the highest value with a 40%
chance and the other two options with a 30% chance.15 Finally, in the “50%, 25%, 25%”treatment,
a similar mechanism gave the default option a 50% chance of having the highest value, and the
others a 25% chance.

       Each treatment lasted 12 rounds, and the order of these 3 “blocks” of rounds was randomized.
No feedback about performance was provided at any point during the experiment. Also, there was
no time limit in each round, and subjects could leave the laboratory whenever they completed all
36 rounds. On average, subjects were in the laboratory for less than 1 hour – the minimum total
time was 30 minutes, and the maximum total time was over 2 hours. Before a subject left the
laboratory, three of the 36 rounds were randomly selected for payment.16 In each round selected
for payment, if the subject chose the best option, the payment was $8, and if the subject did not
choose the best option, the payment was $4. Thus, the maximum total payment was $24, and the
minimum total payment was $12. There was no show up fee.

       Over 4 sessions, we observed a total of 53 students complete 1908 rounds (636 rounds per
treatment). All sessions were run the Center for Experimental Social Science laboratory, and
subjects were drawn from the undergraduate population at New York University.



5.3       Do Better Defaults Improve Choices?

Because there is an objectively best answer in each round, we can measure subject decision quality
by the percentage of rounds in which the best option was chosen. Table 1 shows that while decision
quality does not di¤er noticeably between treatments, decision quality drops for all treatments
after the …rst 12 rounds.17 This drop in decision quality is explained in our model by a shift in the
distribution of attentional costs due to fatigue.

       In fact, none of the pairwise comparisons of decision quality level between treatments, within
  15
       Here a number was drawn randomly from four 1’s, three 2’s, and three 3’s.
  16
       Payment procedures were announced in advance to reduce disruption as subjects departed the laboratory. How-
ever, these departures may have introduced some peer e¤ects.
  17
     Unlike de Haan and Linde [2011], we do not …nd evidence that a more informative default in the …rst block of
rounds hurts performance in the second block of rounds.




                                                          21
blocks or overall, are signi…cantly di¤erent at the 10% level using a two-sided t-test.18

                                  Table 1. Percent of rounds best option chosen

                                                                       Rounds

                                   Treatment             n      1-12    13-24    25-36    Overall

                                   33%, 33%, 33%        636     62%     48%      54%       55%

                                   40%, 30%, 30%        636     66%     51%      52%       55%

                                   50%, 25%, 25%        636     62%     55%      55%       58%

                                   Overall             1,908    63%     51%      54%       56%

The basic …nding is that an informative default does little to improve choice quality on average.
One possibility is that the default has no e¤ect on choice behavior, which we will clearly reject.
Another possibility comes from the Drop Out Hypothesis: that informative defaults increase drop
out behavior.



6         Decision Time and the Drop Out Hypothesis

6.1         Revealed Inattention

As noted in the introduction, we measured not only the choices made but also the time taken to
arrive at the decision.19 We treat this decision time measure as a proxy for attentional e¤ort. Across
treatments the average decision time was 43 seconds, with a standard deviation of 58 seconds. The
cumulative distribution function of decision times across treatments is given in Figure 7.

         This measure allows us to observe changes on the intensive margin of attention (how much
attentional e¤ort is exerted) and the extensive margin of attention (whether any attentional e¤ort
is exerted). For changes in the intensive margin of attention, we compare raw decision times,
contingent on a subject having appeared to exert any attentional e¤ort. To determine whether a
subject has exerted any such e¤ort, we look both at the speed in which decisions are made and the
average quality of the resulting decisions.

         Rather than selecting an arbitrary time at which we feel that subjects have begun to pay
    18
         Probit regressions run with clustering at the subject level produce the same results.
    19
         In many settings, both in the lab and the …eld, it is possible to collect information on the time it takes to reach
a decision.


                                                               22
       1
       .8  .6
 Probability
.4     .2
       0




                0                    200                    400               600
                                              Seconds



                    Figure 7: Cumulative density function of decision times




                                              23
attention, we use the data to suggest an appropriate time. To do this, we ask the question: At
what time have subjects attended enough to do better than always choosing default option? In the
“33%, 33%, 33%”treatment, the fraction of rounds in which the best option is chosen is signi…cantly
higher than the fraction of rounds the default is best after just 9 seconds (at a signi…cance level of
5%).20 Thus, we will label a subject as having been “inattentive” in a round if 8 seconds or less
was taken to make their decision. The vertical red line on Figure 7 indicates where the threshold
for inattentiveness intersects with the cumulative density function, showing that in 39% of rounds
subjects are revealed to be inattentive. The results that follow are robust to changes the threshold
time (any time from 5 to 11 seconds).



6.2       Inattentiveness and Performance

Choice behavior is substantially di¤erent in those rounds in which subjects are revealed to be
inattentive. Table 2 shows that when subjects are inattentive, the default e¤ect is very strong: the
default option is chosen far more often than it is best. Also, as the informativeness of the default
increases, the default e¤ect becomes even stronger. When subjects expect the default to be best
50% of the time, nearly all inattentive subjects select the default option. On the other hand, when
subjects are attentive, they choose the default option in a proportion similar to the rate at which
it is best.

                                        Table 2. % rounds default chosen
                                         Treatment           Inattentive    Attentive

                                         33%, 33%, 33%           55%           37%

                                         40%, 30%, 30%           83%           45%

                                         50%, 25%, 25%           95%           51%

                                         Overall                 80%           43%




       Given that inattentive subjects overwhelmingly choose the default option when there is an
informative default, it is not surprising that they …nd the best option about as often as the default
option is best. As a result, informative defaults improve the choice quality of inattentive decisions,
  20
       For the other treatments, the threshold is higher, but we chose the more conservative approach of using the lowest
threshold.


                                                            24
signi…cantly so between the most informative default and the other defaults (p-values of 0.033 and
0.0524 using a two-sided t-test).21

                                   Table 3. % round best chosen (inattentive rounds)

                                    Treatment            Inattentive

                                    33%, 33%, 33%           37%

                                    40%, 30%, 30%           39%

                                    50%, 25%, 25%           47%

                                    Overall                 42%


6.3      Attentiveness and Performance

As Table 4 indicates, attentive subjects do not always choose the best option. Instead, they …nd
the best option in roughly two out of three rounds. We …nd that better defaults improve choice
quality on aggregate for attentive decisions, albeit insigni…cantly so. The di¤erence is not signi…cant
between any two treatments, either overall or between any two blocks of rounds (two-sided t-test,
10% signi…cance level).22

                           Table 4. Percent of rounds best option chosen (attentive rounds)

                                                Rounds

                             Treatment            1-12      13-24      25-36   Overall

                             33%, 33%, 33%        66%       56%        65%      63%

                             40%, 30%, 30%        69%       63%        63%      65%

                             50%, 25%, 25%        67%       65%        70%      67%

                             Overall              67%       62%        66%      65%


6.4      Drop Outs

The Drop Out Hypothesis predicts that there is one factor that might o¤set the improvements
in choice quality for inattentive and attentive decisions, which is a possible increase in drop out
behavior. Table 5 con…rms this prediction by showing that the percentage of inattentive rounds
increases as the default becomes more informative. When the default is no more likely than any
 21
      Probit regressions run with clustering at the subject level produce p-values of 0.016 and 0.057.
 22
      Regressions run with clustering at the subject level produce the same results.


                                                           25
other option to be best, subjects are inattentive in only 31% of rounds. On the other extreme,
when the default is 50% likely to be the best option, subjects are inattentive in nearly half of the
rounds. These di¤erences are signi…cantly di¤erent at the 1% level using a two-sided t-test.

                                Table 5. Percentage of inattentive rounds

                                  Treatment        Overall

                                  33%, 33%, 33%        31%

                                  40%, 30%, 30%        38%

                                  50%, 25%, 25%        49%

                                  Overall              39%


6.5    AVF: “33%, 33%, 33%” Treatment

Having con…rmed the Drop Out Hypothesis, we now turn to our underlying model. Using decision
time as a proxy for the intensive margin of attention, we …nd some evidence of a suitable common
(across subject) AVF in the “33%, 33%, 33%”treatment. While it would be preferable to estimate
the AVF separately for each individual, we do not have enough choices in the “33%, 33%, 33%”
treatment to do so.

   Figure 8 shows average decision quality for each octile (8th) of decision times, with all “inat-
tentive” octiles pooled together, and the quadratic …t to these data points, along with the 95%
con…dence intervals. While far from conclusive, this …gure is broadly suggestive of the theory: the
value function appears to be increasing and returns appear bounded. Given this AVF, it would be
straightforward to back out the corresponding distribution of marginal costs of attention.

   A …t to the logistic function, as in the example, produces a similar curve to this quadratic …t.
The apparent absence of the convex portion in this graph makes sense because the environment is
simple enough that any convex region should be relatively brief and may fall almost entirely in the
…rst octiles.



6.6    AVF: Across Treatments

If we produce a quadratic …t for each treatment, then we once again …nd evidence consistent with
our model. Figure 9 shows that the quadratic …t for the “50%, 25%, 25%” treatment falls above


                                                  26
     1
     .8
Performance
     .6
     .4
     .2




              0        50                 100           150             200
                                     Decision Time

                            Quadratic Fit CI         Quadratic Fit
                            Average                  Line Connect




  Figure 8: Average performance by decision time (33%, 33%, 33% treatment)




                                        27
               1
               .8
          Performance
               .6
               .4
               .2




                        0                50               100              150               200
                                                     Decision Time

                                 Conf. Interval (33%,33%,33%)          Quad. Fit (33%,33%,33%)
                                 Quad. Fit (40%,30%,30%)               Quad. Fit (50%,25%,25%)




                        Figure 9: Average performance by decision time (across treatments)



the 95% con…dence interval for the quadratic …t for the “33%, 33%, 33%” treatment for shorter
decision times.



7    Active Choice

An alternative to the default policies described above is to have no default option at all, as suggested
by Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick [2009]. Because this active choice policy provides
decision makers with the same information as the random default, our model suggests that it should
produce the same number of inattentive subjects and the same overall choice quality.

    To test this hypothesis, we ran another experiment, which was identical to the …rst, except
that active choice was required – as no option was preselected. We call the previous experiment
the “default” experiment and this new one the “active choice” experiment. In the active choice
experiment, we observed a total of 42 students complete 1512 rounds (504 rounds per treatment)


                                                       28
over 3 sessions. While all three treatments were run in this experiment, we only look at responses in
the “33%, 33%, 33%”treatment because an active choice policy would not provide any information
about the location of the best prize.

    Table 6. Comparisons between experiments

                        First Option Chosen     Percentage Inattentive Rounds    Best Option Chosen

     Treatment        Default   Active Choice   Default     Active Choice       Default   Active Choice

     33%, 33%, 33%      43%         38%          31%             24%             55%          58%

     40%, 30%, 30%      59%                      38%                             55%

     50%, 25%, 25%      72%                      49%                             58%


    As Table 6 shows, nearly a quarter of all subjects are deemed inattentive in the “33%, 33%,
33%” treatment of the active choice experiment. However, this is lower than in any treatment of
the default experiment (two-sided t-test, 5% signi…cance level). Our model is silent on why the
amount of inattentiveness would drop, suggesting a positive behavioral e¤ect of this policy.



8    Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we develop a model of attentional choice and formulate the Drop Out Hypothesis,
which posits that an informative default will increase the number of attentional drop outs. We
…nd evidence of this in a simple laboratory experiment, suggesting that a key challenge for default
setters is how to best measure such drop out behavior in the …eld.



9    Bibliography


References

 [1] Altmann, Ste¤en, Armin Falk, and Andreas Grunewald. 2012. “Incentives and Information as
     Driving Forces of Default E¤ects.” Mimeo.

 [2] Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2011. “Behavioral Eco-
     nomics Perspectives on Public Sector Pension Plans.” Journal of Pension Economics and
     Finance, 10(2): 315-336.

                                                 29
 [3] Bolton, Patrick, and Antoine Faure-Grimaud. 2009. “Thinking Ahead: The Decision Problem.”
    Review of Economic Studies, 76(4): 1205-1238.

 [4] Brown, Christina L., and Aradhna Krishna. 2004. “The Skeptical Shopper.” Journal of Con-
    sumer Research, 31(3): 529.

 [5] Caplin, Andrew, Mark Dean, and Daniel Martin. 2011. “Search and Satis…cing.” American
    Economic Review, 101: 2899-2922.

 [6] Caplin, Andrew, and Daniel Martin. 2012. “Framing E¤ects and Optimization.” Mimeo.

 [7] Carlin, Bruce I., Simon Gervais, and Gustavo Manso. 2011. “Libertarian Paternalism and the
    Production of Knowledge.” Mimeo.

 [8] Carroll, Gabriel D., James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick.
    2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1639-
    1674.

 [9] Crawford, Vincent P., and Joel Sobel. 1982. “Strategic Information Transmission.”Economet-
    rica, 50 (6): 1431-1451.

[10] de Haan, Thomas, and Jona Linde. 2011. “Nudge Lullaby.” Mimeo.

[11] Geng, Sen . 2011. “Asymmetric Search, Asymmetric Choice Errors, and Status Quo Bias.”
    Mimeo.

[12] Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
    Participation and Saving Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 1149-1187.

[13] McKenzie, C. R. M., M. J. Liersch, and S. R. Finkelstein. 2006. “Recommendations implicit
    in policy defaults.” Psychological Science, 17(5): 414-420.

[14] O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Studying Optimal Paternalism, Illustrated by
    a Model of Sin Taxes.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93(2): 186-191.

[15] Ratcli¤, Roger, and Gail McKoon. 2008. “The di¤usion decision model: theory and data for
    two-choice decision tasks.” Neural Computation, 20: 873-922.




                                                30
[16] Reutskaja, Elena, Rosemarie Nagel, Colin Camerer, and Antonio Rangel. 2011. “Search dy-
    namics in consumer choice under time pressure: An eyetracking study.” American Economic
    Review, 101: 900-926.

[17] Rubinstein, Ariel. 2007. “Instinctive and Cognitive Reasoning: A Study of Response Times.”
    Economic Journal. 117: 1243-1259.

[18] Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving decisions about health,
    wealth, and happiness. New Haven: Yale University Press.

[19] Wilcox, Nat. 1993. “Lottery choice: Incentives, complexity, and decision time.” Economic
    Journal, 103: 1397-1417.




                                              31
10   Online Appendix: Complete Instructions




                              32
Welcome
You are about to participate in an experimental session designed to study decision making. You
will be paid for your participation with cash vouchers at the end of the session.

Please silence your cellular phones now.

The entire session will take place through your computer terminal. Please do not talk or in any way
communicate with other participants during the session.

We will start with a brief instruction period. During this instruction period, you will be given a
description of the main features of the session and will be shown how to use the program. If you
have any questions during this period, raise your hand.

When you have finished the experiment, remain quietly seated until your payment form has been
prepared. This will take several minutes, so please wait patiently. Do not disturb those who are still
working - you can read or do something equally quiet. This is important because participants will
finish the experiment at different times.

Also, please raise your hand if you experience any unusual behavior from the computer program.
We will occasionally walk through the room to make sure everything is running properly.

                    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The experiment consists of 36 rounds, which are divided into 3 blocks of 12 rounds. There will be
additional instructions before each block.

In each round, you will be shown 3 options, each of which contains 20 numbers. Each of the
twenty numbers is a random integer between plus eighteen and minus eighteen (all equally likely),
and each number is determined independent of the other numbers.

The value of each option is the sum of all 20 numbers. Your task will be to choose the option that
has the highest value. You cannot use a calculator or scratch paper.

At the end of the experiment, we will randomly select three rounds for payment (one round from
each of the 3 blocks). In each of the three rounds selected for payment, if you chose the option
with the highest value, you will get $8, if not, you will get $4. Therefore, the maximum total
payment is $24, and the minimum total payment is $12.

When a round starts, the first option will be selected, and if you make no changes before clicking
the 'Finished' button, it will be recorded as your choice. You can change which option is selected
by clicking on the button to the left of the option you want or by clicking anywhere on the option
itself. You are free to change which option is selected at any time and as many times as you like.

Whenever you click on the 'Finished' button, the round will come to an end, and the selected option
will be recorded as your choice. After a brief pause, you will be given the opportunity to either
review the instructions again on the computer screen or proceed to the next round. This will
continue until you have completed all 3 blocks, for a total of 36 rounds.
                                                                                                       Next
