                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           UNIVERSITY ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND PROFESSOR PRIVILEGE

                                   Erika Farnstrand Damsgaard
                                        Marie C. Thursby

                                       Working Paper 17980
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17980


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2012




Financial support from the Torsten and Ragnar Söderberg Foundations and Jan Wallander's Research
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. We thank participants of the June 2011 IFN/Swedish Entre-
preneurship Forum Conference Entrepreneurship, Industrial Development and Growth for helpful
comments and suggestions. Thursby acknowledges funding from the National Science Foundation
(Sub-award 44771-7471of Award 0335765 and Award 0965289. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Erika Farnstrand Damsgaard and Marie C. Thursby. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
University Entrepreneurship and Professor Privilege
Erika Farnstrand Damsgaard and Marie C. Thursby
NBER Working Paper No. 17980
April 2012
JEL No. O3,O33,O34

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes how institutional differences affect university entrepreneurship. We focus on ownership
of faculty inventions, and compare two institutional regimes; the US and Sweden. In the US, the Bayh
Dole Act gives universities the right to own inventions from publicly funded research, whereas in
Sweden, the professor privilege gives the university faculty this right. We develop a theoretical model
and examine the effects of institutional differences on modes of commercialization; entrepreneurship
or licenses to established firms, as well as on probabilities of successful commercialization. We find
that the US system is less conducive to entrepreneurship than the Swedish system if established firms
have some advantage over faculty startups, and that on average the probability of successful commercialization
is somewhat higher in the US. We also use the model to perform four policy experiments as suggested
by recent policy debates in both countries.


Erika Farnstrand Damsgaard
Research Institute of Industrial Economics
Box 55665
SE-102 15 Stockholm, Sweden
erika.farnstrand.damsgaard@ifn.se

Marie C. Thursby
College of Management
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street, NW
Atlanta, GA 30308-1149
and NBER
marie.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu
1     University Entrepreneurship and Professor Privilege
University entrepreneurship, whether de…ned broadly as commercialization of faculty inventions or more
narrowly, in terms of faculty founding companies to develop their inventions is subject to considerable
debate in both academic and policy communities. While it is widely accepted that university research is a
critical part of national innovation systems, the participation of university faculty in industrial application
of their research is often questioned. Much of the debate surrounds the trade-o¤ between the importance
of the inventor’s tacit knowledge in further development and the cost of diverting faculty from more
basic duty within the university (Thursby and Thursby 2010). More fundamentally, some question the
ownership of faculty inventions, suggesting that faculty, rather than the university, should own their
inventions, the so-called professor privilege (Litan, Mitchell, and Reedy 2008, Kenney and Patton 2009).
    In this paper, we examine two institutional regimes: one with university ownership, as is the case
in the United States, and the other with professor privilege, as in Sweden. We compare the mode
of commercialization chosen (entrepreneurship versus license to established …rms) and the success of
commercialization under each regime. An important di¤erence between the two regimes lies in the identity
of the agent deciding whether to commercialize an invention by licensing to the faculty inventor or by
licensing to an established …rm. In the US system, it is the technology transfer o¢ ce (TTO), and in
the Swedish system, it is the faculty inventor herself. Naturally, the two agents have di¤erent objective
functions, and therefore, optimal decisions di¤er. In addition, there is an principal-agent problem inherent
in university ownership. That is, with university ownership, income from commercialization is shared
between the university and the inventor, creating an agency problem not present under professor privilege
since the inventor has no obligation to share income. This distinction yields important di¤erences when
inventions licensed require further inventor e¤ort, as is the case for most university inventions. Lastly,
there could be di¤erences in the ability of universities and inventors to …nd licensees. We develop a
theoretical model that allows us to examine commercialization under the two systems, and which is rich
enough to take the di¤erences described above into account. The richness of the model implies that we
must resort to numerical solutions, and we solve the model for a wide range of parameter values.
    One of the main …ndings is that the US system is less conducive to entrepreneurship than the Swedish
system, if established …rms have some advantage over faculty startups. The reason is that the inventor
can collect, on average, a larger share of revenues when she starts a …rm, and therefore chooses the
startup more often although the established …rm has some advantage. We also …nd that on average, the
probability of successful commercialization is somewhat higher in the US. However, if there are search
costs in …nding an established …rm, if the inventor prefers basic research or if there are close to constant
returns to scale in development e¤ort, and any of the three is combined with a general advantage for the
established …rm, then the average probability of commercialization success is instead higher in Sweden.
    A higher probability of commercialization success in the US is generally a result of the fact that the



                                                      2
TTO chooses to license to an established …rm which has an advantage in commercialization skills, whereas
the inventor prefers the startup. In the instances where the probability of successful commercialization is
higher in Sweden, it is due to the fact that when both agents choose to license to an established …rm, the
agency problem present in the US implies that the inventor exerts less e¤ort.
    We then use the model to perform four policy experiments as suggested by recent policy debates in
both countries. We …nd that an internet based system for …nding licensees among established …rms reduces
commercialization through startups, and has a positive e¤ect on the probability of successful commercial-
ization. We also …nd a somewhat counterintuitive e¤ect of a new policy used in select US universities to
promote entrepreneurship; that the expedited startup license (often referred to as the "Carnegie License")
reduces commercialization through startups, but the e¤ect on successful commercialization is mixed. If
the TTO has an advantage in …nding a licensee among established …rms compared to the inventor, the
probability of successful commercialization is always higher in the US than in Sweden. Lastly, if the
TTO has a disadvantage compared to the inventor, the probability of successful commercialization can be
higher in Sweden than in the US. This occurs when established …rms have some advantage over faculty
startups.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the policy environment in the US and
in Sweden. Section 3 sets the stage for policy comparisons, and Section 4 presents the model. In Section
5, a baseline version of the model is presented, which illustrates the di¤erences across systems. Section 6
compares the two systems in the full model, and Section 7 contains a robustness analysis of the results.
The policy experiments are described in Section 8, and Section 9 concludes.




2     The Policy Environment
Until recently, professor privilege was common among European countries, with Swedish university faculty
having this right as an exception to the 1949 Act on the Rights to Employee’s Inventions designating
employer ownership. While professor privilege remains in Sweden and became the policy in Italy in 2001,
within the last decade Denmark, Finland, Germany, and Norway all changed to university ownership
models similar to the Bayh Dole Act of 1980 which gives US universities the right to own inventions
from publicly funded research. Between 2004 and 2009, the Swedish government formally considered the
possibility of university ownership, but ultimately decided against adoption (SOU 2005:95, Government
Bill 2008/2009:50).
    In Asia, adoption of Bayh-Dole type legislation has become increasingly prevalent. Japan, for example,
changed from a model in which inventions were owned by either the inventor or the nation to one in which
university employers can take ownership (OECD). In other Asian countries, such as Malaysia, a shared
ownership model has become prevalent (Stephen 2010).



                                                     3
   Somewhat ironically, the proliferation of movements toward university ownership outside the United
States came at a time of growing skepticism about Bayh Dole in US academic and policy circles. Some
doubted that policies which worked well in the United States would translate to other countries, partic-
ularly those where professors historically owned their inventions, cautioning that the counterfactual to
university ownership in the US was government ownership and free license of federally funded inventions
(Mowery and Sampat 2005). Others were critical of the US system, per se. Criticisms ranged from
the view that patent licensing threatened the pursuit of basic research to the opposing view that the
infrastructure that had evolved under Bayh-Dole sti‡ed entrepreneurial e¤ort (Greenburg 2007, Thursby
and Thursby 2010). In the popular press, universities were accused of acting like pro…t centers, but serious
academics also questioned whether the patent system was interfering with widespread dissemination of
publicly funded research (Murray and Stern 2007, Washburn 2008). There were also critics in industry,
where a common view was that university technology transfer o¢ ces (TTOs) were di¢ cult to deal with,
not only in licensing publicly funded research, but also the terms under which industry would license
results of industry sponsored research (Thursby and Thursby 2003).
   Amidst the US debates, Litan et al. (2008) proposed several alternatives. One alternative would
maintain university ownership, but would give faculty “free agency" to choose to license their inventions
through their TTO or to select another agent. The most extreme alternative proposed was, in fact,
professor privilege, in which case Litan et al. argued universities would bene…t because “loyal” faculty
who pro…ted from their inventions were likely to donate back to the university. A third proposal pertained
primarily to small universities. The recommendation was for TTOs to form alliances, which would allow
bundling of inventions across universities as well as access to commercialization personnel with superior
expertise. The fourth proposal, addressing the need for wide dissemination, was for TTOs to make use of
internet-based marketing mechanisms, such as the iBridge network (Litan et al. 2008).
   In the face of this controversy, two committees of the National Research Council (NRC) commissioned
a National Academies (NAS) review of the organization and functioning of university technology transfer
under Bayh Dole. The study culminated in a set of research …ndings and recommendations put forth in
Merrill and Mazza (2010).
   The scenarios we examine are motivated by the Swedish and US policy initiatives. Both focus on
professor privilege versus university ownership, albeit from opposite perspectives: professor privilege the
status quo in Sweden and university ownership in the US. In both, the status quo was the winning
recommendation. Importantly, however, these decisions were supported by statements of insu¢ cient
evidence to support a change. For example, NAS study cited only one comparison of the Swedish and US
cases, which failed to show an advantage to the Swedish system (Goldfarb and Henrekson 2003). With
the lack of systematic evidence the NAS examining committee saw no reason to recommend a change.




                                                     4
2.1    SOU 2005:95

In 2004, the Swedish government commissioned an analysis of professor privilege in response to discussion
of the ‘Swedish paradox.’ Although Sweden was a world leader in R&D investment relative to gross domes-
tic product (GDP), its growth lagged the average for OECD countries. The country was a leader in terms
of patents and scienti…c publications per capita, which should have positioned it well for entrepreneurial
led growth (Braunerhjelm 2007). In principle, professor privilege should provide university employees the
necessary incentives to commercialize their inventions.
   The Inquiry considered many issues related to commercialization of university inventions, those most
relevant for our study are surrounding the ownership and reporting of university inventions. The report,
SOU 2005:95, proposed two potential changes to Swedish higher education policy: mandatory reporting of
inventions and institutional takeover of ownership. Under mandatory reporting professor privilege would
be maintained, but employees with research duties in institutions of higher education would be required
to report any inventions resulting from their research. They could, in principle, make arrangements for
the institution to take over rights to the invention, but such arrangements would be purely voluntary.
Under the second alternative, the ‘teacher’s exception’ to the 1942 Employee’s Invention Act would be
abolished. Institutions of higher education would be entitled to takeover their employees’ inventions in
return for reasonable compensation. In the event of institutional takeover, the employer should take
e¤ective measures toward commercialization, including applying for patent protection. If such measures
were not taken, the employee would have the right to recover the invention or to receive appropriate
compensation if the employer had sold the rights.
   The 2008/2009:50 government bill acknowledged the SOU 2005:95 proposals, but nonetheless asserted
the importance of professor privilege. In maintaining the privilege, the bill stressed the importance of
professor privilege in providing the incentives for researchers to commercialize their inventions. Without
adequate university systems for commercialization and mechanisms to ensure adequate incentives for
researchers to take part in the process, the privilege should be maintained.


2.2    US National Academies’Study

The 2010 National Academies’study was a comprehensive review by a Committee on Management of Uni-
versity Intellectual Property. With thirty years of experience since the passage of Bayh Dole, a systematic
review was feasible and needed in light of growing controversy. Six …ndings and …fteen recommendations
came out of the study (Merrill and Mazza 2010, Ch. 4).
   The Committee found that: (i) the …rst goal of university technology transfer is wide dissemination of
university-generated research, (ii) e¤ective transfer can occur in multiple ways, (iii) university ownership
is superior to its predecessor in the US, i.e., government ownership, (iv) there is little evidence that
university practices have undermined academic norms, (v) a persuasive case has not been made for “free


                                                     5
agency,”and (vi) proposals to “empower”university faculty by giving them ownership of their inventions
re‡ect perceived underappreciation of the need to engage faculty in the process.
    Many of the Committee’s recommendations were aimed at improving organizational e¢ ciency, making
goals more transparent and publicly oriented, and ensuring widespread use of research tools. The recom-
mendation most relevant to our analysis is the 10th, which was designed to promote practices to support
entrepreneurial ventures by university faculty, sta¤, or students. The foremost recommendation was the
adoption of standardized procedures and license terms to expedite startup formation.



3     Setting the Stage for Policy Comparisons
Three themes pervade the policy discussions. First, despite an extensive literature on university technology
transfer and entrepreneurship, there is little systematic analysis of the Swedish and US systems. Second,
a critical di¤erence in the ownership schemes is ‘who’determines the path to commercialization. Is it the
professor who decides whether her inventions merit commercial development and, if so, the best route to
commercialization? Or is it the university TTO who makes these decisions? Finally, without systematic
study, we understand little about the likelihood of commercialization under the two systems, or even
the likelihood of di¤erent modes of commercialization (i.e., is entrepreneurship or licensing to established
companies). In this section, we set the stage for an analysis of the second and third themes by reviewing
the conceptual issues and related prior work.


3.1    The Arguments for University Ownership and Professor Privilege

The arguments for university and inventor ownership, though quite distinct, are both inextricably linked
with the embryonic nature of university inventions. Indeed prior to the passage of Bayh Dole in 1980,
proponents argued that …rms would not license and develop the basic inventions resulting from federally
funded research (Rai 1999, Mowery et al. 2004). Such inventions required substantial and risky develop-
ment before commercial application. With federal government retention of rights and free, nonexclusive
license any rents associated with commercialization would be easily dissipated. Thus it was not the uni-
versity ownership, per se, of Bayh Dole that was the crux of the argument, but the ability of the owner to
exclusively license . In principle, allowing inventor ownership along with the right to exclusively license
would have been another solution.
    Although it was not a part of the rationale for Bayh Dole, a share of license revenue for the inventor
was among the requirements of the Act. It was only later that survey evidence indicated the importance of
inventor e¤ort for commercial development of many inventions. A 1996 survey of US universities indicated
that 45% of the inventions they licensed were only a proof of concept when they were licensed, with another
37% no more than a lab scale prototype. The view of the technology transfer personnel executing the
licenses was that three fourths of these would need inventor e¤ort for commercial application (Thursby

                                                     6
et al. 2001). This is consistent with survey evidence from business executives involved in licensing US
university inventions. In their estimation, three fourths of the inventions they licensed were no more than
a lab scale prototype at the time of license, and for 55% of these licenses, they engaged the inventor in
the development process. They engaged the inventor much less for inventions ready for the market, but
these inventions represented only 7% of their licenses from universities (Dechenaux et al. 2011).
   The rationale for the inventor to share license revenue when the university owns the invention is much
the same as the argument for professor privilege. However, the form of the revenue matters (Jensen and
Thursby 2001; Dechenaux et al. 2011). There is a moral hazard problem with regard to inventor e¤ort
since the inventor may well prefer to spend time conducting research in her lab than spending time in
development with the licensee. One way to solve the problem is to specify fees contingent on success such
as milestones after technical success, royalties, or equity.
   The important point vis-à-vis professor privilege, however is that for any given positive sum of contin-
gent payments, inventor e¤ort is increasing in the share. For a given payment structure, the optimal share
from the point of view of inventor e¤ort is one, which is equivalent to the solution of selling the project to
a risk neutral agent in the classic principal agent or agency problem (La¤ont 1989). Thus, with respect
to inventor e¤ort, professor privilege weakly dominates university ownership, ceteris paribus. The issue,
however, is not that simple since this simple comparison abstracts from any di¤erences in the ability of
inventors and universities to obtain licensee interest or …nancing (Henrekson and Rosenberg 2001).


3.2    University Ownership and the Role of Technology Transfer O¢ ces (TTOs)

University ownership of inventions along with a dedicated TTO might dominate a system of professor
privilege for a variety of reasons. Several theoretical studies focus on the potential for TTOs to act as
intermediaries between inventors and potential licensees (Hoppe and Ozdenoren 2005, Macho-Stadler et
al. 2007, Hellmann 2007). In all three cases, these o¢ ces serve to mitigate the uncertainty surrounding
university inventions.
   In Hoppe and Ozdenoren (2005) uncertainty about the pro…tability of inventions prevents …rms from
licensing them unless a TTO invests in acquiring information to reduce this uncertainty. They examine
equilibria in which it is worthwhile for the TTO to make this investment and for …rms to adopt and invest
in developing inventions. The authors show that the use of success-based payment terms, such as royalties
or equity signals to …rms that the TTO is interested in choosing the best match of inventions with …rms.
When the number of inventions available to the TTO is su¢ ciently high, these payments support an
equilibrium in which the TTO performs an intermediary function. Macho-Stadler et al. (2007) is similar
in that …rms have incomplete information about invention quality and contracts take the form in which
universities receive a share of licensee pro…ts. The TTO, with private information about true invention
quality, may shelve a portion of the inventions in order to establish a reputation for o¤ering high-quality



                                                       7
inventions. As in Hoppe and Ozdenoren, whether it is worthwhile for the TTO to invest in establishing
such a reputation depends on a su¢ cient supply of inventions.
   Both of these studies point to potential TTO bene…ts that are unlikely to be seen under professor
privilege. On the other hand, neither study addresses issues related to inventor incentives to disclose
inventions to the TTO or to cooperate in further development. One of the major concerns expressed
by proposals for alternatives to university ownership was that because of con‡icting objectives, TTOs in
practice have di¢ culty getting faculty inventors to disclose their inventions (Kenney and Patton 2009;
Litan et al. 2008). Survey evidence also points to con‡icting objectives between TTOs and faculty
inventors (Thursby et al. 2001).
   Hellmann (2007) examines the role of patents in a model where scientists (inventors) are unaware of
which …rms can use their discoveries and …rms are unaware of which academic discoveries would be useful
to them. Central to the model is a costly matching process in which inventors and …rms …nd each other.
If a match is successful some portion of …rm pro…ts are transferred to the inventor. The existence of
a patent raises the transfer payment to the inventor. He shows that patents increase the incentive for
inventors to search for …rms that could use their discoveries, but dampen the incentive for …rms to search
for discoveries made outside their own laboratories. This is akin to the e¤ect found by Valentin and Jensen
(2007) in their study of Denmark and Sweden. Nonetheless, Hellmann’s model provides a justi…cation
for delegating searches for compatible …rms to a TTO which may be more e¢ cient at searching than
the inventor. Again, however, critics of the US system in practice claim that inventors often have better
information than the TTO (Kenney and Patton 2009), and TTOs themselves report that faculty inventors
are one of their best sources of information about licensees.
   One aspect of TTO performance which appears to have been largely overlooked is the extent to
which TTOs license inventions to startups versus established …rms. Statistics from the Association of
University Technology Managers (AUTM) routinely show that the overwhelming majority of licenses are
to established …rms. As reported in Jensen and Showalter (2011) startup licenses represent little more
than 10% of licenses executed, which seems somewhat counterintuitive given their embryonic nature. This,
combined with the discrepancy between TTO and inventor objectives, it seems unlikely that a system of
university ownership would yield the same result in terms of licenses to startups as would a system of
professor privilege.
   While university entrepreneurship has been extensively researched (Rothaermel et al. 2007), there is
little understanding of the relative merits of commercialization through faculty startups versus established
companies. Indeed much of the analysis of startups has been empirical and has focused on US data
(DeGregorio and Shane 2003, Lowe and Ziedonis 2006, Thursby, Fuller, and Thursby 2009). The advent
of Bayh-Dole type legislation in Europe, along with the European Paradox has motivated a number of
European studies, but these tend to focus on patents rather than startups (Geuna and Nesta 2006, Lissoni
et al 2009, Valentin and Jensen 2007, Verspagen 2006). To our knowledge, Jensen and Showalter (2010) is


                                                     8
the only theoretical analysis of the choice between a startup and established …rm and their model is one
of university ownership. They focus on a technology transfer o¢ ce’s choice between licensing to a startup
versus an established …rm as a function of inventor and university characteristics. Macho-Stadler et.al
(2008) examine licenses to spin-o¤s, but as does much of the literature, focuses on optimal contract terms.
Conti (2009) is the only theoretical model in which the faculty member makes a choice. The decision she
considers is which …elds of use a professor would be willing to assign to a research sponsor. None of these
studies compare university ownership and decision making with professor privilege.



4     A Model of Commercialization under the Alternative Systems
In this section we develop a theoretical model that allows us to examine commercialization under the
two systems. Commercial application of the invention requires further development, the success of which
is uncertain. As with many university inventions, the discovery is su¢ ciently embryonic that it requires
further technical and market development. For the technical development, the inventor’s e¤ort is required.
This is consistent with data from US universities showing that three quarters of the inventions licensed
are no more than a proof of concept or lab-scale prototype and for these inventions technical development
requires inventor involvement more than half of the time (Jensen and Thursby 2001, Dechenaux et al.
2010). For such early stage inventions, the ultimate use may even be uncertain, and even when applications
are clear, market success if uncertain (Shane 2000). In addition, Braunerhjelm and Svensson (2010) show,
using a dataset on patents granted in Sweden, that when the patent is licensed to an established …rm,
pro…ts are higher if the inventor is involved in the commercialization process. They conclude that the
inventor is important for further adaptation of the innovation and to reduce uncertainty.
    Our model is a stylized description of the Swedish and US systems. In our model of the US system,
the technology transfer o¢ ce (TTO) of the university decides whether to license the invention to the
faculty inventor or to an established …rm. In either case, the inventor’s e¤ort is required for further
development. We restrict our attention to inventions with positive expected pro…ts from development and
commercialization e¤ort, so that once the TTO determines the licensee, the inventor chooses the amount
of time to spend on development. In our model of the Swedish system, the professor chooses whether
to license to an established …rm or attempt to commercialize her invention in a startup company. We
assume the faculty member remains in the university regardless of the commercialization mode, so that
her university responsibilities act as a constraint on the time she can devote to development, regardless
of the system or mode of commercialization.
    The inventor’s development e¤ort under each mode of commercialization (US and Swedish) is deter-
mined to maximize her expected utility. We adopt the conventional view that she derives utility from
income as well as her basic research. For simplicity, we adopt the following log linear function of these




                                                    9
two elements:
                                       Uij = ln Iij + A ln(T          eji )

   where i 2 fS; F g denotes startup and established …rm, respectively, and j 2 fU S; SW Eg denotes
the US and Sweden, respectively. A gives the relative weight on the income and basic research parts
of utility, Iij is the inventor’s total income, and T is total time available for basic research. Thus, her
development e¤ort, eji ; has disutility because it reduces the time she can spend on basic research projects.
The parameter     scales the development e¤ort.
   The optimal level of e¤ort under each commercialization mode a¤ects the probability that the invention
will be successfully commercialized, which in turn will a¤ect the mode chosen by the relevant decision
maker in the licensing decision (i.e. the TTO in the US case and the inventor in the Swedish case). More
speci…cally, we assume the probability of technical success, or the development probability is given by

                                            p(eji )   = B eji

                                                      < 1

   re‡ecting the fact that inventor e¤ort is necessary. The probability that the invention is successfully
commercialized (i.e. that it makes it to the market) depends on this probability and the probability that
the licensee successfully markets it. Thus, we de…ne the probability of successful commercialization as

                                                  P = p(eji )qi

   where qi 2 (0; 1) is the probability that the developed product gets sold on a market. It is intended
to capture general commercialization skills that are independent of the invention itself. Therefore, we
will refer to qi as commercialization skills, which are speci…c to the established …rm, and to the startup,
respectively. Expected pro…ts from commercialization of the invention are then given by:


                                             j
                                             i   = B eji    qi    c

   where    is product market pro…t and c is a …xed development cost.
   In the following discussion we summarize the choice of commercialization mode under the two systems.
A formal representation of the choice under the two systems is given in the Appendix.


4.1    The US System

There is considerable evidence that in the US one of the primary objectives of TTOs is to maximize
license income (Thursby et al 2001; Jensen and Thursby 2001). Accordingly, we assume the TTO chooses
a licensee so as to maximize its expected license revenue. In general, we assume this revenue is a royalty
payment based on the licensee’s net sales. We treat the royalty rate as exogenous and, assume the TTO
cannot discriminate in the rate it charges to di¤erent licensees. If it licenses to the inventor, it bears no

                                                       10
cost, but if it licenses to an established …rm it bears a search cost. According to Bayh-Dole, the TTO is
required to share a portion of this revenue with the faculty inventor, which we denote by .
   Expected license revenue to the TTO if it licenses to an established …rm is given by


                                      RF = (1     )rFU S B eU
                                                            F
                                                              S
                                                                       qF            k

   where (1      ) is the TTO’s share of license revenue, rFU S is royalty rate, eU
                                                                                  F
                                                                                    S
                                                                                      is optimal inventor e¤ort,
k is search cost for an individual researchers of …nding a …rm, and               is the share of the cost that the TTO
incurs. If the TTO has increasing returns to scale in searching, informational advantages or skills, that
corresponds to     < 1. The optimal e¤ort level chosen by the inventor is given by

                  eU
                   F
                     S
                       = arg max ln sU S + rFU S B eU
                                                    F
                                                      S
                                                                       qF         + A ln(T     eU S
                                                                                                F )
                               eU
                                F
                                  S




   where sU S is her university salary in the US.

   Expected license revenue to the TTO if the licensee is a startup is


                                        RS = (1        )rSU S B eU
                                                                 S
                                                                   S
                                                                            qS

   where eU S
          SF is optimal inventor e¤ort in her own startup.


   The TTO chooses to license to a startup if


                                                        RS > RF

   or, de…ning     as:

                        = (1   )rSU S B eU
                                         S
                                           S
                                                   qS       (1    )rFU S B eU
                                                                            F
                                                                              S
                                                                                          qF    + k

   the condition can be stated as
                                                           >0

   The optimal e¤ort level chosen by the inventor is given by
                                      h                    i
   eU
    S
      S
        = arg max ln sU S +            B eU
                                          S
                                            S
                                                  qS      c +(         )rSU S B eU
                                                                                 S
                                                                                   S
                                                                                          qS    + A ln(T     eU S
                                                                                                              S )
                 eU
                  S
                    S



   where      2 [0; 1] is the share of startup pro…ts that remain after any equity taken by investors, since
she may need to get external …nancing, in return for which she gives up a share of her …rm.. We allow for
the case when the startup does not need any external …nancing:                   = 1: As seen from this expression, the
inventor gets income both as a share of pro…ts in the startup, and a share of the royalty that the startup
pays to the university .



                                                          11
4.2    The Swedish System

By contrast, in the Swedish system the professor owns her invention and hence chooses the licensee. If she
licenses to an established …rm she bears a search cost and her licensing income comes from a royalty on
net sales, which we assume is exogenous (as we did in the US TTO case). If she chooses to do a startup,
there is no search cost, but she may need to get external …nancing, in return for which she gives up a
share of her …rm.
    If she starts her own …rm, her utility is given by

                     USSW E = ln sSW E +      B eSW
                                                 S
                                                    E
                                                              qS    c   + A ln(T     eSW
                                                                                      S
                                                                                         E
                                                                                           )

    where sSW E is her university salary in Sweden,       is the share of startup pro…ts that remain after any
equity taken by investors, and eSW
                                S
                                   E
                                     is her optimal e¤ort in the startup under the Swedish system. If she
licenses to an established …rm, her utility is given by

                 UFSW E = ln sSW E + rFSW E B eSW
                                               F
                                                  E
                                                               qF       k + A ln(T     eSW
                                                                                        F
                                                                                           E
                                                                                             )

    where eSW
           F
              E
                is her optimal e¤ort for the …rm and k is her search cost.
    The inventor chooses to do a startup if

                                              USSW E > UFSW E

    or de…ning      as
                                              = USSW E        UFSW E

    the condition can be stated as
                                                         >0



5     Baseline model
To illustrate the di¤erences across the systems, we create a baseline version of the model. In this baseline
model, the outcomes are identical under US system and the Swedish system, both in terms of mode of
commercialization and the probability that the invention is commercialized.
    In the baseline model, we introduce a number of assumptions: …rst, the inventor has no disutility
from development e¤ort. Hence, the e¤ort choice is exogenous and the inventor always provides maximal
e¤ort in development. Second, the TTO does not maximize revenue, but instead inventor income. This
implies that the objective functions contain the same components for the TTO under the US system and
the inventor under the Swedish system. Third, the inventor’s share of royalty revenues in the US system,
 , is equal to 1, and the royalty rate charged to the startup under the US system, rSU S ; is equal to zero.
Fourth, there are no search costs for …nding an established …rm; k = 0. In addition, we impose that the


                                                      12
environments are identical; university salaries are equal, sU S = sSW E = s; and the royalty rates charged to
the …rms are equal, rFSW E = rFU S = rF . Given these assumptions, the TTOs choice of commercialization
mode can be restated as follows:

                                      = s + (BqS        c)    (s + rF BqF )

   Hence, the TTO chooses to license to the startup if

                                                      >0

   Similarly, the inventor’s choice of commercialization mode can be restated as follows:

                                     = s + (BqS       c)     (s + rF (BqF ))

   The inventor chooses to do a startup if
                                                        >0

   and the conditions     and      are identical and can be written as:


                                        =    =   (BqS        c)   rF BqF
                              @          @         @
   Comparative statics give   @    > 0 , @rF
                                             < 0 , @qS
                                                       > 0 , @@c < 0 and   @
                                                                           @qF   < 0: An increase in       or qS , or
a decrease in c makes it more likely that the inventor and the TTO will choose to license to a startup. A
higher ownership share for the inventor in the startup, , increases her returns to e¤ort since she obtains
a larger share of pro…ts. Higher commercialization skills in the startup, qS , increases expected income
from the startup relative to income from the established …rm. As for the development cost, c, it is only
borne by the inventor if she chooses a startup since the royalty charged to the established …rm is based
on net sales. Therefore, a decrease in c increases expected income from the startup relative to income
from the established …rm. An increase in rF or qF makes it more likely that the inventor and the TTO
will choose to license to an established …rm. A higher royalty rate, rF , or higher commercialization skills
in the established …rm ,qF ; increases expected income from the established …rm relative to the startup.


5.1    Parameterization

It is clear that the optimal choice of commercialization mode depends on a large number of parameters,
even in this baseline model. As seen from     , the parameters     and rF are key determinants of the choice,
since they govern the share of startup pro…ts and net sales, respectively, accruing to the decision maker.
Starting with the inventor’s ownership share in the startup, we posit that the inventor can keep at least 10
percent ownership in her startup and allow for the case when she does not need any external …nancing at all.
Hence, 0:1        1 and we divide this interval into ten values;    2 [0:1; 0:2; 0:3; 0:4; 0:5; 0:6; 0:7; 0:8; 0:9; 1].
As for the royalty rate charged to the established …rm, we allow rates between 0:02 and 0:2 given the wide

                                                      13
variation in actual rates across industries (Parr 2007).1 Hence, 0:02                     rF     0:2 and we also divide this
interval into ten values; rF 2 [0:02; 0:04; 0:06; 0:08; 0:10; 0:12; 0:14; 0:16; 0:18; 0:20]. Consequently, we solve
the model for 100 combinations of                and rF .
      As for the commercialization skills, they are formulated as probabilities of commercialization success,
and hence qS 2 (0; 1) and qF 2 (0; 1). For simplicity, we set B = 1, and                    is normalized to 100. As for the
development cost c it naturally varies across inventions, but our model is too stylized to allow us to infer
its value from data. We choose the following approach. Guided by the comparative statics results, we
generate three cases, which are representative of the optimal choices of mode over the entire parameter
space.
      The …rst case is where the established …rm has no advantage in commercialization, and the …xed
development cost is very low. We denote this the equal commercialization skills case, and parameterize it
as qS = qF = 0:1, c = 0:1. This is the case that is most conducive to choosing the startup, as shown by
@                  @
@c    < 0 and      @qF   < 0. The second case is where the established …rm has an advantage in commercialization
but the development cost is still very low. We denote this the …rm skill advantage case, and parameterize
it as qS = 0:1; qF = 0:25, c = 0:1. This case is less conducive to choosing the startup. The third case is
where the established …rm has a larger advantage in commercialization and the development cost is high.
We denote this the …rm general advantage case, and parameterize it as qS = 0:1; qF = 0:9, c = 5. This is
naturally the case that is least conducive to choosing the startup. Hence, with these three cases we can
capture the optimal commercialization mode in situations that are most conducive to startups and …rms
respectively, as well as an intermediate situation.
      Within each of the three cases, we vary the key parameters                  and rF over ranges described above and
using the expression for             we can determine the optimal commercialization mode from point of view of
the TTO and the inventor alike.
      The numerical solution to the baseline model yields the following results, presented in Table 1. Starting
with the equal commercialization skills case, the TTO and the inventor choose to license the invention to
the startup in 93 percent of the combinations of                 and rF . As stated above, this is the case that is most
conducive to choosing the startup.


     1 For   royalty rates in biotechnology, rates are quite low. For example, Edwards et al. (2003) report e¤ective rates of .04,
and Higgins et al. (2011) report .02. The higher rates in this range re‡ect licenses for products closer to commercialization
than the typical biotech invention.




                                                                 14
                Table 1: Percent of cases where invention is licensed to startup
                                                          Baseline   Two systems
                                                                     US     Swe
                              equal skills                93         100    93
                              …rm skill advantage         75         8      75
                              …rm general advantage       10         0      7



     The few cases where the agents choose to license to the established …rm is, as indicated by the
                      @             @
comparative statics   @   > 0 and   @rF   < 0, when     is low and rF is high. In the …rm skill advantage case,
the higher commercialization skills possessed by the …rm implies that for given values of         and rF ; the
agents are more likely to choose to license to the established …rm, and hence the cuto¤ points for          for
which the agents choose the startup shifts up, and the cuto¤ point for rF for which the agents choose the
startup shifts down. Now, the TTO and the inventor choose to license the invention to the startup in 75
percent of the combinations of      and rF . In the …rm general advantage case, the additional incentive for
licensing to an established …rm that lies in a higher development cost and in higher commercialization
skills implies that the TTO and the inventor chooses the startup in only 10 percent of the combinations
or    and rF ; that is when    is high and rF is low.




6     Two Systems Compared
Now, we relax the most restrictive assumptions from the baseline model, and thereby allow for the two
di¤erent institutional regimes in Sweden and the US. We choose the following parameterization. The
parameter , the inventor’s share of license revenues under the US system, is set to 0:4, which corresponds
to the average share among US universities. We assume that the TTO cannot discriminate between
licensees, and therefore the royalty rate charged to the startup is equal to the royalty rate charged to the
established …rm: rS = rF . For lack of empirical estimates, the parameter , which governs the concavity
of the development success function, is set to an intermediate value: 0:5: A robustness analysis with
respect to   is presented in Section 7. The weight on research in the inventor’s utility function, A, is set
to 0:3. In Section 7, we also analyze how an increase in A a¤ect the results. The inventor’s university
salary in both Sweden and the US is normalized to 1. Similarly, the total time available for the inventor
is normalized to 1: In this analysis, we exclude any search costs in …nding a licensee. Hence, we set k = 0.
In Section 8, we will introduce a search cost and conduct policy experiments with respect to the cost.




                                                        15
6.1    Numerical results

As before, we solve the model for the three cases: equal commercialization skills case, …rm skill advantage
case and the …rm general advantage case. We start with the results for the US system and then turn
to the results for the Swedish system. As seen in Table 1, in the US system, we …nd that in the equal
commercialization skills case, the TTO chooses the startup in 100 percent of the combinations of          and
rF . In the …rm skill advantage case, the corresponding number is 8 percent, and in the …rm general
advantage case it is 0 percent. Compared to the baseline model, we note that when the TTO maximizes
license revenue instead of inventor utility, the inventor’s ownership share and the royalty rate charged to
the …rm are less important for the choice of commercialization mode. In the former case, the ownership
share now enters into the TTOs optimization only indirectly, through the inventor’s e¤ort level. In the
latter case, the royalty rate charged is now identical across mode, and therefore has a lower impact. As
seen from the expression for    :

                        = (1        )rS B eU
                                           S
                                             S
                                                 qS        (1   )rF B eU
                                                                       F
                                                                         S
                                                                                   qF

   in the equal commercialization skills case where qS = qF , the TTO’s decision is completely determined
by the optimal e¤ort levels eU
                             S
                               S
                                 and eU
                                      F
                                        S
                                          . From the inventor’s utility function, we see that given rF = rS
and qF = qS the inventor has a higher income for a given e¤ort level if she chooses startup as long as
  > 0: Therefore, the inventor exerts more e¤ort in the startup for all       2 [0:1; 1] and rF 2 [0:02; 0:2] :
Essentially, since the TTO charges both startup and …rm the same royalty rate, the inventor gets a share
  of that royalty in both cases. In the startup, however, she gets a share          of the …rm pro…ts net of
royalty payments in addition to that, which increases her e¤ort, and   eU
                                                                        S
                                                                          S
                                                                              >   eU
                                                                                   F
                                                                                     S
                                                                                         .
   When we turn to the …rm skill advantage case the picture is di¤erent. The inventor still exerts more
e¤ort in the startup, but the TTO now faces a trade-o¤ between choosing the …rm, which has higher
commercialization skills, and choosing the startup, for which the development e¤ort is higher. Now, the
percentage of startups chosen decreases from 75 percent to 8 percent, and one factor contributing to that
result is the decreasing returns to development e¤ort, which implies that the TTO puts more weight on
the commercialization skills. This result can be compared to data on US university licensing; Jensen and
Showalter (2011) report that startup licenses represent little more than 10% of licenses executed. In the
…rm general advantage case; the higher level of development costs only enters into the TTO’s decision
problem indirectly, through the inventor’s e¤ort level. It increases eU
                                                                      S
                                                                        S
                                                                          ; but the inventor’s higher e¤ort
level is never su¢ ciently high to outweigh the di¤erence in commercialization skills.
   Under the Swedish system, the results show that in the equal commercialization skills case, the inventor
chooses the startup in 93 percent of the combinations of    and rF . The corresponding number for the …rm
skill advantage case is 75 percent, and …nally, in the …rm general advantage case it is 7 percent. Compared
to the baseline model, we see that when the e¤ort level is made endogenous, it has a minor impact on
the inventor’s choice of mode. In contrast to the US system, the optimal e¤ort is chosen to maximize the

                                                      16
same objective function, namely the inventor’s utility function, as the choice of commercialization mode.
One reason why the inventor prefers the startup to a greater extent than the TTO is that even if the
established …rm has an advantage, the inventor can, in many instances, collect a larger share of pro…ts
from commercialization when she chooses the startup than when she licenses to the established …rm. In
the …rst case, the inventor owns between 10 and 100 percent of the …rm, and of its pro…ts, whereas in the
latter case, the inventor gets a royalty rate between 2 and 20 percent of revenues.
   Table 2 displays the average e¤ort levels provided by the inventor in the US and Sweden respectively,
for the three cases. As argued above, one main di¤erence between the two systems is that the US system
can create an agency problem, whereas the Swedish does not. In the table, if we compare the average
e¤ort provided by the inventor in the …rm for the equal commercialization skills case, it is signi…cantly
higher in Sweden than in the US; 0:37 compared to 0:21: This di¤erence is due to the agency problem.
The inventor only captures a share of the expected income, and therefore provides less e¤ort. For the
same reason, the e¤ort levels in the established …rm are higher in Sweden than in the US for the …rm
skill advantage case and the …rm general advantage case. However, if we turn to the startup and compare
the e¤ort provided in the equal commercialization skills case, we see that the average e¤ort levels are not
very di¤erent across countries. If the inventor works for a startup, the agency problem built into the US
system has a small impact on e¤ort on average. The reason is that even though the inventor’s …rm has
to pay a royalty to the university under the US system, the inventor gets a share of that royalty, and
if her ownership share is low in relation to her share of royalty revenues, the royalty payment can even
generate a net increase in income. Therefore, the average e¤ort levels over the combinations of    and rF
are similar.



                              Table 2: Average inventor e¤ort levels
                                                   Two systems
                                                   US              Swe
                                                   S       F       S        F
                         equal skills              0:562   0:207   0:557    0:367
                         …rm skill advantage       0:562   0:367   0:557    0:493
                         …rm general advantage     0:708   0:529   0:723    0:586
                         where S=startup and F=established …rm



   In addition, the table conveys that e¤ort levels are generally much higher in the startup than in an
established …rm. In the equal commercialization skills case, the average development e¤ort in the startup
is more than double that in the established …rm in the US system. In the Swedish system, the di¤erence
is smaller. The main explanation for this di¤erence is that the upper bound on the royalty rate charged

                                                    17
to the …rm is 0:2 whereas the ownership share has an upper bound of 1. This explains the di¤erence in
e¤orts in the Swedish system. However, in the US, there is an additional e¤ect, as mentioned above. Since
the TTO charges the same royalty rate from both startup and …rm, the inventor gets a higher income
from the startup since she has some positive ownership share.
   From Table 2, we also see that inventor e¤ort is generally higher in the …rm general advantage case
than in the …rm skill advantage case. When the inventor works for the …rm, the increase in …rm commer-
cialization skills naturally increases her incentives to provide e¤ort. However, we see than average e¤ort
increases also when the inventor works for the startup. The explanation is that inventor e¤ort is increasing
in the development cost, c. The development cost is …xed, paid up-front, and it reduces inventor income.
Since the inventor’s utility function exhibits decreasing marginal utility, a higher development cost implies
that the inventor has a higher marginal utility of income, and since higher e¤ort results in higher expected
income, the inventor chooses a higher e¤ort level.
   It is clear that the two institutional regimes a¤ect commercialization mode. The next step is to analyze
the di¤erences in probability of successful commercialization. We start with the equal commercialization
skills. In this case, di¤erences in probability of successful commercialization depend entirely upon di¤er-
ences in inventor e¤ort. Table 3 shows that on average, the probability of successful commercialization is
slightly higher in the US than in Sweden, but the magnitude is such that it may not be of any economic
importance. However, the averages conceal interesting di¤erences depending on the values of         and rF .
It is more likely that the invention is commercialized in the US if     is low and rF is low, and conversely
in Sweden if   is high and rF is high. When modes are identical, the inventor works for a startup in both
countries, but in Sweden she increases e¤ort more in response to an increase in ownership share. It is
only in the US system that the startup pays a royalty rate rF ; and hence an increase in that rate reduces
inventor e¤ort in the US but not in Sweden.



                   Table 3: Average probability of commercialization success
                                                           Two systems
                                                           US         Swe
                                 equal skills              0:0749     0:0747
                                 …rm skill advantage       0:1484     0:1031
                                 …rm general advantage     0:6523     0:6503



   In the …rm skill advantage case, the average probability of successful commercialization is higher in
the US than in Sweden. The TTO is more likely than the inventor to choose the established …rm, which
for a given development e¤ort level results in a higher probability of commercialization success. When
taking e¤ort levels into account, the former e¤ect dominates, and the probability of commercialization

                                                     18
success is higher in the US than in Sweden if the TTO has chosen the established …rm and the inventor
has chosen the startup. However, when both TTO and inventor choose to license to the established …rm,
which occurs for high values of rF , success is higher in Sweden, due to higher inventor e¤ort. This is a
direct result of the agency problem; in the US, the inventor only captures a share     < 1 of license revenue
from the established …rm, whereas in Sweden the inventor gets total license revenue.
    In the …rm general advantage case, the average probability of commercialization success is slightly
higher in the US than in Sweden. The di¤erences in averages is very small, but commercialization success
is much higher in the US for low values of rF , which is when the TTO chooses the …rm but the inventor
chooses the startup. In the startup, the inventor exerts more e¤ort, but the established …rm’s substantial
skill advantage in commercialization implies a much lower probability of commercialization success when
the startup develops the invention. When both agents choose the established …rm, the probability of
commercialization success is higher in Sweden since the agency problem implies a lower e¤ort level for the
inventor. In general, across cases, the average probability of commercialization success is higher in the
US that in Sweden (although sometimes only slightly higher).



7     Robustness analysis
To assess the sensitivity of our numerical results to the chosen parameter values, we now perform a
robustness analysis with respect to the three main parameters that have hitherto been held …xed; A, B
and .
    We start with varying A, the relative weight on the income and basic research parts of utility. We
increase A from 0:3 to 1, to explore the case when the inventor prefers to do basic research. As a result,
the inventor exerts less e¤ort in development, both in the startup and in the established …rm. This
occurs under both the Swedish and the US system, as seen when comparing Table 4 to Table 2. However,
since the probability function for development is concave in e¤ort, the reduction in e¤ort induces a larger
reduction in probability of success in development for low initial levels of e¤ort. The average e¤ort level
is lower in the …rm than in the startup, implying that licensing to the …rm now becomes relatively less
attractive. In addition, the inventor su¤ers a higher reduction in utility, for a given level of e¤ort.




                                                     19
                    Table 4: Robustness checks, average inventor e¤ort levels
                                      A=1                                    B = 1:2                                 = 0:9
                        US              Swe                US                      Swe                 US               Swe
                        S      F        S      F           S             F         S         F         S         F      S      F

   equal skills         0:26   0:04     0:25   0:11        0:57          0:24      0:57      0:40      0:70      0:23   0:69   0:46
   …rm skill adv.       0:26   0:11     0:25   0:20        0:57          0:40      0:57      0:51      0:70      0:46   0:69   0:62
   …rm general adv.     0:33   0:23     0:31   0:28        0:69          0:54      0:69      0:59      0:79      0:66   0:74   0:72
   where S=startup and F=established …rm



   This latter e¤ect is taken into account by the inventor in her choice of commercialization mode, but
not by the TTO. Hence, under the US system, the inventor’s preference for basic research makes the
TTO more prone to license to a startup. The results on commercialization mode are presented in Table
5 below. Comparing Table 5 to Table 1, it is clear that in the equal skills case, that has no e¤ect on
commercialization modes as the TTO already chooses the startup in 100 percent of the cases. In the
…rm skill advantage case, the TTO now chooses to license to the startup more frequently. In the …rm
general advantage case, the reduction in development e¤ort cannot outweigh the advantages conferred to
the established …rm.


         Table 5: Robustness checks, percent of cases invention is licensed to startup
                                                      A=1                     B = 1:2                = 0:9
                                                      US            Swe       US       Swe       US        Swe
                       equal skills                   100           93        100      93        100       93
                       …rm skill adv.                 18            75        0        75        19        75
                       …rm general advantage          0             2         0        10        0         6



   Under the Swedish system, the inventor’s preference for basic research has two opposing e¤ects on her
choice of commercialization mode. In the equal skills case and the …rm skill advantage case, the two e¤ects
balance and there is no e¤ect on the inventor’s choice of mode. However, in the …rm general advantage
case, the reduction in utility from doing development e¤ort outweighs the reduction in e¤ort levels, so
that the inventor licenses more often to the established …rm, where she exerts less e¤ort.
   Comparing the average probability of commercialization success across the two systems, we see in Table
6 that when the inventor prefers basic research, the average probability of commercialization success can
be higher in Sweden than in the US. This occurs in the …rm general advantage case, and is a result of the
fact that inventor development e¤ort in the established …rm is greater in Sweden than in the US.



                                                               20
        Table 6: Robustness checks, average probability of commercialization success
                                            A=1                   B = 1:2               = 0:9
                                       US       Swe          US       Swe      US         Swe
                   equal skills        0:0504   0:0502       0:0907   0:0906   0:0721     0:0720
                   …rm skill adv.      0:0828   0:0696       0:185    0:125    0:131      0:0995
                   …rm general adv.    0:424    0:472        0:794    0:763    0:620      0:637



   Next we vary the parameter B, which a¤ects the productivity of e¤ort in the probability of development
success. We increase B from 1 to 1:2, to re‡ect a situation where the inventor’s e¤ort has a high impact on
the probability of success in development. An increase in B a¤ects both optimal e¤ort and the probability
of success for a given e¤ort level, something that the TTO and the inventor take both into account. As
seen in Table 4 when compared to Table 2, a higher B increases the inventor’s e¤ort in both the startup
and the …rm, except in the …rm general advantage case, where e¤ort in the startup decreases for high
levels of . The reason is that the startup faces very high development costs, a share           of which are borne
by the inventor. This implies that the optimal e¤ort level is very high, and an increase in B allows the
inventor to decrease e¤ort and still obtain a high probability of success.
   The increase in B a¤ects the TTO’s optimal mode of commercialization as follows. In the …rm skill
advantage case, the TTO decreases its licensing to the startup, as shown in Table 5 compared to the
corresponding number in Table 1. The intuition is that the average optimal e¤ort level in the startup
increases less than the average optimal e¤ort level in the established …rm. This is due to the fact that
if the inventor owns a large share of her startup, the royalty payments she must pay to the university
decrease her return from increasing e¤ort. The increase in B also a¤ects the inventor’s optimal mode
of commercialization, but the result is a small decrease in the licensing to the established …rm, and the
mechanism is di¤erent. The decrease occurs in the …rm general advantage case, and it occurs because the
increase in B allows the inventor to decrease optimal e¤ort, which increases her utility.
   The e¤ect of an increase in B on the average probability of commercialization success can be seen
when comparing Table 6 to Table 3. There is a general increase due to the increase in development e¤ort.
Comparing the US and Swedish systems, the rate is higher in the US for all cases.
   Lastly, we vary the parameter , which governs the concavity of the development success function.
We increase       from 0:5 to 0:9 to explore a scenario where there are close to constant returns to scale in
development e¤ort. This change increases optimal e¤ort levels in general, as seen from comparing Table
4 and Table 2. In addition, a comparison of commercialization modes in Tables 5 and 1 shows that a
higher value of     implies that in the …rm skill advantage case, the TTO chooses to license to the startup
more often. the reason is that the average increase in e¤ort is higher in the startup than in the …rm.
The inventor, on the other hand, chooses the startup slightly less often, and it occurs in the …rm general
advantage case. In this case, e¤ort in the startup is already at such a high level before the increase in

                                                        21
that inventor e¤ort in the established …rm increases more. In addition, the inventor takes into account
the large decrease in utility that results from increasing e¤ort in the startup from an already high level.
   Lastly, Table 6 displays the e¤ect of close to constant returns to scale in development e¤ort on average
probability of commercialization success. It shows that, as in the case when the inventor prefers basic
research, the average probability of commercialization success can be higher in Sweden than in the US.
This occurs in the …rm general advantage case, and is a result of the fact that inventor development e¤ort
in the established …rm is greater in Sweden than in the US.
   To sum up, the robustness checks show that the main results for the US system are robust to changes
in the inventor’s preference for basic research, the productivity of the development e¤ort or the degree
of decreasing returns to development e¤ort when …rms have equal skills or when the established …rm has
a general advantage. However, when the established …rm has a skill advantage, these changes a¤ect the
mode of licensing. If the inventor prefers basic research or if there are close to constant returns to scale
in development e¤ort, the TTO chooses to license to startups more often, and if development e¤ort is
very productive, the TTO chooses to license to startups less often. Similarly, the main results for the
Swedish system are robust when …rms have equal skills or when the established …rm has a skill advantage.
When the established …rm has a general advantage, these changes a¤ect the mode of licensing. If the
inventor prefers basic research or if there are close to constant returns to scale in development e¤ort, the
inventor chooses the startup less often and if development e¤ort is very productive, the inventor chooses
the startup more often. Nevertheless, the Swedish system is still more conducive to startups if established
…rms have some kind of advantage.
   The changes in commercialization mode also a¤ect average probabilities of commercialization success.
The result that the average probability of commercialization success is always higher in the US, is robust
to changes in productivity of the development e¤ort. However, if the inventor prefers basic research or
if there are close to constant returns to scale in development e¤ort and any of the two is combined with
a general advantage for the established …rm, then indeed the average probability of commercialization
success is higher in Sweden. From this analysis, it is clear that which country has the highest probabil-
ity of commercialization success depends crucially on which commercialization mode the TTO and the
inventor choose. When both agents choose to license to an established …rm, the agency problem present
in the US implies that the inventor exerts more e¤ort in Sweden, and the latter has a higher rate of
commercialization success. When the TTO chooses to license to an established …rm while the inventor
chooses the startup, which system generates the highest probability of commercialization success hinges
on whether the established …rm has an advantage in commercialization or not. When both the TTO and
the inventor chooses to license to the startup, it is more likely that the invention is commercialized in the
US if   is low and rF is low, and conversely in Sweden if     is high and rF is high.
   A higher probability of commercialization success in the US is generally a result of the fact that the
TTO chooses to license to an established …rm which has an advantage in commercialization skills, whereas


                                                     22
the inventor prefers the startup. In the instances where the probability of successful commercialization is
higher in Sweden, it is due to the fact that when both agents choose to license to an established …rm, the
agency problem present in the US implies that the inventor exerts less e¤ort.
    Lastly, it is important to bear in mind that the results in the main model as well as the robustness
analysis rest on the premise that the ten values for the ownership share in the startup, , and the royalty
rate charged to the established …rm, rF , in the chosen intervals are equally likely to occur.




8     Policy experiments
In this section, we use our model to perform four policy experiments, based on policies that have been
suggested by the policy debates discussed earlier. First, we introduce a cost to searching for an established
…rm into the model. The di¤erence between the two systems in this case is that in the US, the TTO
bears the cost while in Sweden the inventor bears this cost. This will allow us, not only to examine
di¤erences in the burden on the TTO and the faculty member, but also allows us to examine the impact
of the type of internet based mechanisms suggested earlier (Litan et al. 2008). Notice that, while the
internet alternative was raised in the US context, such systems could expedite commercialization under
both systems. Thus in …rst policy experiment, we consider a reduction in search costs under both the
Swedish and US systems.
    The second, third and fourth experiments are conducted only for the US system. The second responds
directly to Recommendation 10 by the NAS study; to promote entrepreneurial ventures. The third
analyzes the case when the TTO has an advantage, generated for example by economies of scale, in
…nding an existing licensee. The fourth responds to empirical evidence in the US that in many cases the
faculty are better positioned than the TTO to …nd an existing licensee (Thursby and Thursby 2000).


8.1    Search costs

First, we introduce costs in searching for established …rms as potential licensees. Licensing to the inventor
startup involves no search. The search cost is borne by the inventor in the Swedish system, and by the
TTO in the US system. It is possible that the two agents face costs of di¤erent magnitudes, and we will
allow for that possibility later. Initially, we will assume that both TTO and inventor incur the same search
cost, and parameterize our model as follows: the search cost for …nding an established …rm to license the
invention to is k = 0:9. The share of that cost that the TTO incurs, , is equal to 1.
    Introducing a search cost has the following e¤ects in this model. In the US system, the search cost
decreases net income from licensing to an established …rm relative to licensing to a startup. However, it
does not a¤ect inventor e¤ort in the established …rm, since the inventor does not bear the cost. In the
Swedish system, the search cost decreases inventor income from licensing to an established …rm, and it


                                                     23
also a¤ects inventor e¤ort directly. The search cost is a …xed cost, and it reduces the inventor’s total
income. Since the inventor’s utility function is concave in income, a lower income level implies a higher
marginal utility from income and consequently, the inventor exerts more e¤ort in development.
   The numerical solutions show that introducing search costs has a large e¤ect on commercialization
mode in both the US and Sweden. Comparing Table 7 to Table 1, the percent of cases where the invention
is licensed to a startup increases from 8 percent to 70 percent in the US and from 75 to 88 percent in
Sweden, in the …rm skill advantage case. Similarly, in the …rm general advantage case, the percent of
cases where the invention is licensed to a startup increases from 0 percent to 10 percent in the US and
from 7 to 13 percent in Sweden. The increase is larger in the US than in Sweden, since in the Swedish
system, the increase in the inventor’s e¤ort level mitigates the direct e¤ect of the cost.




                  Table 7: Percent of cases where invention is licensed to startup
                      Search costs     Internet based        C-license        TTO                 TTO

                                       system                                 advantage           disadvantage

                      k = 0:9;    =1   k = 0:6;    =1        k = 0:9;    =1   k = 0:9;    = 0:5   k = 0:9;   = 1:2
                      US    Swe        US    Swe             US               US                  US

 equal skills         100   100        100   99              100              100                 100
 …rm skill adv.       70    88         50    84              59               40                  87
 …rm general adv.     10    13         10    11              9                0                   10



   If we turn to the e¤ect of search costs on the average probability of commercialization success, Table
8 reveals that commercialization success weakly decreases in both the US and Sweden for all cases as
compared to Table 3. Generally, when both the TTO and the inventor choose the startup to a greater
extent, commercialization success decreases if the established …rm has an advantage in commercialization.
   In addition, with search costs the choices of commercialization mode made by the TTO and the
inventor are more aligned. Both the inventor and the TTO choose to license to the startup for low values
of rF . Now, the e¤ort levels across Sweden and the US are almost identical, and hence the di¤erences in
the probability of commercialization success decrease. However, it is still the case that when both agents
choose the established …rm, the probability of commercialization success is higher in Sweden than in the
US, and this e¤ect generates a higher average probability of commercialization success in the …rm general
advantage case .




                                                        24
                      Table 8: Average probability of commercialization success
                            Search costs      Internet based         C-license   TTO         TTO

                                              system                             advantage   disadvantage

                            US       Swe      US            Swe      US          US          US

       equal skills         0:0749   0:0745   0:0749        0:0746   0:0720      0:0749      0:0749
       …rm skill adv.       0:105    0:0901   0:123         0:0945   0:113       0:131       0:0881
       …rm general adv.     0:609    0:632    0:609         0:639    0:613       0:652       0:609



8.2    Internet based system

With an internet-based system for …nding potential licensees among established …rms, the search costs
go down both for the TTO in the US system and for the inventor in the Swedish system. We model the
introduction of these systems as a reduction in k. The e¤ect on commercialization mode is displayed in
Table 7. As seen from the table, in the equal commercialization skills case, there is virtually no e¤ect. The
decrease in cost is not su¢ ciently large to induce neither TTO nor inventor to switch from licensing to the
startup in more than one instance. In the …rm skill advantage case, there is a large shift to established
…rms by the TTO, and a smaller shift by the inventor. The reason is that the search cost k reduces the
TTOs license revenue directly but does not a¤ect inventor e¤ort, while in the Swedish system it reduces
income, but also increases inventor e¤ort because of the higher level of marginal utility of income. In the
…rm general advantage case, the decrease in search cost has no e¤ect on commercialization mode in the
US, and only a very small e¤ect in Sweden.
   If we turn to di¤erences in the average probability of commercialization success, we see from Table
8 that in the equal commercialization skills case there is virtually no e¤ect of the decrease in k, which
is natural given that there was a very small change in commercialization mode. In the …rm skill advan-
tage case, commercialization success is higher. This is a result of the fact that the established …rm is
chosen more often, and it has an advantage in commercialization. The same holds for the increase in
commercialization success in Sweden in the …rm general advantage case.
   Hence, an internet based system for …nding licensees induces both the TTO and the inventor to
choose to license to an established …rm to a greater extent. When established …rms have an advantage
in commercialization, that also results in higher probabilities of commercialization success. The largest
e¤ect is obtained in the US case, when …rms have a skill advantage but not a general advantage, which is
when the reduction in cost can induce the largest di¤erences in commercialization mode.


8.3    Carnegie license

In the US, universities have moved toward adopting license templates designed to expedite startup for-
mation. This type of license responds to the National Academies’recommendation that university TTOs

                                                       25
make greater e¤orts to facilitate faculty entrepreneurship. One of the …rst universities to adopt such a
format was Carnegie Mellon University. As is common in such formats, the faculty member agrees to
forego her share of license revenue, and royalty fees are not charged for a number of years. In lieu of this,
the university takes a …xed ownership share, which in the Carnegie case is 6 percent of the startup. Hence,
the inventor receives no royalty revenues. This license template is not used for licensing to an established
…rm. In our model, we postulate that the …xed ownership share reduces the inventor’s ownership share
by the same amount, so that the share held by outside parties is constant.
   Using a Carnegie license a¤ects the inventor’s e¤ort level in the startup, as she gets a lower share of
equity and no license revenue. Hence, she exerts less e¤ort in all cases, except when    is close to 1 and rF
is very high. When the TTO goes from charging a royalty to taking an ownership share in the startup, it
has the following e¤ects on the choice of commercialization mode. As seen in Table 7, the TTO chooses
to license to the startup less often, compared to the case with search costs, except in the equal skills case,
where it has no e¤ect. The intuition for this result is that now, the TTO only gets 6 percent of pro…ts
from the startup whereas it can get up to 60 percent of a royalty of 20 percent of net sales if it licenses to
an established …rm. In addition, the inventor exerts less e¤ort in the startup.
   As regards the e¤ects of the Carnegie license on the probability of commercialization success, Table 8
reveals that in the equal commercialization skills case, there is a decrease in commercialization success. It
stems from the fact that the inventor reduces her development e¤ort in the startup. On the contrary, in
the …rm skill advantage case commercialization success increases. Now, the TTO chooses the established
…rm more often, and it has an advantage in commercialization. In the …rm general advantage case, there
is a decrease in commercialization success. The negative e¤ect of lower inventor e¤ort in the startup
outweighs the positive e¤ect of choosing the established …rm more often.
   Introducing a Carnegie license implies that the inventor exerts less development e¤ort in the startup,
and that the TTO chooses to license to the established …rm more often. Whether that results in a higher or
lower probability of commercialization success depends on whether the established …rm has an advantage
in commercialization or not.


8.4    TTO advantage or disadvantage

Now, we want to analyze the e¤ects if the TTO has an advantage over the inventor in searching for
established …rms as licensees. The advantage can be due to increasing returns to …nding licensees, or
to skill di¤erences. We model this di¤erence as a decrease in       from 1 to 0:5, while the cost k is kept
constant. We solve the model for the US and compare to the outcome in Sweden when there are search
costs. The decrease in    has no e¤ect on inventor e¤ort in the US, as it is the TTO that bears the cost.
The di¤erences in commercialization mode are shown in Table 7. As seen from the table, the TTO chooses
the startup less often than the inventor in Sweden, except in the equal commercialization skills case. The



                                                     26
result is straightforward, since the relative cost of licensing to an established …rm is low and the expected
revenues are constant. In fact, in the …rm general advantage case, the TTO never chooses the startup,
whereas the inventor in Sweden chooses the startup in 13 percent of the combinations of            and rF .
    If we turn to the e¤ects of a TTO advantage on commercialization success, Table 8 shows that the
average probability of commercialization success is higher in the US than in Sweden in all cases. In the
equal skills case, it is, as described earlier, due to the fact that on average, inventor e¤ort is slightly higher
in the US than in Sweden. In the …rm skill advantage case and …rm general advantage case, the higher
commercialization probability is explained by the fact that the TTO chooses the established …rm more
often, and it has higher commercialization skills.
    We also analyze the case where the TTO has a disadvantage in searching for established …rms as
licensees The disadvantage can be due to lack of TTO resources, or due to inventor connections with
established …rms resulting from sponsored research, consulting or other interactions. We model this
di¤erence as an increase in      from 1 to 1:2, while the cost k is kept constant. We solve the model for
the US and compare to the outcome in Sweden when there are search costs. The results on mode of
commercialization are presented in Table 7. The table shows that the TTO still chooses the startup less
often than the inventor, but the di¤erences are very small. If we turn to Table 8, the results show that the
average probability of commercialization success is higher in the US in the equal skills case, but higher in
Sweden for the two remaining cases. The explanation for the latter result is that when both the inventor
and the TTO chooses the …rm, the agency problem reduces inventor e¤ort in the US relative to Sweden,
and the search cost itself increases inventor e¤ort in Sweden whereas it does not a¤ect inventor e¤ort in
the US.
    Consequently, if the TTO has a disadvantage in searching for established …rms, the commercialization
modes in Sweden and the US are rather similar. However, the average probability of commercialization
success di¤ers, and if the established …rm has an advantage, commercialization success is higher in Sweden
than in the US.




9     Concluding Remarks
A simple reading of SOU 2005:95 and Merrill and Mazza (2011) makes it clear that policy analysis has
been hampered by a lack of systematic comparisons of the ownership models behind technology transfer
in the two countries. In this paper, we take a step toward framing such a comparison. We construct a
simple model which allows us to examine some of the salient di¤erences in the two systems. In particular,
we examine the impact of di¤erent decision makers on the mode of commercialization, inventor e¤ort
under each mode, and the probability of successful commercialization in the two environments. We also
examine the e¤ects of several of the policies recently recommended, such as internet based marketing and



                                                       27
the Carnegie license in the US.
   Our results show the systems are, indeed, di¤erent and di¤erent in more nuanced ways than one
might expect. For example, it has been argued in the policy debate that Technology Transfer O¢ ces can
have both advantages and disadvantages in identifying licensees relative to faculty inventors. However,
our analysis shows that the mere presence of costs of identifying a licensee, identical for both TTO and
inventor, introduces a di¤erence between the systems. Since these costs are borne by the TTO in the US,
they do not a¤ect inventor e¤ort— further driving a wedge between the decision makers in the US.
   Comparing the systems, we …nd that the US system is less conducive to entrepreneurship than the
Swedish system if established …rms have some advantage over faculty startups. Further, the average
probability of successful commercialization is generally somewhat higher in the US. However, if there are
search costs in …nding an established …rm, if the inventor prefers basic research or if there are close to
constant returns to scale in development e¤ort, and any of the three is combined with a general advantage
for the established …rm, then the average probability of commercialization success is higher in Sweden.
   Our policy experiments further highlight the di¤erences in outcomes. For example, the reduction
in search costs implied by internet-based marketing makes no di¤erence in the commercialization mode
in the US when inventor and …rm skills are equal (or when the …rm has a general advantage). Only
in the intermediate case of a …rm skill advantage do we see a substantial change in the US mode of
commercialization. In Sweden, however, there is a general increase in licensing to an established …rm .
The reason is that in Sweden the search costs a¤ect inventor e¤ort as well as mode of commercialization.
   The Carnegie license experiment also produces surprising results. The Carnegie license was one of the
…rst examples of the type of expedited policy prescribed in Merrill and Mazza (2011). When the inventor
and the established …rm have equal skills there is no di¤erence; the TTO in our model always licenses
to the startup. However, when the …rm has an advantage, the portion of cases where the invention is
licensed to a startup goes down. The reason is that under the Carnegie license the TTO takes a cap of
6% equity in the startup while it can collect higher royalties from the …rm.
   Finally, our consideration of TTO versus inventor advantages in identifying licensees shows the impor-
tance of TTO resources, or the lack thereof, discussed in SOU 2005:95 and other studies (Braunerhjelm
2007). When the TTO has an advantage the likelihood of commercialization is improved. In the opposite
case–TTO disadvantage– the likelihood of commercialization is equal or slightly less. Compared to the
Swedish system, professor privilege gives a likelihood of commercialization which is higher than that when
the TTO has a disadvantage (except when inventor and …rm skills are equal ) but is lower than when the
TTO has an advantage.
   We emphasize that the major takeaway from this exercise is does not lie in the speci…c results, but in
the demonstration that systematic comparisons of the two systems are critical. These results have come
from a simple model. For example, we have not compared the outcome of di¤erent …nancing environments
in Sweden and the US. While we have modeled the need for inventor e¤ort for embryonic inventions, we


                                                   28
have not explicitly modeled the fact that in many cases, the ultimate application of inventions is unknown
at the time of license.




                                                   29
References
 [1] Conti, A. (2009), “Managing Innovations Resulting from University-Industry Collaborations”,
    Mimeo.

 [2] Braunerhjelm, P. (2007), “Academic Entrepreneurship: Social Norms, University Culture and Poli-
    cies”, Science and Public Policy, 34, 619-631.

 [3] Braunerhjelm, P. and R. Svensson (2010), “The Inventor Role: Was Schumpeter Right?”, Journal of
    Evolutionary Economics, 20, 314-44.

 [4] Dechenaux, E., M. Thursby and J. Thursby (2011), “Inventor Moral Hazard in Licensing: The Role
    of Contracts”, Research Policy, 40, 94-104.

 [5] Di Gregorio, D. and S. Shane (2003), “Why Do Some Universities Generate More Start-ups Than
    Others?”, Research Policy, 32, 209-227

 [6] Edwards, M., F. Murray, and R. Yu (2003), “Value Creation and Sharing Among Universities,
    Biotechnology and Pharma”, Nature Biotechnology, 21, 618-624.

 [7] Geuna, A., L. J. J. Nesta (2006), “University patenting and its e¤ects on academic research: the
    emerging European evidence”, Research Policy, 35, 790-807

 [8] Greenburg, D. (2007), Science for Sale: The Perils, Rewards, and Delusions of Campus Capitalism.
    The University of Chicago Press: Chicago

 [9] Goldfarb, B., and M. Henrekson (2003), “Bottom-up versus top-down Policies Twoards the Commer-
    cialization of University Intellectual Property”, Research Policy, 32, 639-658.

[10] Henrekson, M. and N. Rosenberg (2001), “Designing E¢ cient Institutions for Science-Based Entre-
    preneurship: Lesson from the US and Sweden”, Journal of Technology Transfer, 26, 207-231.

[11] Higgins, M., J. Thursby and M. Thursby (2010), “The Nexus of NIH Funding for University Science
    and Biopharmaceutical Applications”,in Why Invest in Biomedical Research, O¢ ce of Science Policy
    Analysis. National Institutes of Health: Bethesda, MD.

[12] Jensen, R., and D. Showalter (2010), “Commercializing University Inventions with Startups”, Mimeo.

[13] Jensen, R., and M. Thursby (2001), “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing of University
    Inventions”, American Economic Review, 91, 240-259.

[14] Kenney, M. and D. Patton (2009), “Reconsidering the Bayh-dole Act and the Current University
    Ownership Model”, Research Policy, 38, 1407-1422.



                                                     30
[15] La¤ont, J.J. (1989), The Economics of Uncertainty and Information. The MIT Press: Cambridge,
    MA.

[16] Lissoni, F., P. Lotz, J. Schovsbo, and A. Treccani (2009), “Academic Patent and the Professor’s
    Privilege: Evidence on Denmark from the KEINS Database”, Science and Public Policy, 36, 595-607.

[17] Litan, R., L. Mitchell, and E.J. Reedy (2008), “Commercializing University Inventions: Alternative
    Approaches”, in J. Lerner and S Stern (eds, Innovation Policy and the Economy. University of
    Chicago Press: Chicago.

[18] Lowe, R. (2006), “Who Develops a University Invention? The Impact of Tacit Knowledge and
    Licensing Policies”, Journal of Technology Transfer, 31, 415-429.

[19] Lowe, R. and A. Ziedonis (2006), “Overoptimism and the Performance of Entrepreneurial Firms”,
    Management Science, 52, 173-186.

[20] Macho-Stadler, I., D. Perez-Castrillo and R. Veugelers (2008), “Designing Contracts for University
    Spin-0¤s”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 17, 185-218.

[21] Mowery, D., R. R. Nelson, B. Sampat and A. Ziedonis (2004), Ivory Tower and Industrial Innova-
    tion: U.S. University-Industry Technology Transfer Before and After the Bayh-Dole Act. Stanford
    University: Stanford Press

[22] Mowery, D. and B. Sampat (2005), “The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and University Industry Technology
    Transfer: A Model for other OECD Governments?”,The Journal of Technology Transfer, 30, 115-127.

[23] National Research Council (2010), Managing University Intellectual Property in the Public Interest
    The National Academy Press: Washington, D. C.

[24] Parr, R. (2007), Royalty Rates for Licensing Intellectual Property. John Wiley and Sons: New York.

[25] Rai, A. (1999), “Regulating Scienti…c Research: Intellectual Property Rights and the Norms of
    Science”, Northwestern University Law Review, 94, 77-152.

[26] Rothaermel, F., S. Agung, and L. Jiang (2007), “University Entrepreneurship: A Taxonomy of the
    Literature”, Industrial and Corporate Change, 16, 691-791.

[27] Shane, S. (2000), “Prior Knowledge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities”, Organiza-
    tion Science, 11, 448-469.

[28] Stephen, T.K. (2010),“Asian Initiatives on Bayh-Dole with special Reference to India: How Do We
    Make it More “Asian”?”, Chicago-Kent Journal of Intellectual Property, 10, 44-64.




                                                  31
[29] Thursby, J. and M. Thursby (2008), “Knowledge Creation and Di¤usion of Public Science with
    Intellectual Property Rights”, in K. Maskus (ed), Intellectual Property Rights and Technical Change,
    Frontiers in Economics. Elsevier: New York.

[30] Thursby, J. and M. Thursby (2010), “University Licensing: Harnessing or Tarnishing Research?”,
    in J. Lerner and S. Stern (eds), Innovation Policy and the Economy. University of Chicago Press:
    Chicago.

[31] Thursby, J. and M. Thursby (2000),“Industry Perspectives on Licensing University Technologies:
    Sources and Problems,” Association of University Industry Managers Journal, (2000 with Jerry
    Thursby), 9-22. Reprinted in Industry and Higher Education (August 2001)

[32] Thursby, J., R. Jensen and M. Thursby (2001), “Objectives, Characteristics and Outcomes of Uni-
    versity Licensing: A Survey of Major U.S. Universities”, Journal of Technology Transfer, 26, 59-72.

[33] Valentin, F., R. L. Jensen (2007), “E¤ects on academia-Industry collaboration of extending university
    property rights”, Journal of Technology Transfer, 32, 251-276

[34] Verspagen, B. (2006), “University Research, Intellectual Property Rights and European Innovation
    Systems”, Journal of Economic Surveys, 20, 607-632.

[35] Washburn, J. (2008), University Inc.: The Corporate Corruption of Higher Education. Basic Books:
    New York.




                                                   32
   Appendix
   1. US system: the university owns the invention
   a. TTO licenses to startup

   Expected pro…t from startup:
                                                    US
                                                    S    = B eU
                                                              S
                                                                S
                                                                       qS    c

   where eU S
          S 2 (0; 1) is inventor e¤ort from startup under the US system, qS captures commercialization

skills in the startup,      is net sales and c is a …xed development cost.

   Inventor income
                                  h                                               i
           ISU S    = sU S +          B eU
                                         S
                                           S
                                                   qS     c rSU S (B eUS
                                                                         S
                                                                             qS ) + rSU S (B eU
                                                                                              S
                                                                                                S
                                                                                                           qS )
                                  h                        i
                    = sU S +          B eU
                                         S
                                           S
                                                   qS     c +(       )rSU S B eU
                                                                               S
                                                                                 S
                                                                                    qS

   where sU S is the inventor’s university salary in the US,                 is inventor’s share of license revenue, and
rSU S is royalty rate charged to the startup under the US system

   Inventor utility
                                 h                         i
          USU S = ln sU S +       B eU
                                     S
                                       S
                                                   qS     c +(         )rSU S B eU
                                                                                 S
                                                                                   S
                                                                                       qS       + A ln(T       eU S
                                                                                                                S )




   FOC eU
        S
          S


                                               1
                              B eUS
                                    S
                                         qS    +(                   )rSU S
                            h                i                                          A                 =0
                   sU S        U
                          + B eS S    qS    c +(                 )rSU S B eU S    qS        T      eU
                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                      S
                                                                           S




   b.   TTO licenses to an established …rm

   Expected pro…t:
                                                    US
                                                    F    = B eU
                                                              F
                                                                S
                                                                       qF    c

   where eU S
          F 2 (0; 1) is inventor e¤ort in …rm under the US system, qF denotes commercialization skills

in the established …rm.

   Inventor income


                                         IFU S = sU S + rFU S B eU
                                                                 F
                                                                   S
                                                                                 qF

   Inventor utility

                                                              33
                          UFU S = ln sU S + rFU S B eU
                                                     F
                                                       S
                                                                          qF           + A ln(T         eU S
                                                                                                         F )


     FOC eU
          F
            S
                                                            1
                                      rFU S B eU
                                               F
                                                 S
                                                                qF
                                                                               A                   =0
                               sU S   +    rFU S   B   eU S      qF                T        eU
                                                                                             F
                                                                                               S
                                                        F



     TTO’s choice of licensee

     Expected license revenue to the TTO if licensee is an established …rm


                                  RF = (1              )rFU S B eU
                                                                 F
                                                                   S
                                                                                 qF            k

     where (1      ) is the TTO’s share of license revenue and eU
                                                                F
                                                                  S
                                                                    is optimal inventor e¤ort, k is search
cost for an individual researchers of …nding a …rm, and                   is the share of the cost that the TTO incurs. If
the TTO has increasing returns to scale in searching, informational advantages or skills, that corresponds
to    < 1.

     Expected license revenue to the TTO if the licensee is a startup


                                          RS = (1        )rSU S B eU
                                                                   S
                                                                     S
                                                                                       qS

     The TTO chooses to license to a startup if


                                                            RS > RF

     or, de…ning    as:

                      = (1     )rSU S B eU
                                         S
                                           S
                                                       qS            (1        )rFU S B eU
                                                                                         F
                                                                                           S
                                                                                                        qF     + k

     the condition can be stated as
                                                                 >0



     2. Swedish system: professor privilege
     a. Inventor does a startup
     Expected pro…t
                                               SW E
                                               S       = B eSW
                                                            S
                                                               E
                                                                           qS           c

     where eSW
            S
               E
                 2 (0; 1) is inventor e¤ort from startup under the Swedish system.



                                                                34
Inventor income
                                 ISSW E = sSW E + (B eSW
                                                      S
                                                         E
                                                                                  qS         c)

where sSW E is inventor’s university salary in Sweden.

Inventor utility


                   USSW E = ln sSW E +        B eSW
                                                 S
                                                    E
                                                                 qS           c        + A ln(T            eSW
                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                 )

FOC eSW
     S
        E
                                                   1
                                   B eSW
                                      S
                                         E
                                                       qS
                                                                          A                           =0
                         sSW E +       B eSW E         qS        c                T         eSW
                                                                                             S
                                                                                                E
                                          S



b. Inventor licenses to an established …rm
Expected pro…t
                                           SW E
                                           F      = B eSW
                                                       F
                                                          E
                                                                         qF           c

where eSW
       F
          E
            2 (0; 1) is inventor e¤ort from licensing to an established …rm under the Swedish system.

Inventor income


                              IFSW E = sSW E + rFSW E B eSW
                                                         F
                                                            E
                                                                                       qF         k

where k is a …xed cost of searching for a licensee.
Inventor utility


                   UFSW E = ln s + rFSW E B eSW
                                             F
                                                E
                                                                 qF               k + A ln(T               eSW
                                                                                                            F
                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                 )

FOC eSW
     F
        E
                                                       1
                               rFSW E B eSW
                                         F
                                            E
                                                           qF
                                                                          A                           =0
                         s+   rFSW E   B   eSW E       qF            k            T         eSW
                                                                                             F
                                                                                                E
                                            F




                                                            35
