NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLUTION OF INCOME, CONSUMPTION, AND LEISURE INEQUALITY
IN THE US, 1980-2010
Orazio Attanasio
Erik Hurst
Luigi Pistaferri
Working Paper 17982
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17982
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012

A first version of this paper was presented at the NBER-CRIW conference on the Consumer Expenditure
Survey, Washington, DC, December 2-3. We are grateful to Angus Deaton, Guglielmo Weber, Thesia
Garner, David Johnson, Erich Battistin and Mario Padula for useful comments. We would also like
to thank Peter Levell, Erich Battistin, Mario Padula for help with the CE data and Andres Otero for
efficient research assistance. Pistaferri gratefully acknowledges financial support from the ERC Starting
Grant 284024 and thanks EIEF for hosting him while this paper was written. Hurst gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business. As usual, we are responsible
for any mistakes. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Orazio Attanasio, Erik Hurst, and Luigi Pistaferri. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution of Income, Consumption, and Leisure Inequality in The US, 1980-2010
Orazio Attanasio, Erik Hurst, and Luigi Pistaferri
NBER Working Paper No. 17982
April 2012
JEL No. D12,E21
ABSTRACT
Recent research has documented that income inequality in the United States has increased dramatically
over the prior three decades. There has been less of a consensus, however, on whether the increase
in income inequality was matched by an equally large increase in consumption inequality. Most researchers
have studied this question using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) and some studies
have suggested that the increase in consumption inequality has been modest. Unfortunately ,there
is now mounting evidence that the CE is plagued by serious non-classical measurement error, which
hinders the extent to which definitive conclusions can be made about the extent to which consumption
inequality has evolved over the last three decades.
In this paper, we use a variety of different techniques to overcome the measurement error problems
with the CE. First, we use data from the diary component of the CE, focusing on categories where
measurement error has been found to be less of an issue. Second, we explore inequality measures
within the CE using the value of vehicles owned, a consumption component that is considered to be
measured well. Third, we try to account directly for the non-classical measurement error of the CE
by comparing the spending on luxuries (entertainment) relative to necessities (food). This is similar
to the recent approach taken by Browning and Crossley (2009) and Aguiar and Bils (2011). Finally,
we use expenditure data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to explore the dynamics of alternative
measures of consumption inequality. All of our different methods yield similar results. We find that
consumption inequality within the U.S. between 1980 and 2010 has increased by nearly the same amount
as income inequality.
Orazio Attanasio
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk
Erik Hurst
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu

Luigi Pistaferri
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pista@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
This paper studies the evolution of the distribution of wellbeing over the last 30 years in the US. Our
study has three distinctive features. First, we look at different measures of wellbeing (e.g., income,
consumption and leisure) to assess whether they paint similar pictures with regards to trends in inequality.
This is important not only because variables such as consumption and leisure are likely to affect wellbeing
directly but also because the joint characterization of the evolution of the distribution of these variables
can be informative about the nature of the shocks that have affected individual incomes, about the ability
of individual households to buffer them and, ultimately, about the potential need for government
interventions. Second, we measure inequality in wellbeing using different indexes and looking at different
population groups, which helps us understand movements in the entire distribution and, in particular,
whether the trends we observe tend to be concentrated in certain groups within the population. Finally, we
draw our inference from disparate sources of data that differ by the quality and the type of wellbeing
measures available, which is useful to assess the robustness of our conclusions. In summary, our analysis
of a variety of different data sources suggests that the well documented rise in income inequality during the
last thirty years was accompanied by an increase in consumption inequality of nearly the same magnitude.
It is a very well-known fact that, starting in the early 1980s, inequality in wages (and earnings) in the US has
increased dramatically, both in absolute terms and within groups defined by observable characteristics such
as education, labor market experience, occupation, gender and race. The rise in inequality has been
attributed to a combination of many forces, including skill-biased technology changes (such as the
computerization of the labor force), institutional factors (such as the decline in unionization and the falling
real value of the minimum wage), and the impact of international trade. Some authors have argued that the
rise in wage and earnings inequality has been of structural or permanent nature; others have noticed that
structural factors have been accompanied by a rise in transitory factors of similar or even higher
magnitude. 2
The distinction between temporary and persistent shifts in the wage distribution is important because the
nature of the policy interventions aimed at reducing the welfare effects of the rise in inequality depends on
identifying correctly what caused it. If the increase in wage inequality is mainly due to unskilled individuals
losing ground due to technology shocks making their skills obsolete, policies that try to retrain the
unskilled may be effective. In contrast, if the rise in wage inequality is primarily due to transitory forces
2

For a detailed discussion of these issues see, for example, Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008) and the citations within.

1

(such as increased turn-over in the labor market), then short-run income support policies are more
appropriate to reduce the welfare consequences of increasing inequality.
The distinction between temporary and persistent forces also highlights the usefulness of measures of
welfare, such as consumption or leisure, that are likely to depend on long-run (or permanent) income. This
consideration has spurred a large and growing literature looking at trends in consumption inequality. A first
set of contributions, which includes among others Cutler and Katz (1992), Attanasio and Davis (1994),
Slesnick (2001), Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2005), Krueger and Perri (2006), Meyer and Sullivan
(2009), Attanasio, Battistin and Padula (2010), and Aguiar and Bils (2011), had as primary objective of
verifying whether the trends in consumption inequality mirror the trends in wage or earnings inequality.
Implicitly, the question that these papers try to answer is whether the worries induced by the well
documented increased dispersion in the wage and earnings distributions were confirmed by observing an
increase in consumption inequality of similar magnitude. Another set of contributions, such as Deaton and
Paxson (1994), Attanasio and Davis (1996), Blundell and Preston (1998), Krueger and Perri (2006),
Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008), Parker, Vissing-Jorgensen and Ziebarth (2009), Heathcote, Perri
and Violante (2010), and Attanasio and Pavoni (2011), use information on consumption (and sometimes
income) inequality to test a number of theoretical predictions, such as the hypothesis of complete markets,
the presence of partial insurance against income shocks, or evidence for endogenous incomplete markets
due to limited commitment.
We complement and extend the existing literature in a number of directions. First, and most importantly,
we analyze the evolution of consumption inequality with a variety of empirical strategies, using different
consumption measures, and using consumption data from many alternative data sets.

When exploring

the changing nature of consumption inequality within the U.S., most of the studies cited above use
nondurable expenditure data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE). It is now well documented
that the CE has measurement problems that are non-classical in a way that will likely bias the estimates of
trends in consumption inequality.

For example, many papers document the fact that aggregate measures

of expenditure from the CE does a poor job at reproducing the level of expenditure in National Account
data (see Garner and Maki, 2004). The most worrying feature is the fact that the large discrepancy between
CE aggregate consumption measures and the PCE aggregates has been increasing over time.
Additionally, Aguiar and Bils (2011) document that higher income households are increasingly likely to
underreport their expenditures relative to lower income households.

If true, such measurement error will

mechanically result in trends in consumption inequality to be increasingly biased downwards. This can be
2

one reason why authors who have used CE data have concluded that the rise in consumption inequality
during the last thirty years was only a small fraction of the rise in income inequality during the same period
(see, for example, Krueger and Perri (2006)).
We start the empirical analysis of this paper by replicating the dynamics of consumption inequality in the
main (interview) CE survey. However, we also perform many exercises to try to overcome the
measurement error problems in the CE data. First, we examine consumption inequality in categories of
the CE that have been found to be measured well relative to the PCE in all years of the survey.

Using the

properties of a simple demand system where the consumption categories are measured with an error
structure that we specify, we can then scale up the measures of consumption inequality in these categories
by the income elasticity for that category to get a measure of overall consumption inequality3. Second, we
use data from the diary component of the CE where measurement error in some of the categories have
been found to be less problematic.

Third, we look at the stock of car owning in the CE and use the

imputed value of those vehicles to create an alternative measure of consumption inequality.

Finally, we

can use expenditure data from the PSID - where systematic changes in measurement error has not been
documented - to compute trends in overall consumption inequality.
very similar story.
inequality.

All of the different methods tell a

During the last thirty years, consumption inequality evolved very similarly to income

In particular, our estimate of the standard deviation of log income increased by roughly 0.2

log points between 1980 and the late 2000s. Depending on our sample and measure of expenditure, our
preferred estimates of the increase in the standard deviation of log consumption ranged between 0.15 and
0.2 log points during this time period (depending on the sample and the measure of consumption used).
All of these estimates are much larger than the estimates obtained using the Interview CE survey data,
without accounting for the changing nature of measurement error within the survey. The striking feature is
how robust these estimates are across the different surveys and consumptions measures we explore.
Our second contribution is to also document the evolution of leisure inequality within the U.S. during the
last thirty years.

We show that despite the fact that consumption and income inequality increased

dramatically between high and low educated households during this time period, the change in actual utility
differences between the two groups was muted by the fact that low educated households were spending
much more time in leisure relative to their high educated counterparts.
Our next contribution is that we try to look at different aspects of the change in the distribution of income
and consumption inequality. To do this, we look at trends in inequality both at the top of the distribution
3

The approach we take is related to ideas in Browning and Crossley (2009 ) and Aguiar and Bils (2011).

3

(as measured by the 90th-50th percentile difference) and at the bottom of the distribution (as measured by
the 50th-10th percentile difference). Lastly, we explore the evolution of leisure inequality during this time
period.

We find that despite the fact that higher income individuals experienced a rapid rise in

consumption relative to lower income individuals, higher income individuals experienced a smaller change
in leisure relative to lower income individuals.
Overall, our results suggest that there has been a substantial rise in consumption and leisure inequality
within the U.S. during the last 30 years. The rise in income inequality translated to an increase in actual
well-being inequality during this time period because consumption inequality also increased. Some of this
increase, however, was offset by the fact that leisure inequality increased as well, in particular with lower
income individuals taking more leisure relative to their high educated counterparts.

2. A Conceptual Framework
In this section, we expand upon some of the conceptual issues we need to address to assess the changing
nature of income, consumption, and leisure inequality. Additionally, we will introduce the conceptual
framework we will be using to address the measurement error within the CE data.

2.1

Consumption vs. Income inequality

Most analyses of inequality focus on income, not consumption. Partly, this is due to data availability. Data
sets containing information on measures of household resources (wages, earnings, income, etc.) are more
frequently available, have typically larger samples, and have more consistent variable definitions than data
sets containing information on consumption.
While an analysis of income inequality is very valuable, one may argue that analyzing trends in
consumption inequality may be even more informative from a welfare point of view. Since individuals’
utility is typically defined over consumption goods rather than income per se, one may argue that measures
of consumption inequality get closer to an ideal measure of inequality in household welfare than income
inequality. Moreover, large changes in income inequality may reflect transitory variations, and these may
have small welfare effects if households can smooth their consumption against transitory shocks. In other
words, consumption might be a better proxy of ‘permanent income’. Consumption inequality might
therefore provide a more reliable measure of inequality in long term living standards than income. Finally, a
4

study of consumption inequality allows to study allocation of disposable income to different commodities,
which differ in their necessity/luxury characteristics. This analysis may be important insofar as an increase
in food spending inequality is perceived as being more worrying that, say, an increase in the inequality of
spending on holidays.
In practice, it may be important to study income and consumption inequality simultaneously. Their joint
analysis may be informative about smoothing possibilities available to consumers, as well as distinguishing
between external shocks in insurance opportunities as opposed to fundamental changes in the income
process caused by, say, labor market reforms, technological changes, etc. Moreover, one can distinguish
between income- and consumption-based measures of poverty and study their evolution over the business
cycle.
While the main focus of this paper is the analysis of the evolution of consumption inequality, partly
because the trends on income inequality are much better known and partly to put the consumption
inequality figures into context, we start our result section 4 with some discussion on the evolution of
income inequality, where income is measured by total household income, divided by the number of adult
equivalents.
As we discuss in section 3, we will be using different data sources, some of which have an established use
in the analysis of income and earnings inequality. We will also discuss the fact that different pictures
emerge when we consider inequality of consumption measures from different data sources that rely on
completely different samples. Comparing income inequality in the same data sources can then be
informative about the nature of these differences, with the two main alternatives being the different nature
of the consumption information contained in the data sets and the composition of the samples used in the
analysis.

2.2

Measures of inequality and changes in the distribution.

When looking at the evolution of consumption and income inequality, we will start by considering the
evolution over time of the standard deviation of the log of both consumption and income in the samples
described below. However, the evolution of the standard deviation of log consumption (or income) is only
one way to characterize the changing inequality within the distribution of interest. It maybe that a given
change in the standard deviation corresponds to a large change in the difference between the top of the
distribution and its middle with nothing much happening in the bottom of the distribution. As a result, to
5

provide a more complete picture of what has happened to consumption and income inequality in the last
30 years, we will be also looking at the difference between the 90th percentile and the median as well as the
difference between the median and the 10th percentile of the respective distributions.

2.3

Inequality in different dimensions: skill and year of birth groups

The statistics mentioned in the previous sub-section will be computed on the whole sample we use. It may
be of considerable interest, however, to consider the evolution of the distribution over time in other
dimensions, as they might suggest direct economic interpretations to what has happened. An important
dimension we will be looking at is that of the difference across skill groups (as proxied by the education
achievement of the household head). In particular, we will be looking both at difference between different
skill groups and at inequality within skill groups. The evolution of differences in income and consumption
between skill groups might reflect the evolution of the prices of different skills in the labour market, which
in turn have been associated to technological progress and other innovations that are likely to be
permanent and difficult to insure and smooth out. Inequality within skill groups will reflect both the
evolution of unobserved skill prices and other factors. When considering this decomposition it is clear that
the simultaneous analysis of consumption and income inequality can be particularly informative about the
nature of the shocks we observe and household ability to smooth them out.
An issue that potentially affects many measures that have been considered in the literature is the fact that
when we follow the evolution of inequality measures over time, they might reflect changes in the
composition of the sample we are considering. This concern may be more salient when exploring the
patterns of inequality over long periods of time. This is true for the overall sample and, even more so, in
the case of the skill groups, as the fraction of, for instance, high school dropouts declines monotonically
over the sample periods. To address this issue, one can consider the evolution of inequality within groups
whose membership is (approximately) constant over time. For instance, one can define groups by year of
birth (of the household head), and by doing so follow the same group of individuals followed over time4.
The evolution of the distribution of a given variable, being consumption or income, in the overall sample
can mask very different dynamics for a fixed group of individuals. This is particularly the case in the
presence of strong cohort effects. Moreover, theoretical models of insurance of income shocks have
Groups defined by the year of birth of the household head can change in composition, however, for several reasons. First, it is
possible that family formation and dissolution is different for individuals of different economic status. Second, there are strong
differences in mortality rates between rich and poor individuals that are likely to make observed cohorts progressively ‘richer’.
Finally, it is possible that migration patterns are also related to economic status.
4

6

specific implications for the evolution of the relative distribution of income and consumption. Following
the evolution of these distributions over the life cycle can therefore be particularly interesting. For reason
of space, we discuss results related to the evolution of inequality over the life cycle in an Appendix
available on our websites.5

2.4

Measuring inequality: accounting for measurement error

As discussed in the Introduction, one of the main issues we have to deal with when studying the
distribution of consumption and its evolution over time is the presence of large measurement error of the
non-classical type in the CE.

The CE, however, contains details on hundreds of commodities that, in

turn, can be aggregated into different categories, some of which have been documented as providing a
good match to PCE data (see Meyer and Sullivan, 2012, and Garner and Maki, 2004). One possible
approach to study the evolution of the inequality of overall consumption is therefore to focus on
consumption categories that are well measured. To get an estimate of the changing nature of total
consumption inequality one simple approach is to compute the extent of consumption inequality using the
specific consumption category that is measured well and then scale that measure up by the category’s
income elasticity. We do this below.
Additionally, we can take a stand on the nature of the measurement error in the consumption data. Let’s
denote with ‫ܥ‬௜௧ the total consumption of household i in period t . Suppose that total consumption is made

of K different categories with ‫ܥ‬௜௧ = ∑௄௞ୀଵ ‫ݍ‬௜௞௧, where ‫ݍ‬௜௞௧ is the spending on consumption category k by
household i in period t.

Let’s consider two commodities that are known to be measured without

systematic error, ‫ݍ‬௜ଵ௧ and‫ݍ‬௜ଶ௧, and suppose that commodity 2 is a necessity, while commodity 1 is a luxury.

As usual, we define a necessity as a commodity whose elasticity with respect to total expenditure is less
than 1 and a luxury as a commodity whose income elasticity is greater than one.
Suppose that in the case of commodities ‫ݍ‬௜ଵ௧ and‫ݍ‬௜ଶ௧ spending on those categories can be expressed by the
following equations:

ఈ

(1)

ఈ

(2)

‫ݍ‬௜ଵ௧ = ‫ܥ‬௜௧భ ‫ݑ‬௜ଵ௧‫ݒ‬௧ଵ ,ߙଵ > 1

5

‫ݍ‬௜ଶ௧ = ‫ܥ‬௜௧మ ‫ݑ‬௜ଶ௧‫ݒ‬௧ଶ ,ߙଶ < 1

See http://www.stanford.edu/pista

7

Equations (1) and (2) represents two Engel curves. They relate the expenditure of each of the two
commodities to total expenditure (with  and 2 being the income elasticities), some aggregate factors
௝

௝

‫ݒ‬௧ (with݆= 1,2), such as relative prices, and some unobserved idiosyncratic taste shocks (‫ݑ‬௜௧, ݆= 1,2) .

We will assume that the idiosyncratic taste shocks are i.i.d across households and that their distribution is
constant through time. Taking the ratio between ‫ݍ‬௜ଵ௧ and‫ݍ‬௜ଶ௧ one obtains:
௤೔భ೟
௤೔మ೟

భ భ

ఈ ିఈమ ௩೟ ௨೔೟
మ
௩೟మ௨೔
೟

= ‫ܥ‬௜௧ భ

(3)

Taking logs of this expression, one gets:
log(‫ݍ‬௜ଵ௧) − log(‫ݍ‬௜ଶ௧) = (ߙଵ − ߙଶ)log(‫ܥ‬௜௧) + (log(‫ݒ‬௧ଵ) − log(‫ݒ‬௧ଶ)) + (log(‫ݑ‬௜ଵ௧) − log(‫ݑ‬௜ଶ௧))

(4)

Computing the cross sectional variance of both sides of equation (4) and assuming for the time being that
the idiosyncratic taste shocks are uncorrelated with total expenditure, one obtains:
ܸܽ‫(ݎ‬log(‫ݍ‬௜ଵ௧) − log(‫ݍ‬௜ଶ௧)) = (ߙଵ − ߙଶ)ଶܸܽ‫(ݎ‬log(‫ܥ‬௜௧)) + ܸܽ‫(ݎ‬log(‫ݑ‬௜ଵ௧) − log(‫ݑ‬௜ଶ௧)).

(5)

Expression (5) deserves several comments. First, the aggregate shocks, by their very nature and because
they enter additively in equation (4), do not contribute to the variance of the right hand side. Second, the
left-hand side of (5) is observed and can be computed in a data set which contains detailed information on
consumption. In situations where a reliable measure of total consumption is not available because some of
its components are affected by substantial measurement error whose variance is changing over time, the
interesting question is the extent to which we can use such a variable as an approximation for the level or
the changes in total consumption inequality. Notice that, because of the choice of commodities, (ߙଵ −

ߙଶ) ≠ 0 so that the left-hand side of equation (5) will be varying with changes in the variance of total
expenditure. If one is willing to assume that the variance of the taste shocks is invariant over time, then

changes in the left hand side will be driven entirely by changes in the variance of total consumption. Indeed,
changes in the left-hand-side will be proportional to changes in such a variance, where the factor of
proportionality is given by (ߙଵ − ߙଶ)ଶ. Information on total expenditure elasticities derived from other
sources can be used to evaluate the size of such a factor of proportionality.6

The approach we propose is similar to the idea discussed in Aguiar and Bils (2011) and even more so to the
approach proposed by Browning and Crossley (2009). Browning and Crossley (2009), in particular,
Aguiar and Bils (2010) use information on demand systems to address the measurement error problems in the CE in the US.
Our approach is, however, different from theirs in that they attempt to address systematic measurement error within the CE.
Like them, we also find that consumption inequality tracks income inequality over this time period.
6

8

consider the evolution of the covariance of two ‘noisy measures’ of total consumption. Notice that from
components, this would imply considering:
Cov(log(‫ݍ‬௜ଵ௧) , log(‫ݍ‬௜ଶ௧)) = (ߙଵߙଶ)ܸܽ‫(ݎ‬log(‫ܥ‬௜௧)) + Cov((log(݁௜ଵ௧) , log(݁௜ଶ௧))

(6)

Where the e’s include both the aggregate and individual shocks in equations (1) and (2). Again, assuming
that the second term in equation (6) does not change over time, one can use changes in the covariance on
the left-hand side of (6) and knowledge of the income elasticities to back out the evolution of total
consumption.
In what follows, we will look at the ratio of the changing variance of expenditure on entertainment services
relative to the changing variance of expenditure on food at home. The latter is a luxury, while the former is
a necessity (see, for instance, the study by Blow, Lechene and Levell, 2012). Moreover, as indicated, for
instance, in the study by Meyer and Sullivan (2012), these components of the CE are relatively well
measured over the sample period we study. Moreover, when aggregated up, the ratio of the resulting
aggregates to PCE from the national accounts is relatively constant.

3 Data: surveys and sample selections
3.1

The Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE).

Survey Overview. Studying income and consumption inequality entails non-negligible measurement issues.
The first is data availability. In the US there is only one data set with a comprehensive measure of
consumption, the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey. Other data sets include incomplete consumption
information, ranging from just food (the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) before the 1999 redesign, as well as most proprietary scanner data sets), to spending on only child care and rent (the Survey
of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)), to measures that have much more details about expenditure
but still fall short of covering the entirety of household budget (the PSID after the 1999 re-design). We
begin our analysis with the CE data given that it is designed to provide a comprehensive measure of
spending for U.S. households. However, as we discuss below, we are aware that the CE has its own
limitations.
The CE Survey has a long history, dating back to the beginning of the 20th century. The main purpose of
the survey is to collect information to be used in computing the weights for the Consumer Price Index (the
CPI). For this reason, the CE Survey contains comprehensive and detailed information about consumption
expenditure and its components. Until 1980, the CE was performed roughly every ten years. In 1980
9

however, it was radically redesigned and became a survey that is run continuously. It is made of two
separate and independent samples: the Interview and the Diary surveys. The former is a rotating panel
available on a continuous basis since 1980. Households are interviewed every three months for at most 5
quarters. The first interview is a preparatory one and no data pertaining to it are released. From the second
interview, the respondent in each household is asked to report detailed expenditures on hundreds of
categories in each of the three months preceding the interviews. These categories are almost exhaustive of
total consumption, the only exception being personal care items. Some items, however, are extremely
aggregated. The best example is food at home, which is a single category. The information on expenditure
is then complemented with information on mortgages, cars (including loans to finance their purchases),
credit cards, health and education expenditures and so on. Finally, the Interview Survey also includes
extensive socio-economic information on the household, ranging from detailed demographic information
to labor supply and earning information on each household members, to some information on assets.
A large part of the income and demographic files are also found in the Diary Survey. The information on
expenditure in this sample, however, is collected with a radically different method. In the Diary Survey,
households are asked to fill in a register (a diary) detailing their spending for two continuing weeks. Until
1986, the Diary Survey contained information only on ‘frequently purchased items’ such as food and
personal care items. The information on food is much more detailed than in the Interview survey. Starting
in 1986, the Diary survey becomes an almost exhaustive expenditure survey, with substantial overlap with
the Interview Survey. Despite this overlap, however, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which runs the Survey,
uses the Diary for some expenditure components and the Interview for others. The presumption is that
one survey is better at measuring some components and the other is better for others.
The CE Survey is a remarkable data source. Given its richness, it is not surprising that over the last 20
years it has been extensively used by economists for a variety of purposes. However, there are well known
issues with the CE. A particular worry is the lack of correspondence between aggregates derived from the
CE survey and the Personal Consumer Expenditure series published in the National Accounts. Not only
does the CE seem to underestimate substantially the level of PCE consumption, but the ratio of CE
aggregates to PCE aggregates has declined substantially over time. Moreover, there is now increasing
evidence of non-random non-responses and attrition. In what follows, we will use the CE data without
referring explicitly to these issues, although the approach we sketched in section 2.4 was designed precisely
to deal with the fact that comprehensive measures of consumption derived from the CE might be plagued
by substantial measurement error with an increasing variance over time. As we show below, the CE data
10

without adjusting for potential measurement error issues provides a very different picture of consumption
inequality than does the CE where measurement error issues are confronted directly or with the PSID
where the measurement issues are not as problematic.
Sample Selection. Within the CE data, we select households whose household head is aged between 25 and
65. With this choice we want to avoid a number of issues that are relevant for very young households and
those that are approaching the last part of the life cycle where retirement and health problems become
particularly relevant. Family formation and dissolution, binding liquidity constraints for the young group,
pressing health problems for the older one, are only some of the issues we want to avoid. Additionally,
given that the CEX excludes households living in rural areas from their sampling frame, we drop such
households from the sample in all years of our analysis. Finally, we drop from our sample all households
with incomplete income responses. The reason for this is that we want to match the sample documenting
consumption inequality with the same sample with which we measure income inequality.
Variable Definitions. There are a number of issues one needs to tackle before even starting to analyze trends
in consumption inequality. First, which definition of consumption should we focus on? The distinction
between durable and non-durable goods is important as it drives a wedge between the concepts of
spending and consumption. For non-durable goods the two concepts coincide, but for durable goods
(especially large ticket items) spending is typically done upfront but the same good provides services over
multiple periods. We will be interested in measuring inequality in consumption, rather than inequality in
spending per se, and hence will focus primarily our analysis on non-durable spending. When using the CE
diary data, it is only possible to construct a comprehensive measure of nondurable consumption starting in
1986. For the CE interview data our nondurable spending data starts in 1980.
While some items are naturally included (e.g., food) or excluded (e.g., furniture) from the definition of nondurable consumption and services, there are a number of arbitrary choices one needs to make. To make
our figures comparable with those of other researchers, we decided to include clothing and footwear in our
nondurable expenditures measures. On the other hand, we exclude expenditure on health and education, as
we see them more as investment in the stock of human capital. On conceptual grounds, we also exclude
payments of interest on loans and mortgages (as well as the repayment of the principal). Finally, and
somewhat more arbitrarily, we exclude contributions and donations to charities. A complete definition of
our measure is reported in Appendix A. In addition to nondurable consumption and services, we also
consider two additional flow aggregates: the expenditure on food at home and the expenditure on
11

nondurable entertainment. Nondurable entertainment expenditures include items such as cable television
subscriptions, DVDs, music, etc.
We do explore inequality patterns using the one durable commodity that is measured in a very rich manner
in the CE: the amount of vehicles owned by the household. The CE contains, in a special module, detailed
information on the type of cars held by each households. In particular, the make, model and year is known
in addition to a number of car characteristics. Furthermore, if the car has been purchased (new or used) in
the 12 months preceding the interview, the purchase price is also reported. We use these data to impute a
value for the cars for which no price is reported. Effectively, for the cars for which we have a value, we run
an hedonic regression which includes make, model and year identifiers as well as age and several
characteristics. We then use the parameters of this regression to interpolate the value of all the cars in the
survey and obtain, for each household, the value of the stock of cars they hold. The procedure is described
in detail in Appendix B and is similar to the one used by Padula (2000).7
Another relevant issues when we measure inequality in household consumption is that households differ in
size and composition, implying important differences in needs as a function of, say, the age and number of
children in the households and so forth. To account for these differences we will equivalize household
consumption by dividing total consumption by an adult equivalence scale. We use the OECD scale,
defined as S=1+0.7*(A-1)+0.5*K (where A is the number of adults and K the number of children, aged 18
or less, in the household). A final issue is how to deflate monetary variables in our data. One option is to
use a global deflator (the CPI), another is to use commodity-specific deflators, which may be important in
the presence of differential trends in relative prices. Here we use the general CPI-Urban deflator (in 198384 $).8

3.2

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics

Survey Overview. The PSID is a longitudinal survey of US families which started in 1968 with two
subsamples, the SRC, which was representative of the US population (60% of the initial sample) and the
SEO, which was oversampling poor families (the remaining 40% of the initial sample). The main feature of
the PSID is that it follows the original survey households as well as households that get formed as a branch

7
8

We thank Mario Padula for help with this procedure.
For food we use the CPI food deflator.

12

of the original ones (e.g., sons or daughters forming their own household unit). Data have been collected
yearly from 1968 to 1997, and biannually after that. The latest available survey refers to 2008. The data is
primarily geared towards collecting data on labor market items, such as labor supply, wages, and so forth.
However, the PSID has also collected information on consumption, especially food (at home and away
from home) and, in some waves, rent, utilities, and child care. After the 1997 wave the PSID was redesigned. The survey became biannual and richer in certain interview components (such as expenditure on
various commodities, health, wealth, and detailed information on spousal sources of income). For our
purposes, the most relevant change was that the PSID started collecting richer and more detailed
information on household spending, which now covers 70% of total CE spending. See below for a
definition.
Sample Selection. Our sample includes all survey households with a head (typically the male) aged between
25 and 65. We exclude the Latino sub-sample and keep the SEO subsample, but use sampling weights
throughout the analysis. We also exclude observations with outlier records on total household income and
food.
Variable Definitions. Similarly to the CE survey, the PSID can also be used to address the dynamics of
consumption distributions. To do so, we will look both at direct measures of consumption in the PSID
(food, and the post-1997 consumption measure), and imputed consumption measures.
Food consumption is the sum of food at home, food away from home and the value of food stamps. The
post-1997 consumption measure (or “70% measure” from now on) includes information on spending on
utilities (electricity, heating, water, miscellaneous utilities), home insurance premiums, health (health
insurance premiums, nursing care, doctor visits, prescriptions, other health spending), vehicle spending
(vehicle insurance premiums, vehicle repairs, gasoline, parking), transportation (bus fares, taxi fares, other
transportation expenses), education (tuition,

other school expenses), and child care. To match the

nondurable consumption definition from the CE, we also consider an alternative measure that excludes
spending on education and health.
We adopt two procedures for imputing a measure of total consumption in the PSID. The first measure
follows Ziliak (1998) and is based on a simple budget constraint accounting (the “Ziliak measure” from
now on). Consumption is defined as the difference between income and the change in assets. Assets are
the sum of liquid assets and equity (the difference between the self-reported home value and the remaining
principal on the home mortgage). Before 1999, data on asset stocks (with the exception of housing) are
13

reported only every 5 years (starting in 1984). We thus impute liquid assets by taking the ratio of income
from liquid assets (which is available every year) and the return on the T-bill. This imputed measure of
consumption is not available for 1981-82 because no data on equity are available for 1981.9
The second measures, based on Blundell et al. (2008) imputes consumption using the estimates of a food
demand equation (from the CEX) (the “BPP measure” from now on). In particular, we use the CE data set
to estimate (on a sample where the head is 25-65 and for each year for which we have data), a regression of
log food onto the number of children, a quadratic in the household head’s age, a dummy for selfemployment, education dummies, log consumption and the interaction of the latter with education
dummies:
ln fit = Xitt + ln Cit t(Eit)+ it
We then use the estimated coefficients in the CEX to impute a measure of consumption in the PSID:

ln f it  X it ˆt
ln Cˆ it 
ˆt Eit 
We refer the interested reader to Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008, 2010) for more technical details
about this imputation procedure.
Similarly to what done with CE data, in the PSID we also equivalize household consumption using the
OECD scale, and deflate nominal values using the general CPI-Urban deflator or the food CPI when we
use just food data (both deflators are expressed in 1983-84 $).

3.3

Time Use Surveys

Survey Overview. To examine the trends in leisure inequality during this time period, we use data from the
1985 Americans' Use of Time Survey and the 2003-2007 American Time Use Survey. The 1985 Americans’
Use of Time survey was conducted by the Survey Research Center at the University of Maryland. The
sample of 4,939 individuals was nationally representative with respect to adults over the age of 18 living in
homes with at least one telephone. The survey sampled its respondents from January 1985 through
December 1985. The 2003 American Time Use Survey (ATUS) was conducted by the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). Participants in ATUS, which includes children over the age of 15, are drawn from
Note that this imputation procedure provides more correctly a measure of total consumption, rather than total nondurable
consumption.
9

14

the existing sample of the Current Population Survey (CPS). The individual is sampled approximately 3
months after completion of the final CPS survey. At the time of the ATUS survey, the BLS updated the
respondent’s employment and demographic information. During 2003, roughly 1,700 individuals
completed the survey each month, yielding an annual sample of over 20,000 individuals. During the 20042007 period, roughly 1,160 individuals were surveyed per month yielding an annual sample of just about
14,000 individuals.10
Each survey is based on 24-hour time diaries. Survey personnel assign each activity to a category in a set
classification scheme. The more refined the classification scheme, the less the survey needs to rely on the
judgment of surveyors in correctly coding activities. The ATUS represents the state of the art of time use
surveys for the United States and reports 406 detailed time use categories. The 1985 Americans' Use of
Time Survey used a scheme which included slightly less than 100 categories.
All data in the surveys are weighted so that they are nationally representative using the provided survey
weights. Moreover, we also further weight the data so that each day of the week is represented equally.
Sample Selection. For both surveys, we restrict the sample to those individuals between the ages of 25 and 65
(inclusive). Given that the data is collected at the individual level, we did not restrict the data to include
only household heads.

We also restricted the data to include only those households that had complete

time diaries in that all 24 hours were accounted for and were able to be classified into discrete time use
categories.
Variable Definitions. We break the allocation of time into a number of broad time use categories. As we
have constructed the categories, they are mutually exclusive and they sum to the household's entire day. In
other words, each person in the survey has 24 hours of non-overlapping activities. Time spent on an
activity includes any time spent on transportation associated with that activity.
In terms of our analysis, we use the time use surveys to construct measures of leisure. Our definition of
leisure follows the definition of Aguiar and Hurst (2007). In particular, we think of leisure time as being
the time not allocated to market work or to home production (cooking, cleaning, mowing the lawn, etc.).
We also exclude time spent taking care of one's children, time spent allocated to health care (going to the
doctor), and time spent in educational attainment from our measure of leisure. Our measure of leisure
therefore sums together time spent watching television, socializing (relaxing with friends and family,
playing games with friends and family, talking on the telephone, attending/hosting social events, etc.), time
10

See Aguiar and Hurst (2007) for a detailed discussion of both surveys.

15

spent exercising or participating in sports (playing sports, attending sporting events, exercising, running,
etc.), reading (reading books and magazines, reading personal mail, reading personal email, etc.), enjoying
entertainment events and hobbies (going to the movies or theatre, listening to music, using the computer
for leisure, doing arts and crafts, playing a musical instrument, etc.), and all other similar activities.11

4 The evolution of income inequality
As mentioned above, the main aim of this paper is the study of the evolution of the distribution of welfare,
which we will mainly approximate by the distribution of consumption. Before delving in the evidence on
consumption and how its distribution is measured in different data sources and with different definitions
of consumption, we provide some evidence on the evolution of the distribution of household income. This

.7

.8

Family Income

.9

1

piece of evidence is much more familiar and uncontroversial.

1980

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

2010

Figure 1: Inequality in (equivalized) family income, PSID
Figure 1 shows how income inequality, as measured by the standard deviation of logs, has evolved over the
1980-2008 period using PSID data. Our measure of income is before tax family income, scaled by the
We exclude the following from our measure of leisure: time spent eating, time spent sleeping, and time spent in personal
maintenance (grooming, etc.). Aguiar and Hurst (2007) include such activities in some of their leisure measures. Our results are
not sensitive to whether or not we include such activities in our leisure measures.
11

16

OECD equivalence scale. Before tax family income includes labor earnings, financial income, and public
and private transfers received by all household members. All data are deflated using the CPI for urban
households (in 1983-84 $) and weighted using the PSID longitudinal sampling weights.
The Figure summarizes well known facts. Income inequality, measured by the standard deviation of the
logarithms, raises quite rapidly and dramatically over the 1980s until the mid-1990s; it slows down (and it
even declines) during the second half of the 1990s; before rising again throughout the 2000s.12 Between
1980 and 2008, the overall increase in the standard deviation of logs is large, at roughly 0.2.

.8

Family Income
.9
1

1.1

Inequality Income Before Taxes

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Figure 2: Inequality in (equivalized) family income, CE Interview Survey
Figure 2 illustrates the change in income inequality using income measures from the CE instead of the
PSID. In the CE, we use ‘before tax family income’ as our measure of income. As with the PSID data, we
account for family size differences across households by normalizing income by the OECD equivalence
scale. As visible from Figure 2, the overall increase in the standard deviation of log income within the CE
during the last thirty years was nearly identical to the similar measure in the PSID data (roughly 0.2).
Notice, however, that there are a few differences between the PSID trends and the CE trends. First, the
level of inequality in all years is higher in the CE.

This is likely due to the fact that the CE income

measure is measured with more error in all years. The CE survey is designed to measure consumption, not

12

We find similar trends using the Gini coefficient which is less subject to the influence of extreme values.

17

income. The PSID data, in contrast, has as its primary goal that of measuring income well. Second, the
CE data suggests a sharp rise in income inequality in the early 1980s that is not present in the PSID data.
The patterns in the PSID match well the patterns found using data from other surveys such as the Current
Population Survey (see Autor, Katz, and Kearney, 2008).
As we mentioned above, in addition to the evolution of overall inequality, as measured, for instance, by the
standard deviation of logs, we also want to consider the evolution of different parts of the distributions of
the variables of interest. In Figures 3 (PSID data) and 4 (CE data), we provide some information on the
evolution of income inequality in different parts of the distribution. To this purpose, we plot the 90th-50th,
the 50th-10th, and the 75th-25th percentile difference. Focusing our attention on the PSID data in Figure 3,
we first notice that the difference between the 50th and 10th percentile is considerably larger than the
difference between the 90th and the 50th and (to a lesser extent) than the difference between the 75th and
25th percentile. The figure also shows that the decline in income inequality of the 1990s comes primarily
from a decline in inequality at the bottom of the distribution, while inequality at the top of the distribution
increases almost monotonically throughout our sample period. It should also be noted that the PSID does
not sample very rich households, and hence substantially underestimates the rise in inequality that has
occurred at the very top of the income distribution. Indeed, over the entire period the rise in inequality at
the bottom is larger than at the top (measured in log points). When comparing Figures 3 and 4, notice in
particular, the steady increase, in both data sets, of the 90th-50th and 75th-25th differentials. In both data sets,
the largest increases, especially in the first part of the sample, however, are registered for the 50th-10th
differential.

18

1.3
1.2
1.1
1
.9
.8
1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
50th-10th pctile diff
75th-25th pctile diff

90th-50th pctile diff

.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

Figure 3: (Equivalized) income inequality in different parts of the distribution
PSID Data

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
50th-10th pctile diff
75th-25th pctile diff

90th-50th pctile diff

Figure 4: (Equivalized) income inequality in different parts of the distribution
CE Interview Survey

19

Some of these trends in the above figures are induced by the dynamics of public transfers at the bottom of
the distribution. We can assess this fact using the PSID data by comparing Figure 3 with Figure 5. Figure
5 is similar to Figure 3 except the income measure is "family earnings" rather than "family income". The
family earnings measure does not include transfer payments (and financial income). In Figure 5, we find
that inequality in family earnings at the top has risen substantially, while that at the bottom has remained
fairly constant (except a drop and a subsequent rise from the mid 1990s to the mid 2000s). Indeed the
main difference between Figures 3 and 5 is the fact that in the former the 50th-10th differential line increases

.7

.8

.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, while it is constant in the latter.

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
50th-10th pctile diff
75th-25th pctile diff

90th-50th pctile diff

Figure 5: Inequality in family earnings, various points of the distribution

5.
Consumption inequality: Nondurable Expenditure in the CE Interview
Survey
We start our analysis of consumption inequality by looking at data from the Interview survey of the CE.
We start here because this is often used as a starting point by researchers exploring the evolution of
consumption inequality within the U.S. over the last 30 years. Figure 6 reports the standard deviation of
log consumption of nondurable commodities and services, as defined in Appendix A, and as measured in
20

the Interview Survey. As with the income data, we adjust the consumption data for differences in family
composition using the same OECD scale mentioned above.
The results shown in Figure 6 are staggering. First of all, we notice that the level of the standard deviation
of log consumption is considerably lower than the standard deviation of log household income in all years
of the survey. This, by itself, is not surprising. Some of the variation in income documented in Figures 1
and 2 is transitory. Households are able to smooth out such transitory shocks through borrowing and
saving. This implies that the standard deviation in log consumption should be lower, on average, than the
variation in log income.

The staggering part of Figure 6 is that the dramatic increase in the standard

deviation of log income was not matched by any meaningful increase in the standard deviation of log
consumption. Even starting in 1982, where the level of the standard deviation of logs is lowest, the
standard deviation of log non-durable consumption as measured in the CE Interview Survey does not
increase by more than 0.06. This is just over a third of the increase witnessed for income.

Even this

number, however, is likely overstated. Starting in 1983, there was essentially no increase in the standard
deviation of log consumption. The bulk of the increase from 1982 through 2010 occurred between 1982
and 1983. This feature of the CE data on consumption inequality has been discussed, among others, by
Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2007), Attanasio, Battistin and Padula (2010), Krueger and Perri (2008),

.5

.52

St. Dev
.54

.56

.58

Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2010).

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Figure 6: Standard deviation Log equivalized nondurable consumption,
CE Interview Data
21

In Figure 7, we look at the evolution of inequality in (log) consumption of food at home, as measured in
the Interview Survey. Again, we adjust the measure for family size using the OECD equivalence scales.
We show these data so as to compare it with the food measures in the CE diary data and with the food
measures in the PSID data. Not surprisingly, the standard deviation of this variable is always below that of
the standard deviation of total nondurable consumption as shown in Figure 6. Food at home is more of a
necessity good and, as a result, varies less in the cross-section. Moreover, the evolution over time indicates
that it does not change much until the early 2000s, when it exhibits a slight increase. Although there is
much more noise in the data, the results in Figure 7 are broadly consistent with the results from Figure 6.
Given the noise over time in this picture, one could conclude that the inequality of food at home has not
increased over time and, relative to the early 1980s, it has, if anything, declined. But if the food measure in
the CE is plagued with systematic measurement error over time, then consumption inequality measure

.46

.48

St. Dev
.5
.52

.54

.56

using food at home data may also be biased downwards.

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Figure 7: Standard deviation Log equivalized food at home consumption,
CE Interview Data

Having described the evolution of overall inequality in our sample, we now look – as we did for income at the evolution of different parts of the consumption distribution. As in Figure 3 and 4, we now plot the
difference between the 90th and 50th percentile, between the 50th and 10th, and between the 75th and 25th for
consumption using the CE interview data. These results are shown in Figure 8.
22

As with income, of the three differentials, the largest is the one between the 50th and the 10th, followed by
that between the 75th and the 25th and then by the one between the 90th and the 50th. The differences
between the three lines, however, are much less pronounced that in the case of family income. This is
particularly true for the difference between 50th and 10th and 75th and 25th percentile that, in the second part
of the sample are actually very close to each other.
Interestingly, in the case of consumption, as with income, the last two increase steadily for the sample
period, while the first (the difference between the 50th and 10th) is flat. However, while the income
differential between the 90th and 50th percentile of household (log) income increases by over 0.2 points, the
increase over the whole period is half that size in the case of consumption. The increase in the difference
between the 75th and 25th is again about 0.2 points in the case of income and less than 0.1 points for

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

nondurable consumption.

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
50th-10th pctile diff
75th-25th pctile diff

90th-50th pctile diff

Figure 8: Movements in the distribution of non- durable Consumption
CE Interview Data

6.
Consumption inequality does track income inequality: beyond the
aggregate CE interview measures of consumption.
Given the measurement error in the CE, which has been widely documented in many studies, we are not
sure how much faith to put in the results on consumption inequality in Figures 6-8. In this section, we use
23

other measures from the CE where measurement error may be less of an issue, as well as data from the
PSID. We do this to see if the patterns using these other data sets and consumption measures yield a
different story relative to the CE Interview data but a consistent story among themselves.

The results

again are striking. Across all the other measures we consider – where, to reiterate, measurement error is
less of an issue – consumption inequality has increased by only slightly less than the increase in income
inequality.

6.1

CE Diary Data: Total Expenditure

As we mentioned in the data section, the CE Survey is made of two components: the Interview and the
Diary Survey. While the figures we have considered so far are derived from the former, analogous figures
can be constructed using the latter, especially after 1986, when the Diary Survey became comprehensive
and includes virtually all consumption categories. In Figure 9, we plot the standard deviation of log total

.75

St. Dev
.8

.85

consumption, for the 1986-2010 period. Again, we adjust the data for differences in family size.

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year

Figure 9: Standard deviation Log equivalized nondurable consumption,
CE Diary Data

When comparing Figure 6 and 9 two features emerge. First, the level of inequality measured in Figure 9 is
considerably larger. This is not particularly surprising because of the structure of the two Surveys: the diary
24

survey covers only two weeks and infrequently purchased items can induce a considerable amount of
additional inequality in the cross section. What is most surprising, however, is the increase in inequality is
considerably larger and more persistent in the Diary Survey. This second feature has been discussed
extensively in Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2008) and in Attanasio, Battistin and Padula (2010).
Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2008), in particular, rule out a number of simple explanations for this
difference, including a decrease in the frequency of shopping that could increase the number of zeros in a
two-week diary.
The increase in the measure of the standard deviation of log expenditure using the Diary data is 0.10 which is about one-half the increase in the measured increase in income inequality.

Now, this measure

may be understated if the expenditure categories that comprise the diary data are more likely to be
necessities (like food). In that case, the increase in the consumption inequality from the diary survey would
have to be scaled up by the income elasticity for the goods in the diary survey to get an overall measure of
the change in inequality for total consumption.

We do not do that here. Instead, we look at specific

categories within the diary data - particularly food (and later on, entertainment). We turn to that analysis
next.

The take away from this section, however, is that within the goods in the diary data, there is a

substantial increase in consumption inequality during the last three decades. The timing of the increases in
consumption inequality from the diary data also matches closely the timing of the changes in income
inequality over this time period.

25

CE Diary Data: Food

.88

.9

St. Dev
.92
.94

.96

.98

6.2

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year

Figure 10: Standard deviation Log equivalized food consumption
Diary Survey

In Figure 10, we explore the evolution of consumption inequality using food expenditures reported in the
Diary data. Researchers at the BLS believe that food data in the Diary is measured with much less error
than in the Interview and, indeed, the main motivation for having the Diary survey is to measure more
accurately what the BLS defines ‘frequently purchased items’.

As seen from Figure 10, the standard

deviation of log food expenditure at home in the diary data increased by between 6 and 8 percentage
points. Estimates from Aguiar and Bils (2011) find that the income elasticity for total food spending is 0.5.
Using this estimate, it follows that a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that total
consumption inequality increased by between 12 and 16 percentage points over the period examined.13
Two things are of interest from the food results in Figure 10. First, using the food data, the rise in
consumption inequality was roughly 80% of the rise in income inequality during the sample period
(0.16/0.20).

Second, the rise in consumption inequality using the food data in the Diary is higher than the

rise in consumption using total consumption in the Diary (0.16 vs. 0.10). Again, this is likely because the
"total" nondurable expenditure measure in the diary is not a complete representation of nondurable
This simple back-of-the-envelope calculation assumes that the income elasticity remains constant. If the elasticity is declining
over time, our calculation is overestimating the increase in total consumption inequality.
13

26

expenditures. Given that it likely contains more reports of food expenditures than other nondurable
expenditure measures, it may also need to be deflated using the income elasticity. As we show below, the
results from the food data in the CE Diary matches well the results on consumption inequality from the
PSID.
6.3

CE Diary Data: Food vs. Entertainment Spending

As we discussed in Section 2.4, one way to deal with measurement error problems that can affect our
overall measures of consumption is to focus on components of consumption for which the measurement
issues are less severe and, possibly, stable over time. In this section we combine information on two such
measures: consumption of food in the home and expenditure on entertainment goods and services
(excluding durable goods).
In Figure 11a, we plot the standard deviation of the log of the ratio of entertainment to food at home
expenditure using the measures from the Diary data. As argued in Section 2.4, under certain conditions,
this should be proportional to the standard deviation of log non-durable consumption, with the factor of
proportionality depending on the difference between the income elasticities of the two commodities. As
said, Aguiar and Bils (2011) estimate the income elasticity for total food spending estimates to be 0.5; they
also estimate the elasticity for entertainment good and services to be about 1.9. According to these
estimates, one would then adjust the increase in Figure 11a by a factor of 1.4 (1.9-0.5). The study by Blow,
Lechene and Levell (2012) reports a similar expenditure elasticity of food at home of 0.5, but their estimate
of the expenditure elasticity of entertainment is lower, at 1.5 - implying a difference of 1 and hence
suggesting that the increase in Figure 11a would be in no need of adjustment.
As seen from Figure 11a, the standard deviation of the log ratio of the two commodities increased, over
the whole sample period, by about 0.15.14 This figure would imply an increase in total nondurable
consumption inequality (as measured by the standard deviation of logs) of the same size, if we take the
Blow, Lechene and Levell elasticities (while it would be lower using the Aguiar-Bils estimates). Again, this
metric suggests that roughly 75% of the increase in income equality has translated to an increase in
consumption inequality (0.15/0.20).

14

In Figure 11a, we do not need to adjust our results by changes in family size, as we are considering the (log) of a ratio.

27

1.3

(mean) sd_leisure_foodin
1.4
1.5

1.6

Inequality Ratio Entertainment-Food

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year

. Figure 11a: SD log ratio Entertainment/Food Spending:
CE Diary Data

The ratio between food at home and entertainment expenditure can also be computed in the Interview
data. In Figure 11b, we report the path of the standard deviation of the log of such a ratio, to be compared
to Figure 11a.
We find that, in the case of this ratio, the inequality measure that emerges from the Interview CE data is
considerably larger than what obtained with total nondurable consumption expenditure and not
inconsistent with the evidence coming from the Diary survey. In particular, depending on when one starts
counting, the increase in the standard deviation of the log ratio is between 0.15 and 0.25.
These results further suggest that the problems associated with the CE Interview Survey and the
discrepancies between that and the Diary Survey might be attributed to difficulties in measuring certain
specific commodities within the Interview Survey. It may be worth remembering that household income
inequality in the CE interview survey increases as much as in other data sets, such as the PSID.

28

1.35

(mean) sd_leisure_foodin
1.4
1.45

1.5

Inequality Ratio Entertainment-Food

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

. Figure 11b: SD log ratio Entertainment/Food Spending:
CE Interview data

6.4

CE Interview Data: Stock of Car Holdings

If it is true that the different conclusions between the CE Diary data and the CE Interview data arise
because some components of the CE Interview data are fraught with changing non-classical measurement
error, one idea exercise would be to find a category within the CE Interview Data that is measured with
less error. To do this, we look at one such measure in the CE: the stock of cars owned by the household.
This is an interesting exercise to perform for at least two reasons. First, the data on the value of the car
stock in the CE seems to be of excellent quality, both in terms of the expenditure on cars and in terms of
the composition of the stock of existing cars. Second, cars are durables and large. Moreover, adjusting the
stock of cars is subject to transaction and adjustment costs. One would therefore guess that decisions
about cars reflect long run expectations about permanent income.
When analyzing the stock of cars one has to take into account the fact that there are a number of
households that do not own a car. This prevents us from computing the log of the value of cars for these
households. To deal with this issue we follow two different approaches. In Figure 12, we plot the
coefficient of variation of the stock of cars, defined as the standard deviation of car values divided by its
mean. Both the mean and the standard deviation are computed including the zeros for households who do
29

not own a car. In Figure 13, instead, we only use households who own at least a car and plot the standard
deviation of the log value for these households.

1

cv_cars
1.05

1.1

CV Cars

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

Figure 12: Coefficient of Variation Stock of Cars,
CE Interview Survey

1.15

1.2

(mean) sd_cars
1.25
1.3

1.35

Standard Deviation Cars

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

Figure 13: SD log Stock of Cars,
CE Interview Data

30

When looking at the coefficient of variation we see an increase of about 0.1, which happens especially in
the first part of the sample period. The increase documented in Figure 12 for the standard deviation of logs
is actually larger, at almost 0.2.

6.5

PSID Data: Food and Nondurable Expenditures

Figure 14 uses PSID data and plots consumption inequality (as measured by the standard deviation of the
logs) against time. Here we use the five different consumption measures we can construct from the PSID:
(a) Food consumption over the 1980-2010 period; (b) the so-called “70% measure” available over the
1998-2010 period (with spending on health and education); (c) the “70% measure” excluding spending on
health and education; (d) the imputation based on the CEX estimation of the food demand function over
the 1980-2010 period (“BPP measure”), and (e) the imputation based on the difference between income
and the change in assets over the 1980-2010 period (“Ziliak measure”).
A number of features of Figure 14 are worth noting. First, the five measures rank as we might expect: food
has less variance than the 70% measure, which in turn displays less variance than the imputed (more
comprehensive) measures. Second, it is remarkable that the two more comprehensive measures – despite
being obtained with two completely different imputation procedures that use completely different modules
of the survey – display very similar trends and levels. Third, both imputed measures show a considerable
increase in consumption inequality over the 1980s and into the early 1990s, of almost 0.2. In other words,
the composite measures from the PSID show that consumption inequality has tracked income inequality
nearly exactly.15 Fourth, the increase in inequality in food consumption in the PSID is nearly identical to
the increase in inequality in food consumption from the CE Diary survey. This is reassuring given that
there is no evidence that systematic measurement error has been changing in the PSID. Fifth, the increase
in total consumption inequality based on the PSID food data is 0.2 (0.10/0.5). Again, to get this, we scale
up the estimate based upon the total food income elasticity of 0.5.

Both imputed measures of course do not identify the levels of consumption inequality because of imputation errors. However,
if such errors are stationary, then the imputed measures are unbiased estimates of the change in consumption inequality over the
sample period.
15

31

1.2
1
.8
.6
.4
1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Imputed from CEX
70% measure
Total food consumption

Income minus change in assets

70% measure strict ND

Figure 14: Trends in consumption inequality from the PSID
Taken together, the results from the PSID data shown in Figure 14 is that consumption inequality and
income inequality tracked each other nearly identically during this time period.

We highlight one more

aspect emerging from the PSID data. Given the results in Figure 1 and the results in Figure 14, we can
compute the simple correlation between the total consumption inequality measures based on the
imputation procedures and the income inequality measures from the PSID over this time period.

A

simple ocular examination of the figures shows that the time series patterns of the inequality measures are
very similar. Both inequality measures (imputed consumption inequality and income inequality) increased
during the 80s, leveled off during the 1990s, and increased further in the 2000s. This is reflected in the
simple correlation measures. For example, the simple time series correlation between the PSID imputed
consumption inequality measure (based on the CE elasticities) and the PSID income inequality measure
was 0.69 and that between the Ziliak measure and the income inequality measure was 0.88.

7.

Different dimensions of inequality

In this section, we use our various other consumption measures within the CE and the PSID to explore
the evolution of consumption inequality at different points in the distribution. In Figure 15, we consider
the percentile differentials we have used so far to study the evolution of the distribution of consumption.
32

In Figure 15, we plot the same differentials between percentiles in Figure 8 but instead use the Diary total
nondurable consumption measure. Notice, the 50/10 differential, which was substantially flatter in Figure
8, increases throughout the sample period and so does the 75/25 differential. The 90/10 differential, which
in Figure 8 was the one that increases the most, increases but slightly less than the other differentials.
Again, the changes in consumption inequality throughout the distribution using the CE diary data better

.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

matches the time series trends in income inequality at similar percentile points.

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year
50th-10th pctile diff
75th-25th pctile diff

90th-50th pctile diff

Figure 15: Movements in the distribution of non- durable Consumption,
CE Diary Survey

Figure 16 explores whether the changes in consumption inequality within the PSID are coming from the
bottom or the top part of the distribution. In the top left panel, we show the results using the Ziliak
measure (defined as the difference between income and the change in assets). First, in the 1980-95 period
the rise in inequality is explained by movements in both tails – the 75th-25th percentile difference is indeed
very stable. The rise in inequality at the bottom is, if anything, more pronounced than the rise in inequality
at the top. However, in the second half of the sample the top part of the distribution starts detaching itself
more dramatically from the rest – the rise in the 90th-10th percentile difference and in the 75th-25th percentile
difference is very pronounced, while the 50th-10th percentile difference remains stable. Interestingly, trends
in food consumption inequality (bottom panel) are different – there is less heterogeneity in the movement
33

of different parts of the food consumption distribution. Partly reflecting this, the percentile differences
computed using the BPP’s imputed measure of consumption (top right panel) display less stark trends.

.6

.8

.8

1

1.2

1 1.2 1.4

BPP

1.4

y-A

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

.55 .6 .65 .7 .75

Food

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

50th-10th pctile diff
75th-25th pctile diff

90th-50th pctile diff

Figure 16: Consumption inequality in different parts of the distribution
In addition to the overall sample and its distribution, it is also interesting to cut the sample by skill levels of
the household level. We know from a large literature in labor economics that the return to education has
increased dramatically over the period we are considering and that, in the case of income and wages, there
have been large increases in inequality both across skill level and within skill levels (possibly reflecting
changes also in the price of unobservable skills).
In Figure 17, we divide the CE diary sample in four groups, on the basis of the education of the household
head: the first group is formed of households headed by an individual with a college degree or more, the
second group by households headed by individual with some college experience, the third by high school
graduates and the fourth by high school dropouts. We then express, for every year, average log
consumption as difference from average log consumption of the third group (the high school graduates).
34

(mean) mean_ndur_educ_summary
-.2
0
.2
.4
-.4
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year
Less than HS
College degree or more

Some College

Figure 17. Consumption Inequality Across Skill Groups (relative to those with a HS degree)
CE Diary Survey

The graphs in Figure 17 indicate a steady increase in the return to education as measured by the difference
between high school graduates and college graduates (the top line). The differential between college
graduate and high school graduates increases from about 0.2 to about 0.33 at the end of the sample. These
changes in the first part of the sample (across different year of birth cohorts) were studied in Attanasio and
Davis (1996) in relation to similar changes in relative wages. Similar patterns for the PSID are shown in
Figure 18.

35

.6
.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4
-.6

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

BPP

.8

y-A

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Less than HS
College degree or more

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Some College

Figure 18. Consumption Inequality Across Skill Groups (relative to those with a HS degree)
PSID Consumption Measures

Having considered changes across education groups, we now look at changes within education groups. In
particular, in Figures 19 and 20, we plot the standard deviation of log consumption within each of the four
education groups listed above for the CE diary data and the PSID consumption measures, respectively.
Within skill group consumption inequality increased dramatically across all skill groups in both surveys.

36

(mean) sd_ndur_educ_summary
.75
.8
.85
.9
.7
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year
Less than HS
Some College

HS
College degree or more

Figure 19: Consumption inequality within skill groups,
PSID Data

.8

1

1.2

1.4

BPP

.6

.6

.8

1

1.2

1.4

y-A

1980

1990

2000
Year

Less than HS
Some College

2010

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

HS degree
College degree or more

Figure 20: Consumption inequality within skill groups,
PSID Data
37

8.

Leisure Inequality: Time Use Surveys

The results in the prior section suggest strongly that consumption inequality has tracked income inequality
rather closely over the last 30 years. Does this mean that the actual inequality in well being tracked income
inequality over this period? In the standard model, utility is a function of both consumption and leisure
time. It is therefore natural to look at the changes in inequality in leisure in conjunction with the changes
in inequality in consumption so as to get a better measure of changes in the inequality of total wellbeing
across individuals.16
To make the results from the time use surveys comparable with some of the results in in the prior sections,
we explore the changes in leisure inequality across skill groups. Table 1 explores the hours per week spent
in leisure for low and high educated men and women in both 1985 and 2003-7. As discussed above, our
measure of leisure includes the actual time the individual spends in leisurely activities like watching
television, socializing with friends, going to the movies, etc.

Sample

1985

Leisure (Hours Per Week)
2003-7

Men
Low Educated
High Educated

36.6
34.4

39.1
33.2

2.5
-1.2

Women
Low Educated
High Educated

35.0
32.2

35.2
30.3

0.2
-1.9

Change

Table 1: Leisure Measures (Hours Per Week) by Group, 1985 and 2003-7

A few things are of note from Table 1.

First, in 1985, low educated men took only slightly more hours

per week of leisure than high educated men. As above, we define high educated as those with more than
12 years of schooling.

A similar pattern holds for women.

between high and low educated men are substantial.

However, by 2007, the leisure differences

Specifically, low educated men experienced a 2.5

hours per week gain in leisure between 1985 and 2007. High educated men, during the same time period,
experienced a 1.2 hour per week decline in leisure.

The new effect is that leisure inequality increased

dramatically after 1985. Again, similar patterns are found for women.

16

The inequality in leisure has been explored by Aguiar and Hurst (2007, 2009).

38

Figure 21 shows the distribution of leisure for low educated men in 1985 (dashed line) and 2003-7 (solid
line).

Figure 22 shows similar patterns for higher educated men. Most of the increase in leisure occurred

as a result of changes in the upper tail of the leisure distribution. A greater share of low educated men in
2003-7 are taking more than 50 hours per week of leisure than in 1985.

This is not the case for higher

educated men. If anything, there is slightly lower proportion of higher educated men taking more than 50
hours per week of leisure in 2003-7 than there was in 1985.
The patterns shown in Table 1 and Figures 21 and 22 show that the overall inequality measures between
high and low skilled individuals becomes muddied when one combines the results for consumption and
leisure. While it is true that the consumption of the high educated has grown rapidly relative to the
consumption of the low educated, it is also true that leisure time of the low educated has grown rapidly
relative to the leisure time of the low educated. In order to make overall welfare calculations, one needs to
take a stance on how the leisure time is valued.

But, as long as leisure has some positive value, the

increase in consumption inequality between high and low educated households during the past few decades
will overstate the true inequality in well being between these groups.

Kernel Density of Leisure Time in 1985 and 2003-2007

0

.005

.01

.015

.02

Sample: Low Edcuated Males Between the Ages of 25 and 65

0

50

100
Hours Per Week
2003-2007

150
1985

Figure 21: Kernel Density of Leisure Time for Low Educated Men, 1985 and 2003-7

39

Kernel Density of Leisure Time in 1985 and 2003-2007

0

.005

.01

.015

.02

Sample: Low Edcuated Males Between the Ages of 25 and 65

0

50

100

150

Hours Per Week
2003-2007

1985

Figure 22: Kernel Density of Leisure Time for High Educated Men, 1985 and 2003-7

9. Conclusions
In this paper, we have documented thoroughly that the increase in income inequality was matched by an
increase in consumption inequality of comparable magnitude. In particular, between 1980 and 2010, the
standard deviation of log income increased by roughly 0.2 percentage points. Across our various preferred
measures, the standard deviation of log consumption increased by roughly 0.10 to 0.2 percentage points
with most of the estimates being in the 0.15 to 0.20 range.
The main innovation of the paper is to show that the data on the increase in consumption inequality within
the U.S. is very robust to alternative measures of consumption and across alternative data sets. The one
outlier in terms of estimates of consumption inequality is total nondurable expenditure from the CE
interview survey (where no attempt is made to adjust for measurement error). For this measure, the
standard deviation of log consumption increased by only 0.06 percentage points – with most of the
increase coming before 1982.

As shown by Aguiar and Bils (2011), the CE interview data is plagued with

non-classical measurement error that biases estimates of consumption inequality downwards. Given that
many researchers used the nondurable consumption measure from the CE interview data as their primary
40

measure of consumption inequality, they have naturally concluded that consumption inequality has not
increased much over the last thirty years. However, some researchers have found rising consumption
inequality using other measures. These various estimates have lead researchers to conclude that the extent
of the increase in consumption inequality is still an open debate among economists.
Our results in this paper, however, show that such a conclusion is unwarranted.

Across every other

measure of consumption we analyzed, consumption inequality increased substantially. Some of these
measures came from the CE diary survey like food and entertainment spending (where measurement error
in those categories has been found to be less of a problem). Some measures came from the CE interview
survey like the stock of cars (where quality of data appears fairly high). Finally, some of our measures
come from the PSID (where systematic measurement has not been found to be a problem). Not only do
these other measures of consumption inequality mirror the overall change in income inequality, the timing
of the changes also line up very closely.
Within the context of the CE, it is clear that the Interview survey is plagued by some serious measurement
problems. These can arise from a variety of sources. In terms of the discussion of inequality, however, the
evidence we have presented seems to indicate that these problems are not caused by the specificity of the
Interview sample and by the fact that it might exclude, for a variety of reasons, households from the
extremes of the income distribution. The main evidence we provide in this respect is that we do find
evidence of increasing inequality in the Interview survey. It is apparent in income, in the value of the car
stock and in the ratio of food at home to entertainment. It is therefore likely that the issue lies with the
measurement of specific items or the degree to which expenditures are fully reported by certain groups.
This evidence can be valuable in the re-design of the CE survey.
From a methodological point of view, more work is needed to formalize the use of several components of
the CE survey both to do imputation in other data sets and to make inferences about overall (nondurable)
consumption. We also believe more work is needed in order to understand the consequences for welfare
of changes in relative prices and the consequent shifts in commodity demand patterns. Finally, if would
also be helpful to think about overall measures in wellbeing by thinking about the overall change in
consumption inequality jointly with the overall change in leisure inequality. We think future work should
attempt to make a composite change in the inequality of wellbeing by formally linking the two measures.

41

References
Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils (2011), “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality?”, NBER Working
Paper 16807.
Aguiar, Mark & Erik Hurst (2007), "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five Decades," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 969-1006.
Attanasio, Orazio, Eric Battistin and Hide Ichimura (2007), “What Really Happened to Consumption Inequality in
the United States?”, in Ernst R. Berndt & Charles R. Hulten (Eds.). "Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services:
Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches", National Bureau of Economic Research.
Attanasio, Orazio, Eric Battistin and Mario Padula (2010), Inequality in Living Standards since 1980: Income Tells
Only a Small Part of the Story, Packt Publishing.
Attanasio, Orazio & Davis, Steven J. (1996), "Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Consumption,"
Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1227-62.
Attanasio, Orazio and Nicola Pavoni (2011), “Risk Sharing in Private Information Models With Asset Accumulation:
Explaining the Excess Smoothness of Consumption”, Econometrica 79(4), 1027-68.
Autor, David H. , Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney (2008), “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the
Revisionists”, Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2), 300-23.
Blow, Laura, Valerie Lechene and Peter Levell (2012). “Using the CE to Model Household Demand”, mimeo.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, & Ian Preston (2004), "Imputing consumption in the PSID using food demand
estimates from the CEX," University College London, mimeo.
Blundell, Richard & Luigi Pistaferri & Ian Preston, (2008), "Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,"
American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887-1921.
Richard Blundell & Ian Preston (1998), "Consumption Inequality And Income Uncertainty," The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 113(2), 603-40.
Browning, Martin and Thomas Crossley (2009): “Are Two Cheap, Noisy Measures Better Than One Expensive,
Accurate One?”, American Economic Review 99:2, 99-103.
Cutler, David M & Katz, Lawrence F. (1992), "Rising Inequality? Changes in the Distribution of Income and
Consumption in the 1980's," American Economic Review 82(2), 546-51.

42

Deaton, Angus & Paxson, Christina (1994), "Intertemporal Choice and Inequality," Journal of Political Economy,
102(3), 437-67.
Garner, Thesia I. & Atsushi Maki (2004), "The gap between macro and micro economic statistics: Estimation of the
misreporting model using micro-data sets derived from the Consumer Expenditure Survey," mimeo.
Heathcote, Jonathan & Fabrizio Perri & Giovanni L. Violante, (2010), "Unequal We Stand: An Empirical Analysis of
Economic Inequality in the United States: 1967-2006," Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(1), 15-51.
Krueger, Dirk & Fabrizio Perri (2006), "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and
Theory," Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), 163-93.
Meyer, Bruce D. & James X. Sullivan (2009), "Five Decades of Consumption and Income Poverty," NBER
Working Papers 14827.
Meyer, Bruce D. , James X. Sullivan & Adam Bee (2012), “Micro and Macro Validation of the Consumer
Expenditure Survey”, mimeo.
Padula, Mario (1999), “Euler Equations and Durable Goods”, CSEF Working Paper 30.
Parker, Jonathan, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen and Nicolas L. Ziebarth (2009), “Inequality in Expenditure in the
Twentieth Century”, NWU mimeo.
Slesnick, Daniel T. (2001), Consumption and Social Welfare: Living Standards and Their Distribution in the United
States, Cambridge University Press.
Ziliak, James (1998), “Does the choice of consumption measure matter? An application to the permanent-income
hypothesis”, Journal of Monetary Economics 41:1, 201-16.

43

