                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE INVARIANCE OF R&D TO THE
                  NUMBER OF FIRMS IN THE INDUSTRY




                          Raaj Kumar Sah


                        Joseph E. Stiglitz




                      Working Paper No. 1798




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBERTs research program
-in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBFR Workinq   Paper #1798
                                                        January 1986



          The Invariance of R&D to the Nurrber of Firrr in the Industry



                                     ABSTRACT




       This   paper presents certain remarkably simple results concerning mar—

ket's allocation to R+D and its comparison to socially efficient alloca-

tions. ic posit that a firm can undertake more than one project aimed at

the same innovation, and consider a product market characterized by

Bertrand competition. Among the results 'we obtain is that the market k+D

(that is, the number of projects undertaken, and the effort spent on dif-

ferent projects) is invariant to the number of firms. We also examine the

effects of the number of firms on the gains from innovation to consumers,

firms, and society, and show, in particular, that the market undertakes

less R+D than is socially desirable.




Raaj   Kiir.r Sah                                      Joseph E. Stiglitz
Depar±rrent    of Economics                            Departrrent of Economics
28 Hilihouse Road                                      Dickinson Hall
Yale University                                        Princeton University
New Haven, CT 06520                                    Princeton, NJ 08544
         TBE INVARIANCE OF R+D TO TUE NUMBER OF FIRMS IN ThE INDUSTRY


                    Raaj Kumar Sah   and Joseph E. Stiglitz*



                               1. Introduction


      A major concern of the recent research in the theory of innovation has

been the effect of market structure on private marginal returns from inno-

vation, and, thus, on the equilibrium level of market R+D. Recent work

has also emphasized the relationship between marginal private returns and

social returns which, in general, may not be the same.1 For instance,

in some patent races, the private return is either zero, when the firm is

not first to invent, or the total (appropriable) return when it is;

while the social return is the increase in the present value of social

gain from having the invention earlier than it otherwise would have been

available.

      The present analysis is based on a model in which a firm can undertake

more than one project aimed at the same innovation, and the product market

Is characterized by Bertrand competition. The main results of this paper

are
      (i) The number of firms in the induty has no effect on the pace of

innovation. That is, the marginal decisions of a firm to undertake an

additional research project, or to spend additional efforts on a project,

are unaffected by the number of firms. The resulting invariance of the

market equilibrium is in marked contrast with some previous studies2

which have found the number of firms in the industry to be a critical

determinant of the market R+D.


                                       1
                                     2




    (jj)   Any 'interior' market equilibrium is 'quasi—efficient.'3 That

is, the set of projects undertaken in the market as well as the intensi-

ties with which they are undertaken maximize the economy—wide probability

of a successful innovation, given the level of expenditure on R+D, but the

market expenditure on R+D is smaller than what is socially optimal.

    These results are fairly general; they hold, for instance, whether

R+D projects have independent outcomes or not, whether there is symmetric

equilibrium or not. In a more restricted model we also establish that:

    (iii) The intensity at which a research project is pursued .n the

market is invariant to the magnitude of (appropriable) rent from

ful innovation. If the rent is larger, then the number of urojects

undertaken is larger.

    (iv) The intensity at which a project is undertaken in the market is

socially optimal but, in general, the market undertakes fewer projects

than is socially desirable.

    Cv) The number of firms in the industry affects the gains from

innovation to firms and consumers and, thus, it affects aggregate social

gains. A larger number of firms lowers industry profit as well as the

profit of an individual firm1 Also, for a class of innovations, a larger

number of firms raises consumers' gains as well as the aggregate social

Lains from innovation.

   A key feature of our model is that a firm may undertake more than one

research project aimed at the same innovation, if it is profitable to do

so. This assumption, we believe, is more plausible from an economic view-

point than the one underlying some previous models in which a firm can

undertake only one research project. It is easy to understand why this

difference in assumption has a significant effect on the analysis of R+D.
                                       3




 Under our assumption, a firm has a larger set of instruments (it can

 select a portfolio consisting of projects at different levels of inten-

 sity) and thus, in general, its behavior is quite different from that when

 it is arbitrarily constrained to undertake a single project. The proper-

ties of the resulting market equilibrium in research are also, therefore,

different. This insight has critical implications for the analysis of

k+D, regardless of the particular model one uses (for example, the partic-

ular assumptions one makes concerning the nature of competition in the

product market); though the specific consequences of our assumption

would, of course, depend on the characteristics of the model. The present

analysis is conducted in a context where there is Bertrand competition in

th. product market. We begin, in the next section, with a simple model;

a more general model is investigated in Section 3.



                              3. A Simple Model


    A research project has a binary outcome: it is either successful or

not,4 If e is the variable effort (expenditure) on a research

project, then the probability of its success is p(o) •          where    e ..   0

1 2 p   0 ,   and   p > 0 . The   outcomes of different projects are in-

dependent of one another, regardless of firm affiliation. A firm can

undertake as many projects as it desires, all of which are aimed at the

same innovation. Thus, if eu      denotes the effort by the i—th firm on

its project j ,     and if this firm undertakes j =     1.   ...,   k   projects,

then the probability that at least one of the projects undertaken by this


firm is successful is given by        l —   iT (1 —
                                            j ai      P(eij))   •



   The product market is characterized by Bertrand competition.
                                                4



Specifically, the (positive) rent gained by a firm is R if it innovates

and if no other firm innovates. If two or more firms inno'vate, then none

of them get any rent and the benefits of innovation accrue solely to con—

sumers, hi denotes the probability that all firms, other than the ith

                                                              kf
firm are unsuccessful. That is, h =                  TT 11(1 — P(Of                    ))    , where
f =   1,   ..,, N   denotes the firms, N . 1          ,       and it is finite. Then, the


(expected) profit of firm i is                  =                 —                +    a)       where   a
                                                     Rhq
                                                                      .1=1
                                                                             (e.             ,



is the fixed cost of undertaking a project.

      le focus at present on the symmetric interior Nash equilibrium in

which all projects have the same p(e) function, each firm undertakes the

same number of projects and, further, if a firm undertakes more than one

project, then all projects are undertaken at the same level of effort.6

At an interior equilibrium, e > 0 ,              k     1      ,       and    both e and k are
finite, Therefore


(1)         q 1 — (1 — p(e)) k           and


                             Nk—k
(2)         h   (1W— p(e))


The first order conditions with respect to e and k                             ,       for    a firm's

optimum,    are: Rhq — k     = 0    ,   and    Rhq — (e + a) = 0                   •    respectively.
These equilibrium conditions can be restated, using (1) and (2),



(3)         R(1_p)•••'Pe_1=Oi and

(4)        —R(1 —    )n1(1   —   p) — (e + a) = 0         ,
                                                5




 where n = Nk      is the total number of projects undertaken in the market.

       Note that the above expressions determine the effort per project, e                  ,

 and the total number, n ,        of   projects undertaken in the market. A

 change in N simply changes k ,               keeping   n and e unchanged. Thus,
the only effect of N is on the number of projects a firm undertakes,

which is k = n/N     •   In   a duopoly, for instance, each of two firms under-

takes half as many projects as a monopoly would have undertaken, it

follows then that the number of firms in the market has no impact on (i)

the total number of research projects undertaken; (ii) the intensity of

each of the projects; and, therefore (iii) the probability of a success-

ful innovation.

      The intuitive idea behind this result is as follows, Consider the

marginal decision of a firm      to    undertake the last project (or to invest

the last dollar on a project). This project (or dollar) yields a benefit

only if the other projects undertaken by this firm            fail,       well      if all
of the projects undertaken by other firms fail,, The marginal decisions

are thus influenced by the total number of projects undertaken in the

market; and not by how these projects are partitioned between the firm

making the decision and other firms, Thus, whether the marginal project
yields a return, as well as the return from the marginal effort invested

in a project are independent of the number of firms. Furthermore, it is

easily verified that this independence holds even when a firm              has    a vector
of control variables,            and when the expected cost of a project is a

general function of the control variables.

      A-still stronger result is obtained by solving (4) for (1 —                p)fl and
substituting the resulting expression into (3). This             yields

(5)       —(e +   a)pI(l — p)ln(l      — p)   —1 0
                                                 6



    The above expression characterizes the optimal e ,    and it does not con-

    tain U or N • Thus, the optimal effort per project is independent not
    only of the number of firms in the industry, but also of the magnitude of

    rent from successful innovation. Further, by perturbing (3) with respect

    to U ,     and noting that e is invariant to this perturbation, we obtain


    (6)        dn/dR =   —l/Rln(l   —   p) > 0

    Thus, a larger number of projects is undertaken in the market if the rent

    from innovation is larger.

          The above analysis also brings out clearly the difference between the

•   consequences of our assumption that k is determined endogenously, and

    the more restrictive assumption under which k is exogenously fixed at

    unity. In the latter case, it is apparent from (3) that the optimal

    effort per project (nd hence the probability of a successful innovation

    in the market) depends, in general, on the number of firms.

          Welfare Analysis: The invariance results we have derived might give
•

    an impression that public policy (affecting the number of firms in the

    industry) has no role to play in the context of research and innovation.

    This is not correct because, though the number of firms does not affect

    the aggregate probability of innovation, it does affect the division of

    this probability between the two cases: (i) when only one firm innovates,

    and (ii) when more than one firm innovates. Since the post—innovation

    gains to consumers (or firms) are different under these two cases, their

    expected gains are affected by the number of firms in the industry.

          To see this, let z denote the probability of innovation, and let g

    denote the probability that two or more firms innovate. That is
                                              7



 (7)

 (8)         gz—Nhq
where,     recalling our earlier notation, Nhq             is   the probability that only

 one    firm innovates.   Clearly, z is independent of N but its division

between g and Nhq          is   not. Specifically
                                                       8




 (9)        d(Nhq)/dN   = h[kln(l   — p) + cj]< 0


This is what we would expect, because if- the same number                     of   total projects

is divided among a larger number of firms then the probability that two or

sore firms innovate is higher and, correspondingly, the probability that

only one firm    innovates    is lower.

       The above reasoning also suggests that a larger number                  of    firms would

lower the aggregate profit of firms. This can be ascertained as follows.

The    aggregate corporate profit is given by

(10)        Nn=RNhq—Nk(e+a)

Now, note that    the last term in the above right hand side does                    not depend
on N •      whereas,   from (9),   the   first term is decreasing             in N .    Thus,
d(Nn)/dN < 0 •     Further,     dnfdN =    [d(Nn)/dN   —
                                                           t]/N   < 0 ,       if a   firm's pro—
fit    is nonnegative (which we assume).       Therefore,        a larger number of firms

lowers    the profit for a single firm,      as   well as for the industry as a

whole.

       Next, consider consumers. They face a monopoly on the fruits of inno-

vation if only one firm       innovates,   but get the entire-benefit from innova-

tion if two or more firms innovate. If their gains in                 these        two oases are

represented by S1 and S2 respectively, then S2 —
                                                                     S1
                                                                          -
                                                                              represents   the
                                              8



loss due j. monopoly, relative to the casó 'when consumers receive the full

benefit of innovation. Normally, S2 —
                                                    s1
                                                          will      be positive.9 Now, the

expected gain to consumers is S
                                            S1Nhq
                                                    +
                                                         S2g    ,    which can be restated as

(11)           S   32z —    — S1)Nhq


where the first term represents the full gain from innovation, and the

second term represents the loss due to monopoly. Using (9), it is obvious

that the consumers gain is larger if the number of firms is larger.

       Since the number of firms has opposite effects on consumers and firms,

we combine these two effects to study the societal implications. Our

analysis      here assigns equal 'weights to the gains of consumers and firms,

but the results can be easily rephrased if the 'weights are different. The

social gain is B = S + Nn       ,    which, from (10) and (11), can be expressed
as


(12)          BS2z—(S2—S1—R)Nhq—Nk(e+a)

It is apparent from (9) and (12) that whether the social gain is increas-

ing or decreasing in the number of firms depends on 'whether the consumers

loss       due to monopoly, (S2 —
                                  S1)   ,   is    larger or smaller than the firms'

rent from monopoly, R •        In   typical oases in 'which the innovation is

meant to reduce a product's production cost, consumers suffer deadweight

losses when a monopoly captures any rents; that is, S2 —                       >   R         In.

these cases, clearly, a larger number of firms yields a larger social

js   in.
      The last result also suggests that if the government can                 alter   the

number of firms in a non—distortive manner               (for   instance through an     entry
                                            9



 subsidy) and if there are no fixed costs associated with establishing a

 firm, then the optimal number of firms is such that each firm undertakes a

 single project. Obviously, if there are fixed costs, we can use (12) to

 calculate the corresponding optimal number of firms11

       Social Optimum: Our objective here is to contrast the socially opti-

 mal resource allocation to R+D with the market allocation described

 above. Let n denote the number of projects undertaken by the planner.

Then a ,     given in (7), is the probability that at least one project is
successful; in which case consumers receive the full benefits of

innovation. The expected social gain is:            S2z —   rt(e + a) •12 The
corresponding first order conditions, with respect to e and n              ,    char—

acterizing the internal optimum, can be expressed as


(13)       S2(1 —   p)fh    —   1 =


(14)       —S2(1 —   p)fl1(1   — p) — (a + a)   0



Note the similarity between the social allocation described above, and the

market equilibrium described by (3) and (4). The two sets of expressions

are identical except that the gain from successful innovation is R for a

firm, whereas it is S2 for the planner. This similarity should not be

surprising because, once again. the marginal decision of the planner (to

undertake the last project, or to invest the last dollar on a project) de-

pends on the total number of projects that have already been undertaken;

just the way U did for a firm in the market. Now, recall that

do/dR 0 •     It    follows that the market effort per project is at the

socially efficient level,

   Further, recalling (6), the similarity between the market equilibrium
                                       10



and the social optimum also implies that whether the number of projects

undertaken in the iarket is smaller (larger) than the socially optimal

number depends on whether S2 is larger (smaller) than K •       Once again,

in a wide variety of circumstances (for instance, for innovations dealing

with cost reduction), the full consumers' gain from innovation is larger

than the rents to a firm from monopolizing the innovation; that is,

S2 > K •   In   these cases (on which we focus in the rest of this paper),

the market undertakes fewer projects than is socially desirable.

    In fact, the economic content of the above result is a consequence of

Bertrand competition, and it does not depend on some of the details of the

model (for example, whet1er a firm can undertake many or only one pro-

ject). The reason is simple. Under Bertrand competition, a firm captures

rents only when it turns out to have monopoly over innovation. It follows

that, so long as the rents to a firm when it is a monopoly are smaller

than the full consumers' gain from innovation, the market investment in

RID is smaller than what is socially desirable.



                         3. General Invariance Results


    The model in the preceding section assumed that there is a single

technology for innovation (though the effort level could vary) and that

the outcomes of different projects are statistically independent; also,

we focussed on a symmetric equilibrium. In fact, our central result that

the market's allocation to R+D is invariant to the number of firms is more

general. The main reason behind this invariance is that, under Bertrand

competition, there ii return from undertaking the marginal project only if

all other projects are unsuccessful; regardless of (i) how these pro—
                                                       11




 jects are partitioned among firms, (ii) whether these projects are based

 on the same or different technologies and effort levels, or (iii) whether

 the outcomes of these projects are correlated or independent. Moreover,

 the return from the marginal project (when it is the only successful

 project), R ,                is   also independent of what the portfolio of unsuccessful

 projects is. In the following paragraphs, we make this intuition more

 precise.

       Let        t = 1,      •.., T denote different types        of   projects, where

 is the effort corresponding to a project of type t , and where different

types of projects represent different technologies as well as different

levels of effort spent on any particular technology. The vector
         .1               T                                                       t
M      EM , ..., M I               denotes   a portfolio of projects where M           is the
                                                   t
number of projects of type t • M                       0 • Define r(M) to be the proba-

bility that at least one project in the set M is successful.

       -Now, consider the portfolio which maximizes —Rr(M) —                  M       , where
A        1            T
•      [e ,..., e         ] .      We refer to this portfolio as the 'quasi—efficient

portfolio.' Let M_t = (M1,.S., Mt —                    1,...,.   Mr]   , and r(M) =
rOt) —
          r(M)        .       r(M_t) is thus the probability that the marginal pro-

ject of type t is successful and all other projects in the portfolio

        are unsuccessful. (Note that the last deduction does not depend on

whether the outcomes of projects in the portfolio -M are statistically

correlated or independent.) Analogously, define
       — EM1,..., M3 +             1,....    MT]
                                                   M_t+j
                                                            (M1,..., Mt —    1,...,     M + 1,
       MT]    ,                    r(M÷) — r(M) , and rj(M_) = r(M_t+j) —
                    r3(M)                                                               r(M_t)
       The optimality conditions for the quasi—efficient portfolio are



(15)          t(M_t) ..            at
                                                         12




(16)          Rr(M) ,

(17)          t(M_t) — et                          —
                                       Rrj(M_t)

for       all t for which Mt              1    ,   and for all j .        The above expressions

have obvious meanings. Expression (15) implies that all marginal projects

that are undertaken at least breakeven. Expression (16) implies that it

does not pay to undertake a project not already undertaken. Expression

(17) ensures that each marginal project undertaken maximizes the more—

mental profit. In the analysis below we assume for brevity that there is

a unique quasi—efficient portfolio but, as we shall see, our qualitative

conclusions are not affected by this assumption.

          It is straightforward to establish that: The quasi—efficient port-

folio is identical to the portfolio of a social planner who is constrained

to spend no more than what is spent on the quasi—efficient portfolio. To

see this, let M denote the quasi—efficient portfolio; the correspond-

ing total effort is M* .                  Clearly,       for this level of effort, r(M*) is

the maximum probability of at least one successful project. Therefore, a

social planner, attempting to maximize S2r(M) ,                          but   constrained to

spend no more than                 ,     can do no better than to choose the portfolio

      •     (This result explains why we have referred to M as the quasi—

efficient allocation.) Further, the optimal expenditure of a social

planner would exceed                     if he did not face any constraint on spend-

ing; this is because the social gain from a successful project,

exceeds R .          Thus, the expenditure on the quasi—efficient portfolio is
smaller than what is socially optimal.                                         -




          Next,   consider market allocations,                    [m19..., mJ denotes a
                                              —f                  —fT
portfolio of firm          f   ,   and        m
                                                    —f 1
                                                    [m     . ..., m  ]     denotes the constraints
                                                            13




 on the number of projects of different types that a firm can undertake'3

 That is, ft 2ft or, equivalently, mf                                              .   The corresponding mar-

 ket portfolio, and the constraint on the market portfolio, respectively,

 are in     5          , and     in   =5            .
                                                                  5   m            represents the probability
                                                                 fi
 that at least one of the projects within the set mi is successful, and

 all   projects in the set 5                            are unsuccessful. Therefore, the profit
                                          fi
of firm i can be expressed a: Rs(m, 3 m) —                                             m   •   Our   interest    here
                                                                  fi
is to examine the market portfolios resulting from firms' choices in the

context of Nash equilibria.

       Suppose that, in a Nash market equilibrium, the firm I is under-

taking at least one project of type t •                            Then, the Increment in its
probability of 'success' (that is, in its probability of capturing the

rent R )        from undertaking the marginal project of type t is:

s(m, 5 m)          —
                                  5              • This     expression is the same as the proba—
    fi                          fi
bility that the marginal project is successful, and all other projects

(that is, those in the set                       ) in    , as    well as in the set in
                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                         ) are
                                            fi
unsuccessful.           An earlier definition, therefore, allows us to restate
                                    14
the above incremental probability as



(18)
            t
           r (in
                 —t
                       ) = s(m  i f i f   ) in    ) — s(m             in   )
                                      fi                         fi

Consequently, the increment in the profit of firm i from undertaking the

marginal project of type t is: krt(m_t) —                                      •       It follows then that a
market portfolio a is sustainable only if the breakeven condition


(19)                     — et    •_   0
          Rr(m_)
                                      14



is satisfied for all firms 'which undertake one or more projects of type

t •   The main point to note here is that the breakeven condition for the

sustainability of a market portfolio, (19), is the same as the breakeven

condition for the quasi—efficient portfolIo. (15). Analogous derivations

show that the other two optimality conditions for the quasi—efficient

portfolio. (16) and (17). also characterize the sustainability of a market

portfolio. This is intuitive because, under Bertrand competition, a firm's

decision to undertake or not to undertake a marginal project (of any type)

turns out to be based on the same considerations which are relevant in

determining the quasi—efficient portfolio.

      The above characteriiation of the market portfolio leads to the

following result: If the quasi—efficient portfolio is feasible in the

market, then it is sustainable as a market portfolio. (What we mean here

by feasibility is that there is at least one way to spread the quasi—

efficient portfolio among the firms in the market, without violating the

firm's constraints; that is rn M .)        This   is because if firms' port-

folios are such that the market portfolio is the same as the quasi—

efficient portfolio, then no firm has an incentive to changeits

portfolio.
-
      Consider now two economies which differ in the number of firms as 'well
as in the constraints faced by different firms, but the quasi—efficient

portfolio is feasible in both of them. A corollary of the above result is

that the quasi—efficient portfolio is sustainable in both economies. Thus:

Among the equilibria in the two different economies are at least two (one

in each economy) which entail the same market portfolio of research pro-

jects, provided the quasi—efficient portfolio is feasible •in both

economies.
                                      is

     We would, of course, have liked to prove a stronger invariance result:

 that the set of equilibria in two different economies are .identical. But

 this does not appear to be the case. There may be market equilibria in

which the constraints faced by one or more firms are strIctly binding on

the portfolios they have chosen. As a consequence, if one firm undertakes

a project at an inefficient effort level, then it may lead some other

firms to undertake projects which are also at inefficient effort levels.

This is because, as pointed out earlier, the marginal gains to a firm are

influenced by what is undertaken in the market.

    The stronger result does, however, hold if the relevant difference

among firms is only due to the access they have to different technologies.

To see this, suppose different types of firms have access to different

subsets of the economy—wide set of technologies, but the choices of firms

(in an equilibrium) ire not constrained due to any other reason. That is,

no firm undertakes all of the projects (of a technology to which it has

access) that it could. We refer to such equilibria as 'interior equilib-

ria.' Once again, the sustainability conditions for a market portfolio

(corresponding to an interior equilibrium) are the same as the optimality

conditions for the quasi—efficient portfolio (where the latter portfolio

maximizes Rr(M) —   M   subject to the economy—wide set of technologies).

Thus: All interior equilibria in a market economy entail a market port-

folio which is the same as the quasi—efficient portfolio. Next, consider

two different market economies ( A and A') which have the saie types

of firms (though the number of firma of different types are different).

It follows from the la3t result that: The market portfolio is identical

for all interior equilibria in the two econouiies.15
                                     16



                              4. Conclusions


     The relationship between the market structure and the nature of market

 R+D, and that between the private and social marginal returns from innova-

 tive activity are, in general, complicated. This paper establishes an

 important invariance result in the central case of Bertrand competition:

 the market R+D (that is, the number of research projects undertaken as

well as the intensities of individual projects) is invariant to the number

of firms in the industry. We also show that though the market expenditure

on R+D is efficiently spent (in the sense that the market portfolio of

research projects is socially optimal, given the market expenditure), the

market expenditure is smeller than what is socially desirable.

    In a simplified version of our model, we have established additional

results. We show, for instance, that the intensity of an R+D project in

the market is socially optimal (in particular, the intensity does not

depend on the magnitude of rent that a firm gains from successful innova-

tion), but the market undertakes a smaller number of projects than is

socially optimal. We have also hinted at some policy implications: for

example, the desirability of increasing the number of firms (which yields

larger gains to consumers, smaller gains to firms, and larger social

welfare gains).

    An important ingredient behind a theory of the firm which our analysis

has left out is the economies and diseconomies of scope; that is, there

may be important spillover effects among the research projects undertaken

by a firm. Also, the relationships we have established here between

social and private returns will not in general obtain under other forms of

competition (for example, Cournot). Our analysis suggests, further, the
                                    17




need to compare the outcomes of policies aimed at encouraging price

competition versus other forms of competition (for example, quantity

competition). The determinants of and moans by which the government may

affect a choice in the modes of competition is, however, a question beyond

the scope of this paper.
                                               18




                                         FON0TES

SWe thank two annonymous          referees   for their valuable comments.


1. See Barzel (1968), Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980), Kamian and Swartz

    (1982), Loury       (1979),    and Stiglitz (forthcoming), among others.


2. See footnote 1.


3. See below for precise definitions of quasi—efficiency and of an

    interior equilibrium.


4. Here we abstract from issues concerning the timing and the scale of

    innovations; that is, by spending more resources, one can                alter   the

    date of innovatipn or the magnitude of rent. But the analysis can be

    readily modified to incorporate these aspects.


5. Subscripts e and k denote partial derivatives with respect to

    these variables.


6. As is well known, there may not always exist a symmetric interior Nash

    equilibrium, because of the non—concavity of the relevant functions.

   Also, we are assuming at present that there are no binding constraint

    (such as on credit) which might prevent a firm from undertaking the

    desired set of projects. A more general framework is considered

    later.


7. For simplicity, we are treating k as a continuous variable. If k

    is treated as an integer, then the expression analogous to (4) is:

    R(i —   p)fl   1p    (e + a)     R(1 — p)flp    ,   with   at least one strict

    inequality. This        does   not affect the invariance result derived below.
                                                   19




 8. The        sign    of the right hand side of (9) is obtained as follows. q(k)

       La easily seen to be strictly concave in k •                   Thus        q(k) —   q(k = 0)    <

                  O)k .    Using (1), then, kln(1 — p) + q(k) < 0 ,                     Thus,   (9)

       is negative.


9. The simplest case is that of a cost reducing innovation for a pro-

       duct. Suppose the innovation reduces the (fixed) unit cost of the

      product from c0 to c2 ,                  where    c is the current (competitive)

      price. If only one firm innovates then it sets a monopoly price

      Cl   ,    where
                          c0      c1 > c2 •    The rent to this firm         is
      R        (a1 —                where D is the aggregate demand function. If
                       c2)D(c1)
      more than one firm           innovates   then, due to Bertrand competition, the

      new competitive          price is c2 .      Obviously, then, s2 —                 > 0 .    Also,
                                                                                   S1

      unless the demand is entirely insensitive to the price, the standard

      consumer surplus arguments show that S2 —                      > R .
                                                                S1

10.   See footnote 9.


11. These conclusions, naturally, do not extend to distortivo instruments

      such as investment tax credits. It should also be pointed out that

      certain instruments of policy may not be feasible due to informational

      problems. For example, it may be difficult to monitor the number                            of
      projects widertaken by a firm.


12.   As in some earlier literature (Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980). for

      example], the present treatment of social optimm assumes that the

      revenue required to finance the R+D can              be   raised in a non—distortive

      manner. If only distortive instruments (such as commodity taxes) are

      available for raising revenue then, under some circumstances, the 'wel—
                                        20



    fare consequence of the market allocation may not be significantly

   different from that of the social optimum. See Stiglitz (forthcoming).


13. A firm   might   be facing some other type of constraints; for instance,

   on the total effort that it can spend (credit constraint) or on the

    types   of   technologies available to it. These different formulations,

   however, do not affect our results.


14. Note, once again, that (18) does not depend on whether the outcomes of

   projects within or across portfolios m and           5 m are correlated
                                                       fi
   or independent.


15. If there is a multiplicity of quasi—efficient portfolios then the last

   two results are modified as follows: (i) Every interior equilibrium

    in a market economy entails a portfolio which is the same as a quasi—

   efficient portfolio, and (ii) Consider an interior equilibrium in

   economy A •       If the corresponding market portfolio is feasible in
   economy A' ,        then it is sustainable in economy A'
                                     21




                                REFERENCES


Barzel, Yoram, 1968, Optimal Timing of Innovation, Review of Economic

    Studies 35, 348—355.

Dasgupta, Partha and Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1980, Industrial Structure and

    the Nature of Innovative Activity, Economic Journal 90, 266—293.

amian, Morton I. and Swartz, Nancy L., 1982, Market Structure and

    Innovation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Laury, Glenn C., 1979, Market Structure and Innovation, Quarterly Journal

    of Economics 93, 395—410.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., forthcoming, Theory of Competition, Incentive and

   Risk, in, Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Mathewson, Frank, eds.,, New

   Developments in the Analysis of Market Structure, McMillan, New York.
