                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        IS INDIA'S MANUFACTURING SECTOR MOVING AWAY FROM CITIES?

                                            Ejaz Ghani
                                       Arti Grover Goswami
                                         William R. Kerr

                                       Working Paper 17992
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17992


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2012




We are grateful for helpful suggestions/comments from Mehtab Azam, Martha Chen, Edward Glaeser,
Himanshu, Ravi Kanbur, Vinish Kathuria, Amitabh Kundu, Peter Lanjouw, Om Prakash Mathur, Pratap
Bhanu Mehta, P.C. Mohanan, Rakesh Mohan, Enrico Moretti, Partha Mukhopadhyay, Stephen O’Connell,
Inder Sud, Arvind Virmani, and Hyoung Gun Wang. We are particularly indebted to Henry Jewell
for excellent data work and maps. We thank the World Bank's South Asia Labor Flagship team for
providing the primary datasets used in this paper. Funding for this project was provided by the World
Bank and Multi-Donor Trade Trust Fund. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not
of any institution they may be associated with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Ejaz Ghani, Arti Grover Goswami, and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is India's Manufacturing Sector Moving Away From Cities?
Ejaz Ghani, Arti Grover Goswami, and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 17992
April 2012
JEL No. J61,L10,L60,O10,O14,O17,R11,R12,R13,R14,R23

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the urbanization of the Indian manufacturing sector by combining enterprise
data from formal and informal sectors. We find that plants in the formal sector are moving away from
urban and into rural locations, while the informal sector is moving from rural to urban locations. While
the secular trend for India’s manufacturing urbanization has slowed down, the localized importance
of education and infrastructure have not. Our results suggest that districts with better education and
infrastructure have experienced a faster pace of urbanization, although higher urban-rural cost ratios
cause movement out of urban areas. This process is associated with improvements in the spatial allocation
of plants across urban and rural locations. Spatial location of plants has implications for policy on
investments in education, infrastructure, and the livability of cities. The high share of urbanization
occurring in the informal sector suggests that urbanization policies that contain inclusionary approaches
may be more successful in promoting local development and managing its strains than those focused
only on the formal sector.


Ejaz Ghani                                          William R. Kerr
South Asia PREM                                     Harvard Business School
The World Bank                                      Rock Center 212
Washington D.C.                                     Soldiers Field
Eghani@worldbank.org                                Boston, MA 02163
                                                    and NBER
Arti Grover Goswami                                 wkerr@hbs.edu
World Bank
Washington, DC
agrover1@worldbank.org
Introduction

        One of the biggest challenges in development is urbanization.1 Within developing
countries, nearly two billion people are expected to move from rural regions into cities in the
next two decades (World Bank, 2011a). The pace at which this will happen will be much faster
than what the world has experienced before. For instance, China’s and India’s economic
transformation and urbanization is happening at 100 times the scale of the first country in the
world to urbanize—the United Kingdom—and in just one-tenth of the time. Most countries have
only one chance to get it right, and there is no “one size fits all” recipe.

       McKinsey Global Institute (2010) contends that cities in India have the potential to
generate 70% of the country’s new jobs and GDP over the next 20 years, a process that could
drive a four-fold increase in per capita incomes. While promising and greatly desired, such
urbanization imposes unprecedented managerial and policy challenges. However, in spite of the
potential for urbanization in the country, research on spatial location and concentration of
economic activity in cities is still at an early stage.

       Given the great challenges ahead, we look backward to describe how the urbanization
process has proceeded (or not) for the Indian manufacturing sector over the 1989-2005 period.
We have two goals. The first goal is to trace the trends and depth of India’s manufacturing
urbanization across states and industries. This description can yield important insights for
researchers and policy makers going forward.

        Our second goal is to examine whether localized education and infrastructure are linked
to urbanization and more efficient spatial allocation of India’s industries and plants since 1989.
As we discuss below, there are many explanations for urbanization drivers in India, too many in
fact for one study to accurately assess. We seek to quantify whether and how these local
conditions, along with other factors like wage costs, promoted or discouraged the urbanization
process.

        Our study combines data from the Annual Survey of Industries for the organized (formal)
sector and from the National Sample Survey for the unorganized (informal) sector. On the whole,
India’s manufacturing sector became more urbanized, with the share of workers in urban areas
rising from 33% of employees in 1989 to 41% in 2005 (Figure 1a). Urbanization growth was
most dramatic from 1989 to 1994, but slowed down from 1994 to 2000. The urbanized
employment share was basically flat from 2000 to 2005. This pattern of increasing urbanization

        1
          Key references in this area include Duranton and Puga (2001), Glaeser et al. (1992, 1995), Henderson
(2005, 2010), Henderson and Venables (2009), Henderson and Wang (2005, 2007), World Bank (2009, 2011a),
Moretti (2004), Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007), and McKinsey (2010).

                                                            2
was also present when looking just at manufacturing plant counts, but the opposite trend is
observed for manufacturing output. The latter has increasingly moved towards rural areas. We
investigate several features of these trends in detail.

        Our first investigation focuses on the relative movements of the organized and
unorganized sectors. The differences, illustrated in Figures 1b and 1c, are striking. Throughout
the 1989-2005 period, the organized sector moved from urban to rural locations, with its urban
employment share declining from 69% in 1989 to 57% in 2005. 2 On the other hand, urban
employment share for the unorganized sector increased from 25% to 37%. Since the unorganized
sector accounts for about 80% of employment in India’s manufacturing sector, the total
urbanization level increased for the employment measure. Likewise, the organized sector
accounts for over 80% of India’s output, so the aggregate output series instead becomes more
rural. Section 2 examines the differences across states and industries within India. Simply put,
the urbanization process and trends are very heterogeneous at the micro level.

        To set the stage for our study of localized changes, Section 3 decomposes India’s overall
urbanization changes into shifts in urbanization within districts versus changes in the spatial
allocation of activity across districts. Using two decomposition techniques, we find that both
within- and between-districts components are important and tend to work in the same direction
for the urbanization of the unorganized sector and the de-urbanization of the organized sector.
We show that the within-district component explains about three-quarters of the overall
adjustments evident. Following this observation, we focus the rest of our paper on studying this
within-district adjustment process.

         To assess the factors contributing to these within-district shifts, we consider a series of
regressions that quantify district traits that are associated with increased urbanization during this
period. Per our second objective, we find substantial evidence that links greater urbanization to
districts with more educated workforces and better infrastructure levels. Further, we find
evidence that higher costs, or sharper differences in urban-rural cost levels, decrease the rate of
urbanization. These effects are most pronounced in the unorganized sector and before 2000. We
also use interaction regressions to show that industries with high capital and land intensity are
more likely to locate in rural areas in districts with strong education and infrastructure levels.

        By itself, there is no guarantee that the increased urbanization associated with education
and infrastructure is optimal. Our final exercise is to construct simple spatial mismatch indices to
test whether these urbanization trends are associated with more efficient allocation of industry

        2
           This movement of organized-sector plants and employment from urban to rural areas may explain some
of the findings of Cali and Menon (2009) regarding reduction in rural poverty. See also Foster and Rosenzweig
(2003, 2004), Kundu (2002), and World Bank (2011b).

                                                           3
for districts between urban and rural settings. The spatial mismatch index compares the observed
industry distribution of district employment across urban and rural locations to a counterfactual
where plants or employment in the district are allocated (in some sense optimally) to urban and
rural locations according to national propensities by industry to be in urban settings. As
elaborated further below, higher mismatch values for a district indicate that plants that would
have been expected to be in urban areas are in rural areas, and vice versa. Figures 2a-2b plot the
trends in our spatial mismatch indices. Encouragingly, there has been an aggregate decline in
spatial mismatch since 1989, primarily driven by improved allocation of the unorganized sector.
Additional regressions identify that the urbanization shifts associated with better education and
infrastructure have improved the spatial allocation of industry.

       The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses our data and the broad patterns of
urbanization for India’s manufacturing sector. We also discuss in depth how urbanization is
defined in India and issues for longitudinal consistency. Section 3 presents the decomposition of
urbanization changes across districts. Section 4 considers the district-level traits associated with
urbanization changes; this section also presents our interaction analysis of industry traits.
Section 5 analyses spatial mismatch in industry allocations. The final section concludes and
discusses implications from this work.

Section 2: Surveys of Indian Manufacturing--Organized and Unorganized Sectors

        This paper employs cross-sectional establishment-level surveys of manufacturing
enterprises carried out by the Government of India. Our work studies the manufacturing data
from surveys conducted in fiscal years 1989, 1994, 2000, and 2005. In all four cases, the survey
was undertaken over two fiscal years (e.g., the 1994 survey was conducted during 1994-1995),
but we will only refer to the initial year for simplicity. This section describes some key features
of these data for our study.3

        It is important to first define and characterize the distinction between the organized and
unorganized sectors in the Indian economy. These distinctions in the Indian context relate to
establishment size. In manufacturing, the organized sector includes establishments with more
than 10 workers if the establishment uses electricity. If the establishment does not use electricity,
the threshold is 20 workers or more. These establishments are required to register under the India
Factories Act of 1948. The unorganized manufacturing sector is, by default, composed of
establishments which fall outside the scope of the Factories Act.



         3
           For additional detail on the manufacturing survey data, we refer the reader to Nataraj (2011), Kathuria et
al. (2010), Fernandes and Pakes (2008), Hasan and Jandoc (2010), and Ghani et al. (2011b). Dehejia and Panagariya
(2010) provide a detailed overview of the services data and its important characteristics.
                                                              4
        The organized manufacturing sector is surveyed by the Central Statistical Organization
every year through the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), while unorganized manufacturing
establishments are separately surveyed by the National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) at
approximately five-year intervals. Establishments are surveyed with state and four-digit National
Industry Classification (NIC) stratification. We use the provided sample weights to construct
population-level estimates of total establishments and employment at the district and two-digit
NIC level. We focus mostly on district and industry variation in our empirical analyses. Districts
are administrative subdivisions of Indian states or union territories that are more appropriate
spatial units for understanding the urbanization process.

         These surveys identify for each establishment whether it is in an urban or rural location.
Our study considers changes in urbanization over time, and thus the stability and comparability
of this survey question over time are very important. To begin with, the statutory definition of an
urban setting during our period of study is:

        (a) All statutory places with a municipality, corporation, cantonment board or notified
            town area committee, etc., or

        (b) A place satisfying the following three criteria simultaneously:
               i)       A minimum population of 5,000;
               ii)      At least 75% of male working population engaged in non-agricultural
                        pursuits; and
               iii)     A density of population of at least 400 per sq. km. (1,000 per sq. mile).

        This definition has been mostly stable since the 1961 Census. One set of adjustments
with the 1971 and 1991 Censuses focused on including ‘outgrowths’ (e.g., railway colonies,
university campuses, industrial townships, and residential and commercial complexes) that lay
beyond strict town or village boundaries within a combined urban agglomeration concept for the
purposes of classifications. A second set of adjustments enacted since the 1981 Census focused
on the definition of the workforce and agricultural sector.4

        Among our datasets, the 1989 survey follows the 1981 Census classification, the 1994
and 2000 surveys follow the 1991 classification, and the 2005 survey follows the 2001 Census
classifications. Our primary focus is on urbanization changes since 1994, and the formal

        4
          India’s Ministry of Urban Development Report (2011), Kundu (2006, 2009, 2011a and 2011b), Himanshu
(2007), Mohan and Dasgupta (2005), Planning Commission (2008), Nelson and Uchida (2008), Bhagat (2011),
Ghani (2010), Sivaramakrishna and Kundu (2005) provide greater details. Desmet et al. (2011) examine spatial
development of India. Chrandrasekhar (2011) and Mohanan (2008) examine the trends in workers commuting
between rural-urban areas.

                                                         5
definition of an urban area has not changed during this period. As we discuss further below,
some sub-units of districts move from being rural areas to being urban areas with the 2001
Census compared to the 1991 Census when the sub-units begin to satisfy the urbanization
criteria. This change can influence our measured urbanization levels, and we discuss below the
robustness of our documented patterns to these reclassifications.5

         It is important to note that India uses a more demanding set of criteria than most countries
to define what is ‘urban’ (e.g., Bhagat, 2005; United Nations, 2001). For instance, substantial
parts of U.S. metropolitan areas like Atlanta or Phoenix would be classified as rural in Indian
statistical analyses because their population densities fall below 1000 persons per square mile.
Thus, our measured urbanization for India will be lower than many international standards. This
consideration does not affect, however, the longitudinal consistency of our trends for India.

        We primarily measure urbanization of manufacturing activity for a district through the
share of manufacturing employment contained in establishments classified to be in an urban
location. This choice most closely corresponds to the prior literature and the central concerns of
Indian policy makers. We also consider urbanization of plant and outputs for comparison. Table
1 provides basic descriptive statistics on districts, further discussed below, that begin with the
average of these measures for 2001.

        Table 2 lists the 17 major states from our sample and their urban shares, combining the
organized and unorganized sectors. Figure 3a provides a graphical depiction. These states are a
subset of India’s 35 states/union territories. Exclusions were due to three potential factors: 1) the
state was not sampled across all of our surveys, 2) the small sample size for the state raised data
quality concerns, or 3) persistent conflict and political turmoil existed in the region. We discuss
below in greater detail the explicit criteria for a district’s inclusion in the regression sample.
These exclusions are minor in terms of economic activity.

        The most urbanized states in terms of manufacturing employment are Delhi and
Chandigarh at over 90% in 2000, with Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra, and Punjab also above
60%. These states account roughly for 35% of urban employment and 47% of urban output for
India in 2000, with these shares fairly stable over time. The larger states of Bihar, Orissa, Uttar
Pradesh, and West Bengal have below-average urbanization rates. Bihar, Orissa, and Himachal
Pradesh have urbanization rates of less than 20% for manufacturing employment.




        5
          Kundu (2011a) suggests that reclassification between the 1991 and 2001 Censuses is a minor factor.
Bhagat and Mohanty (2009) calculate that reclassifications account for about 12% of the total change in
urbanization during the between the 1991 and 2001 Censuses.

                                                            6
        Tables 3a and 3b provide urban shares by two-digit NIC industry, again combining the
organized and unorganized sectors. Office, accounting and computing machinery; Publishing,
printing and media; and Medical, precision and optical instruments, watches are the most
urbanized industries with greater than 80% of employment in urban plants. The least urbanized
industries in 2000 are Wood and wood products; straw and plating articles; Other non-metallic
mineral products; Tobacco products; and Food products and beverages, with under 30% of
industry employment in an urban area. Major increases in urbanization of employment are
evident for the Textiles; Leather tanning; luggage, handbags, footwear; Machinery and
equipment, n.e.c.; and Office, accounting and computing machinery industries.

       Table 3b presents some industry traits: 1) Labor intensity, defined as the total wage bill
over value of shipments; 2) Capital intensity, defined as the total fixed capital value over value
of shipments; 3) Materials intensity, defined as total raw materials costs over value of shipments;
and 4) Land intensity, defined as the closing net land value over value of shipments. There is a
0.20 correlation between labor intensity and 2000 urbanization of employment across industries.
There is a negative correlation of -0.05 for capital intensity. There is no correlation evident for
the materials or land intensity.

        The last part of Table 3b documents the observed ratio of these industry traits between
urban and rural establishments for an industry. That is, the urban-rural labor intensity ratio
measures the labor intensity of urban establishments to the labor intensity of rural establishments
for each industry. The other ratios are similarly defined. Plants in urban areas generally employ
more labor, similar levels of materials, and less capital and land than rural plants do. There is a
0.43 correlation between the urban-rural intensity difference and the urbanization rate for labor
usage; the correlation to materials usage differentials is likewise high at 0.44. Capital intensity
differentials are less correlated at 0.26, and land usage differentials are not correlated with
overall urbanization levels.6

        These descriptive tables refine one of the key trends noted in the introduction. Overall,
manufacturing activity is becoming more urbanized as measured by employment and plants,
while it is becoming less urbanized as measured by output. These trends are mainly explained by
the share of organized and unorganized sectors for each metric and the differences in the
urbanization trends for these sectors. The details in Tables 2-3b also show that urbanization
increases are concentrated, rather than broad-based, even for employment. Only 8 of the 17
states and 7 of the 22 industries exhibit an increase in urbanization from 1994-2005. The

        6
           These metrics are developed using data for the year 2000 from the organized sector. We use the year 2000
to match our district traits taken from the 2001 Census described in Section 4. Several of these variables are not
consistently available for unorganized sector. These correlations and our analyses below are robust to winsorizing
these industry traits at their 5%/95% values.

                                                             7
remainder of the paper will analyze the traits of districts that have successfully urbanized over
this period.7

Section 3: Decomposition of India’s Urban Share Changes

         Table 4 presents our first district-level analysis. Following the productivity growth
decomposition work of Baily et al. (1992), Griliches and Regev (1995), and Foster et al. (2001),
we decompose the observed changes in the aggregate urbanization from 1994 to 2005 into the
“within” changes in urban rates for districts (i.e., average growth in urbanization for districts
weighted by initial employment shares) versus “between” changes across districts in activity
(i.e., relocation of activity from districts with low initial urbanization rates to districts with high
initial urbanization rates).

        Let U denote the urbanization rate of India (in manufacturing employment) and Ud be the
urbanization rate of district d. Sd is district d’s share of Indian manufacturing in employment. By
definition, U = ∑d=1,...,D Sd∙Ud, where d indexes districts. Following Foster et al. (2001), our
primary decomposition of changes from 1994 to 2005 takes the form:

                 ΔU94-05=∑d Sd,94∙ΔUd,94-05+∑d (Ud,94–U94)∙ΔSd,94-05+∑d ΔUd,94-05∙ΔSd,94-05,

where the first term ∑d Sd,94∙ΔUd,94-05 is the within component that represents changes in urban
shares within districts with districts weighted by initial employment shares for the Indian
economy in 1994. Positive values indicate that districts tended to have increasing urban shares
when weighted by initial employment.

         The second term ∑d (Ud,94–U94)∙ΔSd,94-05 measures the between component which
represents changes in employment shares across districts interacted with the initial deviation of
districts from the national urban share. Positive values indicate employment tended to be
reallocated towards districts that had higher initial urban shares.

        The third term ∑d ΔUd,94-05∙ΔSd,94-05 is the covariance component that represents the
interaction of changes in urban shares for districts across the period with changes in employment
shares for districts across the period. Positive values indicate that fast-growing districts also
experienced rising urban shares.


        7
            Ghani et al. (2011c) study the increase since 1994 in female-owned businesses in India. These
urbanization trends and the special role of the unorganized sector are not due to this increased role for women, as
female-owned business shares track upwards in urban and rural settings together. See Dinkelman (2011) for the role
of rural electricity in female employment ratios in South Africa.

                                                             8
        These three components by definition sum to the total change in urban share in aggregate
as well for each of the sectors in India. As we do not consider entry or exit of districts across
years, our decomposition requires a balanced panel in Table 4. The urban shares in Panel A of
Table 4 closely mirror the earlier trends. Table 4 provides the decomposition of urban shares in
plants, employment, and output in aggregate manufacturing (columns 1-3), as well as across the
organized and unorganized sectors.

       Over the 1994 to 2005 period, the within- and between-district components generally
operate in the same direction in Panel B. For the organized sector, both components serve to
reduce the urbanization rate, while for the unorganized sector both components serve to increase
the urbanization rate of plants and employment. The aggregate metrics follow the combination of
these two in accordance to their relative shares. In almost every case, and especially for the
organized sector, the within-district component is larger than the between-district component.

         Interestingly, the covariance term is almost always negative for all three metrics of
urbanization, suggesting that rapidly growing districts experienced relative declines in
urbanization levels. Equivalently, this pattern suggests that urbanization growth was highest in
districts that were growing their manufacturing base less than the national average. While the
within- and between-district components tended to act in different directions for the organized
and unorganized sectors, this covariance component was more consistent.

       These patterns are confirmed in Panel C using the technique of Griliches and Regev
(1995). This second technique and its merits/liabilities are outlined in greater detail by Foster et
al. (2001). Most importantly, the technique lacks a covariance component, with this feature
instead absorbed into both the within- and between-district components. Weighing against this
disadvantage, the Griliches and Regev (1995) technique is more robust to measurement error.
Using this technique provides very similar conclusions to those in Panel B. The appendix also
shows that we obtain similar patterns when examining 1994-2000 and 2000-2005 separately.

         These exercises set the stage for our regression analyses. The estimation techniques used
in the remainder of the paper will thus mostly focus on changes in urbanization levels within
district cells. These decompositions suggest that within-district changes capture the majority of
the urbanization changes during this period. The Griliches and Regev (1995) technique provides
the most straightforward calculation in this regard: the within-district component represents on
average 83% of the total change observed. Using the Baily et al. (1992) technique and ignoring
the covariance component, the within-district component accounts for about 75% of the total
observed changes in absolute terms. Ongoing research is systematically evaluating the between-
district component and the role of major transportation linkages (e.g., Lall et al. 2010).



                                                     9
Section 4: Empirical Analysis of Urban Movements in Economic Activity

        This section analyzes the factors promoting or discouraging changes in urbanization from
1994 to 2005 in districts, with particular emphasis on education and infrastructure. We conduct
our estimations at the district-industry level. In all regressions, we control for industry fixed
effects to absorb changes in urbanization that are simply following national changes in
urbanization levels for given industries. In other words, we will be considering factors that
promote or discourage urbanization for a district beyond the change that would be expected
based upon its industry composition. We first describe the district sample and the district traits
that we consider, and then we present the estimation results.

District Sample

        Our sample focuses on district-industry cells. Our core sample contains 262 districts out
of a total district count for India of 630. This sizeable decline in district count is due to the steps
taken to prepare a consistent estimation setting, with the primary decline being due to lack of
information in the 2001 Census on the district’s traits (e.g., education, infrastructure). This
Census information was only collected for about 400 districts.

        In addition to our state-level restrictions noted earlier, our regression sample also requires
that the district-industry be observed in all of our manufacturing surveys so that we can observe
changes over time. Our explicit criteria with respect to district size are that the district has a
population of at least one million in the 2001 Census and has 50 or more establishments
sampled. Given our desire to study urbanization changes, we also exclude districts that had fewer
than five urban plants or five rural plants. Finally, we exclude plants that have negative value
add, which accounts for 6%-7% of employment.

        These restrictions are not very significant in terms of economic activity. The resulting
panel accounts for over 80% of plants, employment, and output in the manufacturing sector
throughout the period of study. As important, the aggregate trends for these districts mirror that
of India as a whole shown in the figures.

District Traits

        Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on our districts. Beyond the starting urbanization
level for a district-industry, our two most important explanatory variables are the education
levels of the local labor force and the quality of local physical infrastructure. These two factors
are consistently linked to India’s regional development.8 Education levels can play a central role
in urbanization. Many local policy makers stress developing the human capital of their

       8
           For example, Lall (2007), Amin and Mattoo (2008), Mukim (2011), and Ghani et al. (2011a).
                                                           10
workforces, and India is no different (Amin and Mattoo, 2008). We measure the general
education level of the district’s labor force from the 2001 Census as the percentage of adults with
a graduate (post-secondary) degree. Our results below are robust to alternatively defining a
district’s education as the percentage of adults with higher secondary education.

        Our second trait is the physical infrastructure level of the district. Functioning urban areas
depend critically on their underlying infrastructure. Infrastructure likewise connects urban and
rural parts of a district. The government of India is providing substantial financial resources for
infrastructure investment (Ministry of Urban Development, 2008). The 2001 Census provides
figures on the number of villages in a district which have paved roads, electric power access,
telecommunications access, and access to safe drinking water. We calculate the percentage of
villages that have infrastructure access within a district and sum across the four measures to
create a continuous composite metric of infrastructure which ranges from zero (no infrastructure
access in any village) to four (full access to all four infrastructure components in all villages).9

        We empirically assess the role of education and infrastructure for development without
strong theoretical priors on their role, only noting their frequent emphasis by policy makers. We
believe this agnostic approach is important as anecdotal accounts of India suggest multiple
relationships are at play. For example, a natural baseline for education is that agglomeration
economies or urbanization premiums are higher for skilled workers and industries. Observers
note, however, that skilled workers may want to live outside of Indian cities to the extent that the
amenities are lower in Indian cities than in the surrounding areas. Likewise, better infrastructure
typically allows strong urbanization levels. However, cities in India often experience some of the
largest infrastructure failures, and production of own electricity for organized sector firms is high
in both settings. Thus better infrastructure capacity may allow establishments to move to rural
locations.

         Cost factors also play a critical role in location choice decisions for firms. We would
ideally like to model several factors like rental prices, utilities prices, wage rates, and so on, but
data on cost factors are very limited. We primarily focus on the wage rate of the district—
examining both its average rate and the urban-rural ratio for a district. For a given district, we
anticipate that both aspects can push firms to locate in rural areas. Lower average wages in a
district may also attract plants searching for lower labor costs from neighboring districts.

       District wage rates are calculated using firms in the organized sector in 2000. We focus
on the organized sector as many firms in the unorganized sector do not report wages (and may

         9
           In six districts (major cities) which were not further subdivided into separate geographic units, these
indicators were not reported in the Census data. In these cases we assign the infrastructure access components as
100%. Our results are fully robust to excluding these major cities from the analysis sample.

                                                              11
not pay workers). To guard against outliers in the wage rates or ratios, we use the wage rate of
the median employee in the district (and its urban and rural areas). We do not directly observe
the full wage distribution, but instead calculate the metrics through plant averages and their
relative employment levels. Wages are expressed in 2005 U.S. dollars. When discussing our
results, we describe in greater detail the extent to which this factor may model other costs
beyond labor factors for districts. We jointly model the average wage and urban-rural wage ratio
variables as their correlation is small at 0.12.

        Our remaining variables are covariates to contrast with the above factors. We first
consider district land area. This metric is calculated by the World Bank using Geographic
Information System (GIS) data files of district boundaries in India. Conditional on the other
variables specified, we would not anticipate district scale playing an important role. Our focus is
instead on the urban build-up of a district. Following Schneider et al. (2009), we consider the
share of land in the district that is built-up for urban use. This fraction is calculated using 2001
MODIS satellite information at 500 meter spatial resolution. Built-up area, focusing on building
structures, is a good proxy for urban area. Greater built-up area in a district can allow for
stronger urbanization growth and is our best proxy for local land markets. A second proxy,
termed land use intensity, is calculated as total land value of organized sector plants per unit of
shipments.

       For our core estimations, we do not model the overall level or change in population
urbanization for a district, as this may be endogenous/follow the industry movements we
consider. Robustness checks do consider, however, the change in population urbanization from
the 1991 Census to the 2001 Census as a control. Thus, these regressions will be considering the
movement of industry over-and-above that of the underlying population base. Section 2 noted
that some sub-areas of districts change their urbanization status in 2001 and that this could affect
our urbanization measures even if a plant’s location remained fixed. Including this change
provides a quantitative check on whether this is important as the redefinition would apply to the
sub-area’s population, too.

Basic District Analyses

       Our base estimation for district d and industry i is specified as:

       ΔUrban Shared,i = γ∙Initial Urban Shared,i + β∙Xd + ηi + ηs + εd,i.

        The dependent variable, ΔUrban Shared,i, is the change in urban share in employment
across a time period. Initial Urban Shared,i is the initial urban share in employment at the start of
the period. This initial condition is important as we consider shares that are bounded. Thus,
highly urbanized areas like Delhi have limited potential to further urbanize.

                                                     12
         The vector Xd includes the district-level covariates defined above, and ηi is a vector of
industry fixed effects. The industry fixed effects capture broad differences in production
techniques and changes in urbanization levels that are specific to the period analyzed. We further
include in some models a vector of state fixed effects ηs that capture heterogeneity in institutions,
policies, and regulations across states. Including state fixed effects in our regression is non-
trivial, as many education and infrastructure investments may be implemented at the state level.
Nevertheless, we place greater confidence in results that are not sensitive to including the state
fixed effects.

        Table 5 investigates the correlates of India’s urbanization of employment at the district-
industry level from 1994 to 2005. Estimations report standard errors clustered by district, have
1700 observations, and weight observations by the interaction of log district size and log industry
size. The first row of Table 5 indicates strong conditional convergence, where higher initial
urban shares for district-industries experience slower urbanization growth. Figure 4 provides a
graphical depiction of unconditional convergence in urban shares. While this convergence is
partly mechanical due to a share-based formulation, this property generally holds in other
specification formats.

         Columns 1 and 2 find that districts with better infrastructure and more educated
workforces in 2000 experienced higher urbanization growth from 1994 to 2005. These patterns
are evident with and without state fixed effects. In Columns 3 and 4, we include the two wage
measures to model cost conditions in districts. Both measures are always negative and have t-
statistics of at least 1.5. Without state fixed effects, the urban-rural differential tends to come
through strongest, while the overall wage factor tends to come through strongest when state fixed
effects are included. Either way, it is very clear that cost factors are important.

        Columns 5 and 6 add district land area and change in urban population to the preceding
specification. The latter is added as a robustness check to the issue of reclassification of rural
areas highlighted in Section 2. These traits are not statistically important. The urban population
change covariate has a large point estimate that disappears when including state fixed effects,
perhaps indicative of growth differences across states. More important is the stability of the main
regressors in these specifications.

       Column 7 and 8 next control for the share of a district’s land area that is built-up for
urban use.10 Our reported results use indicator variables to allow for non-linear effects in the


         10
            Some observers conclude that the combined effect of multiple layers of central, state, and municipal
regulations is producing an artificial urban land shortage in India. If true, this shortage results in urban land prices
that are abnormally high in relation to India’s household income and alters the spatial structure of cities (Bertaud
and Malpezzi 2001, 2003). Reductions in centrally located floor space and the potential to recycle land can push
                                                                13
built-up area shares. Higher build-up, especially in the top quartile, is strongly associated with
increased urbanization; we find similar effects with other specification formats like linear shares.
A plausible interpretation of these coefficients is that land availability is a strong governor of the
urbanization process. While this interpretation would match anecdotal accounts of the constraints
that land availability and real estate prices have for the location choices of manufacturing firms
in India, this measure is indirect (e.g., compared to real estate price data) and thus caution in
interpretation is warranted.

         One effect of adding this control is that the coefficient on the infrastructure index
declines somewhat and becomes insignificant when including state fixed effects. This is not too
surprising given that the built-up metric in part captures higher infrastructure levels. Adding this
variable, however, does not affect the results on our wage variables. We take from this set of
results that cost factors that slow manufacturing urbanization in India are definitely present in the
labor market and most likely present in the real estate market, too. The evidence further suggests
that absolute cost levels and localized urban-rural cost ratios play a role in India’s urbanization.

        Finally, Columns 9 and 10 alternatively model land use intensity by organized sector
firms to measure the tightness of local land markets. Inclusion of this control does not affect our
core variables. Interestingly, the coefficient is positive, suggesting greater urbanization is
associated with tighter land markets. This counter-intuitive result is one factor suggesting caution
regarding land availability variables.

         Table 6a considers the robustness of these results over different time periods. The first
two columns repeat the specifications in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 5 for 1994-2005. Columns 3
and 4 then consider 1994-2000, while Columns 5 and 6 consider 2000-2005. This disaggregation
is interesting for several reasons. First, Figures 1a-1c showed the substantial flattening of the
urbanization changes for 2000-2005 compared to 1994-2000, and it is interesting to identify what
correlates with this slowdown. Second, as a basic robustness check on potential reclassification
issues, the 1994-2000 change builds on a perfectly consistent urban-rural coding framework.
Third, one might worry that measuring district traits in 2000-2001 is endogenous to changes
occurring from 1994-2000, and so looking at the 2000-2005 period helps somewhat as these
traits are then pre-determined (but still leaves open questions of omitted variable biases).

        Most of the coefficients are similar to the 1994-2000 period in Columns 3 and 4,
compared to the 1994-2005 baseline. The education variable loses some of its economic strength
but remains very important statistically. The infrastructure measure loses some of its statistical
strength but remains overall quite important, too. The most important difference is on the cost

urban development toward the periphery. This results in longer commuting trips and more challenging provision of
urban infrastructure than would have been the case if land supply had been unconstrained.

                                                           14
side. Average wages have a positive and significant effect on urbanization when only industry
fixed effects are controlled for. With state fixed effects, the average wage does not exhibit a
strong relationship. By contrast, the urban-rural wage ratio is very important in explaining
urbanization even after controlling for both industry and state fixed effects.

       In Columns 5 and 6, we again find broad comparability for the 2000-2005 period. The
education variable is especially strong, and the infrastructure variable is equivalent to the 1994-
2000 estimations. The differences thus suggest that while the secular trend for India’s
manufacturing urbanization has slowed, the localized importance of education and infrastructure
has not. Among our cost measures, the average wage is negative and statistically significant. In
contrast to the earlier period, the urban-rural wage differential is negative but not especially
powerful in this second period.

        These adjustments over time, especially in light of the aggregate trends, are interesting
but we can only conjecture about the difference with respect to our cost variables. One plausible
and intriguing possibility relates the series of economic reforms that India undertook in the 1980s
and early 1990s. These reforms substantially impacted the manufacturing sector (e.g.
Balakrishnan et al., 2000; Goldar and Kumari, 2003; Hashim et al., 2009; Srivastava et al. 2001).
Prior to the reforms, many restrictions existed on where plants could locate. The early changes
may have reflected a pent-up sorting to move to cheaper locations within districts. As this
process worked itself out, general district wage rates became more important. We hope that
future work can clarify the story behind this pattern.

       Finally, Columns 7 and 8 of Table 6a present the correlates of changes in urban
employment shares from 1989 to 2005. We focus primarily on the 1994-2005 period to
maximize data quality and comparability; we also lose a quarter of the sample with the longer
horizon. Nevertheless, the basic patterns we show are evident across the full time period, too.

       Table 6b next compares our results on change in urban employment share from 1994 to
2005 with that observed in plants and output. Columns 3 and 4 show similar patterns when
looking at the urbanization of plants, while the results with output urbanization are much weaker
across the board. Only the growth in urbanization in districts with more educated workforces
remains. Columns 7-10 show that these differences directly link to the differences between the
organized and unorganized sectors.11 The unorganized sector, which accounts for most of plants
and employment, mirrors the aggregate trends documented in Table 5. By contrast, changes in
urban location decisions for the organized sector, which dominates output-based metrics, does
not appear to be systematically linked to these metrics.

        11
           Observation counts decline in Columns 7-10 as we impose the minimum plant count restrictions for each
sector independently when separating their effects.
                                                          15
        We find similar patterns—both for the aggregate employment measure and for
differences across sectors—in a variety of robustness checks. To mention a few, our core
estimations weight observations by an interaction of log district size and log industry size. This
weighting strategy focuses attention on generally more important observations while avoiding
biases that could be introduced with using actual placements. Nevertheless, we find similar
results when weighting by actual employment or dropping the weights. We have also confirmed
robustness of the education and infrastructure covariates to including other traits of districts like
distance to a large city, household banking, demographic dividend, and import penetration.
These do not affect our core patterns.

         Our infrastructure index is a composite of four sub-components. Unreported regressions
test introducing these four components separately. These estimations emphasize the importance
of paved roads and electric power access. We are cautious about these disaggregated results,
however, as the paved roads metric dominates in regressions that include state fixed effects,
while the access to electric power metric dominates when state fixed effects are excluded. Given
this sensitivity, we can only conclude that the aggregate infrastructure level is important. In a
second test, we compared the combined sum of the infrastructure components to the minimum
infrastructure level that exists for a district across these components (with and without the
sanitation measure). The combined measure outperforms the minimum measure, suggesting that
the overall package of infrastructure in a district matters more than the minimum level.

District-Industry Interaction Analyses

        Results in Table 4-6b focus on district-level traits that explain where urbanization is
occurring. These estimations control for industry differences but do not otherwise exploit
industry-level variation. Table 7 evaluates the effect of interactions of industry traits with district
characteristics on urbanization in plants, employment, and output across the three periods.
Interacting industry and district traits can help us identify the characteristics of industries that are
most sensitive to district features. Estimations control for district and industry fixed effects, so
that the identification only comes through this interaction.

         Panel A studies the effect of interaction of industry land intensity with education and
infrastructure, while Panel B uses industry capital intensity instead. We focus on these two
variables given their earlier emphasis. For education interactions, we tend to find little action.
The point estimates are all negative, suggesting that land and capital intensive industries may be
urbanizing less in districts with more educated workforces, but the results are not precisely
estimated. On the other hand, we pick up more variation with the infrastructure interaction.
Especially across the 1994-2000 period, land and capital intensive industries urbanized less in
districts with better infrastructure. These results quantify a bit more precisely the correlations
discussed earlier.

                                                      16
        Besides capital and land intensity (and financial intensity which closely followed),
unreported tests do not find other industry traits to be significant in interactions—either with the
education and infrastructure measures, or with our cost-side wage factors. This limited response,
suggesting that most of the district traits noted earlier acted similarly across industries, is
surprising. Moreover, it raises some questions as to whether the urbanization changes improved
the allocation of industry across India’s urban and rural regions. We turn to this in the next
section.

Section 5: Urbanization and Spatial Mismatch

        This section considers whether the above urbanization changes linked to better education
and infrastructure also connected with a better allocation of industries between urban and rural
settings for a district. Our depiction of spatial mismatch for establishments is simple and based
upon the extent to which industries are nationally urbanized, as depicted in Table 3a. Industries
like Office, accounting and computing machinery are predominantly in urban areas, while
industries like Other non-metallic mineral products are predominantly rural.

       We approach our spatial mismatch metrics as follows: Define the national urban share for
an industry as National Urban%i. Taking a given district d, we identify the industry distribution
of employment in the district that is in urban locations, combining both organized and
unorganized sectors. Labeling this as Actual Urban Emp%d,i, our first calculation is

                Actual Urban Allocationd = ∑i Actual Urban Emp%d,i∙National Urban%i,

This provides a weighted average of the extent to which industries located in urban positions in
district d are typically urbanized nationally.

         By itself, Actual Urban Allocationd is difficult to interpret, as districts have varying
industrial compositions and urbanization levels. Our next step is then to create a comparison
point for the district using the observed industry distribution of employment across both urban
and rural settings. Conceptually, we ask what would have been the maximum allocation value
possible if we assigned the urban employments to the industries in district d that are the most
urbanized nationally. Imagine district d had an urban employment of 1000 workers. We would
first take all employment from the Office, accounting and computing machinery industry and
assign them to urban settings in the counterfactual. If this industry’s employment fell short of
1000 workers, we would then assign workers in the industry that is the second most urbanized
nationally, and so on, until we have the industry distribution for the 1000 workers that should
have been in the urban locations had industries sorted according to national trends. From this, we
calculate


                                                    17
             Ideal Urban Allocationd = ∑i Counterfactual Urban Emp%d,i∙National Urban%i.

By definition, this ideal metric will always equal or exceed the actual metric. Our primary
measure of spatial mismatch is

 Spatial Mismatchd = (Ideal Urban Allocationd – Actual Urban Allocationd ) / Ideal Allocationd

The index simply captures the degree to which the allocation of industries in a district does not
conform to what we would have expected based upon national urbanization patterns.

        Table 8 examines the spatial mismatch adjustments in a regression format very similar to
Table 5. We control for the level of initial spatial mismatch for a district, always finding that
areas with large initial spatial mismatch tend to decrease the mismatch over time. We also
control for the change in urbanization evident during this period. We include this second control
because spatial mismatch will be mechanically lower for more urbanized districts (at an extreme,
no mismatch is possible if the district is 100% urbanized). The exact format of this control, or
even its inclusion, is not important to our findings, but we include it to be conservative. It shows
that our spatial mismatch metric declines as urbanization increases.

        Among our focal variables, districts with more educated workforces show stronger
declines in spatial mismatch. This is true in both sub-periods, and it is especially strong in the
unorganized sector. In the organized sector, the education variable loses statistical significance
once state fixed effects are controlled for. On the other hand, while the coefficient on the
infrastructure measure is generally negative, it only displays a powerful connection during the
1994-2000 period. The cost factors do not appear important, beyond potentially what is captured
by the base urban change variable.

        These results are robust to several adjustments in metric design. We find similar results
when normalizing by the average of Ideal Urban Allocationd and Actual Urban Allocationd and
when considering the raw difference without normalization. We likewise find similar results
when using measures of plant allocation without considering employment weights. Finally, we
obtain similar results when not weighting the extent of misallocation by the national urbanization
percentages for an industry but instead treating misallocation as a binary outcome.

        This work is both encouraging and suggestive of future research. On one hand, while our
metric design is admittedly simple, Table 8’s results suggest that the urbanization process in
India linked to education, and perhaps infrastructure, is improving spatial industry allocation.
Unreported estimations find these effects are most pronounced at medium and high levels of
urbanization. On the other hand, changes in urban spatial allocations due to cost factors are not
associated with improvements. This latter result could be due to limitations in our cost measures,
                                                    18
or it could suggest that the cost-based sorting does not help in this regard, which would be
surprising. We hope that future research can clarify these matters.

         We want to note that there are limits to our approach in the Indian context that should be
considered in future work. Anecdotal accounts of India’s business suggest that some firms which
should typically be in urban areas instead choose to locate in rural areas due to a combination of
cheaper land prices, lower pollution restrictions and greater ability to generate own electricity,
lower regulations, weaker congestion, and so on. Our approach does not allow for these types of
realities, and it would be interesting in future work to attempt to model the ideal spatial
allocation if these realities are considered.

Section 6: Conclusions and Implications

       In this paper, we closely examine the movement of economic activity in Indian
manufacturing between urban and rural areas. We find that while the organized sector is
becoming less urbanized, the unorganized sector is becoming more urbanized. This process has
been most closely linked to greater urbanization changes in districts with high education levels; a
second role is often evident for public infrastructure as well. On the whole, these urbanization
changes have modestly improved the urban-rural allocation of industries within India’s districts.

        We want to note several key factors that our paper does not address. We have discussed
at various points the limits on cost side factors. Especially with respect to real estate costs or
limitations on land availability, our measures are quite crude. We hope that better data emerge in
the future to refine these estimates. Related, anecdotal accounts for India suggest that urban-rural
differences in regulation, severe congestion,12 and limits on urban property titles also direct firm
location. While we have started to collect these data on the congestion side, this paper has not
been able to model these factors systematically yet. Thus, to some extent, our wage variables
may be capturing these issues as currently constructed.

        Observers have frequently noted the relatively slow pace of India’s urbanization (even
recognizing the differences in urban definitions); moreover, the movement of organized
manufacturing sector plants to rural areas is surprising, given the relative youth of India’s
manufacturing sector. Perceived wisdom is that this sluggishness is in part due to the limits
imposed by India’s poor infrastructure and weaker education levels, among other factors like
strict building regulations (Sridhar 2010). Our work supports these claims. Continued investment

         12
            Ministry of Urban Development (2008) finds that the problem of congestion does not come from the
number of vehicles in India but their concentration in a few selected cities, particularly in metropolitan cities. For
instance, 32% of all vehicles are in metropolitan cities alone, and these cities constitute about 11% of the country’s
total urban population.

                                                              19
in these factors, beyond their direct effects for Indian businesses, may also provide beneficial
effects from an urbanization and spatial allocation perspective.13

        Our findings suggest that policies that take an inclusionary approach to the urban
informal economy may be more successful in promoting local development and managing its
strains than those focused only on the formal sector. It is very important for Indian policy makers
to recognize that much of the urbanization that is occurring is in the unorganized sector.
Moreover, education and infrastructure investments, regardless of original motivation, are
primarily operating through the unorganized sector. Going forward, adequate provision of
infrastructure is necessary for the informal sector to develop. The more Indian cities recognize
this influx and design appropriate policies and investments to support it, the more effective the
policy interventions will be. Examples of inclusionary policies are mechanisms to ensure that
urban informal livelihoods are integrated into urban plans, land allocation, and zoning
regulations; that the urban informal workforce gains access to markets and to basic urban
infrastructure services; and that organizations of informal workers participate in government
procurement schemes and policy-making processes.

        It is something of a paradox that India, among the most densely populated countries in
the world, is also among the least urbanized. An important aspect for India’s continued growth is
better and deeper urbanization over the next two decades than it has achieved over the past two
decades.



References
Amin, Mohammad and Aaditya Mattoo, “Human Capital and the Changing Structure of the
      Indian Economy,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4576 (2008).
Baily, Martin, Charles Hulten and David Campbell, “Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing
       Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics (1992): 187-249.
Balakrishnan, Pulapre, K. Pushpangadan and M. Suresh Babu, “Trade Liberalisation and
       Productivity Growth in Manufacturing: Evidence from Firm-level Panel Data,” Economic
       and Political Weekly, 35(41), (2000): 3679-3682.



        13
            Evaluating the impact of infrastructure investment on Russia’s peripheral regions, Brown et al. (2008)
find that the firm-level industrial data for 1989 and 2004 highlights a ‘death of distance.’ Particularly, regional
infrastructure is found to be a critical driver of productivity for new and for privately-owned firms. Further,
simulations of their model show that the benefits of infrastructure improvements are highest in regions where
economic activity is already concentrated.

                                                            20
Bertaud, Alain and Stephen Malpezzi, “Measuring the Costs and Benefits of Urban Land Use
       Regulation: A Simple Model with an Application to Malaysia,” Journal of Housing
       Economics, 10(3), (2001): 393-418.
Bertaud, Alain and Stephen Malpezzi, “The Spatial Distribution of Population in 48 World
       Cities: Implications for Economies in Transition,” World Bank Working Paper (2003).
Bhagat, Ram, “Emerging Pattern of Urbanisation in India,” Economic and Political Weekly,
       46(34), (2011): 10-12.
Bhagat, Ram and Soumya Mohanty, “Emerging Pattern of Urbanization and the Contribution of
       Migration in Urban Growth in India,” Asian Population Studies, 5(1), (2009): 5-20.
Bhagat, Ram, “Rural-Urban Classification and Municipal Governance in India,” Singapore
       Journal of Tropical Geography, 26(1), (2005): 61-73.
Brown, David, Marianne Fay, John Felkner, Somik Lall and Hyoung Gun Wang, “The Death of
      Distance? Economic Implications of Infrastructure Improvement in Russia,” EIB Papers,
      13(2), (2008): 126-147.
Cali, Massimiliano and Carlo Menon, “Does Urbanisation Affect Rural (Chronic) Poverty?
       Evidence from Indian Districts,” SERC Working Paper 14 (2009).
Chandrasekhar, S., “Workers Commuting between the Rural and Urban: Estimates from NSSO
      Data,” Economic and Political Weekly, 46(46), (2011): 22-25.
Dehejia, Rajeev and Arvind Panagariya, “Services Growth in India: A Look Inside the Black
       Box,” Columbia Program on Indian Economic Policies Working Paper 2010-4 (2010).
Desmet, Klaus, Ejaz Ghani, Stephen O’Connell and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “The Spatial
      Development of India,” Working Paper (2011).
Dinkelman, Taryn, “The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence from
      South Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), (2011): 3078-3108.
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation, and the
      Life Cycle of Products,” American Economic Review, 91(5), (2001): 1454-1477.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Zvi Eckstein, “Cities and Growth: Theory and Evidence from France and
       Japan,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 27(4-5), (1997): 443-474.
Fernandes, Ana, and Ariel Pakes, “Factor Utilization in Indian Manufacturing: A Look at the
      World Bank Investment Climate Survey Data,” NBER Working Paper 14178 (2008).
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, “Agricultural Productivity Growth, Rural Economic
        Diversity, and Economic Reforms: India, 1970-2000,” D. Gale Johnson Memorial
        Conference Paper (2003).
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, “Agricultural Development, Industrialization and Rural
        Inequality,” Working Paper (2004).
                                              21
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and C.J. Krizan, “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from
        Microeconomic Evidence,” in Dean, Edward, Michael Harper and Charles Hulten (eds.)
        New Developments in Productivity Analysis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
        2001): 303-372.
Ghani, Ejaz, “Do Cities Matter?” End Poverty in South Asia Blog, World Bank (2010).
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr and Stephen O'Connell, “Promoting Entrepreneurship, Growth, and
       Job Creation,” in Reshaping Tomorrow (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2011a).
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr and Stephen O'Connell, “Spatial Determinants of Entrepreneurship in
       India,” NBER Working Paper 17514 (2011b).
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr and Stephen O'Connell. “Local Industrial Structures and Female
       Entrepreneurship in India,” NBER Working Paper 17596 (2011c).
Griliches, Zvi and Haim Regev, “Productivity and Firm Turnover in Israeli Industry: 1979-
       1988,” Journal of Econometrics, 65, (1995): 175-203.
Glaeser, Edward, Jose Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer, “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section
       of Cities,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 36(1), (1995): 117-143.
Glaeser, Edward, Hedi Kallal, Jose Scheinkman and Andrei. Shleifer, “Growth in Cities,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 100(6), (1992): 1126-1152.
Goldar, Bishwanath and Anita Kumari, “Import Liberalization and Productivity Growth in
       Indian Manufacturing Industries in the 1990s,” Developing Economies, 41(4), (2003):
       436-60.
Hasan, Rana and Karl Jandoc, “The Distribution of Firm Size in India: What Can Survey Data
       Tell Us?” ADB Economics Working Paper 213 (2010).
Hashim, Danish, Ajay Kumar and Arvind Virmani, “Impact of Major Liberalization on
      Productivity: The J-Curve Hypothesis,” DEA Ministry of Finance Working Paper 5/2009,
      (2009).
Henderson, Vernon, “Cities and Development,” Journal of Regional Science, 50, (2010): 515-
      540.
Henderson, Vernon, “Urbanization and Growth,” in Aghion, Philippe and Steve Durlauf (eds.)
      Handbook of Economic Growth (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2005): 1543-1591.
Henderson, Vernon and Anthony Venables, “Dynamics of City Formation,” Review of Economic
      Dynamics, 12(2), (2009): 233-254.
Henderson, Vernon and Hyoung Gun Wang, “Urbanization and City Growth: The Role of
      Institutions,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 37(3), (2007): 283-313.
Henderson, Vernon and Hyoung Gun Wang, “Aspects of Rural-Urban Transformation of
      Countries,” Journal of Economic Geography, 5(1), (2005): 23-42.
                                              22
Himanshu, “Recent Trends in Poverty and Inequality: Some Preliminary Results,” Economic and
      Political Weekly, 42(6), (2007): 497-508.
Kathuria, Vinish, Seethamma Natarajan, Rajesh Raj and Kunal Sen, “Organized versus
       Unorganized Manufacturing Performance in India in the Post-Reform Period,” MPRA
       Working Paper 20317 (2010).
Kundu, Amitabh, “Method in Madness: Urban Data from 2011 Census,” Economic and Political
      Weekly, 46(40), (2011a): 13-16.
Kundu, Amitabh, “Politics and Economics of Urban Growth,” Economic and Political Weekly,
      42(20), (2011b): 10-12.
Kundu, Amitabh, “Exclusionary Urbanization in Asia: A Macro Overview,” Economic and
      Political Weekly, 44(48), (2009): 48-59.
Kundu, Amitabh, “Trends and Pattern of Urbanization and Their Economic Implications,” India
      Infrastructure Report (2006).
Kundu, Amitabh, Basanta Pradhan and A. Surmanium, “Dichotomy of Continuum: Analysis of
      Impact of Urban Centres on Their Periphery,” Economic and Political Weekly, 37(50),
      (2002): 5039-5046.
Lall, Somik, “Infrastructure and Regional Growth, Growth Dynamics and Policy Relevance for
        India,” The Annals of Regional Science, 41(3), (2007): 581-599.
Lall, Somik, Hyoung Wang, and Uwe Deichmann, “Infrastructure and City Competitiveness in
        India,” United Nations University Working Paper 2010/22 (2010).
McKinsey Global Institute, India’s Urban Awakening: Building New Cities, Sustaining
     Economic Growth (2010).
Ministry of Urban Development “Report on India Urban Infrastructure and Services,” High
       Powered Expert Committee for Estimating the Investment Requirements for Urban
       Infrastructure Services, Government of India (2011).
Ministry of Urban Development, “Study on Traffic and Transportation Policies and Strategies in
       Urban Areas in India,” Government of India Report (2008).
Mohan, Rakesh and Shubhagato Dasgupta, “The 21st Century: Asia Becomes Urban,” Economic
      and Political Weekly, 40(3), (2005): 213-223.
Mohanan, P.C., “Differentials in the Rural-Urban Movement of Workers,” The Journal of
     Income and Wealth, 30(1), (2008): 59-67.
Moretti, Enrico, “Human Capital Externalities in Cities,” in Henderson, J.V. and J.F. Thisse
       (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Volume 4 (Elsevier, 2004): 2243-
       2291.


                                                 23
Mukim, Megha, “Industry and the Urge to Cluster: A Study of the Informal Sector in India,”
     SERC Discussion Papers 0072, (2011).
Nataraj, Shanthi, “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity: Evidence from India’s
       Formal and Informal Manufacturing Sectors,” Journal of International Economics,
       forthcoming (2011).
Nelson, Andrew and Hirotsugu Uchida, “Agglomeration Index: Towards A New Measure of
       Urban Concentration,” World Bank WDR Paper 2009 (2008).
Planning Commission, “Eleventh Five Year Plan 2007-2012,” Government of India (2008).
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban and Mark Wright, “Establishment Size Dynamics in the Aggregate
       Economy,” American Economic Review, 97(5), (2007): 1639-1666.
Schneider A., M. Friedl and D. Potere, “A New Map of Global Urban Extent from MODIS
       Satellite Data,” Environmental Research Letters, 4(4), (2009).
Sivaramakrishna, K.C., A. Kundu and B.N. Singh, Handbook of Urbanization (New Delhi:
       Oxford University Press, 2005).
Sridhar, Kala Seetharam, “Impact of Land Use Regulations: Evidence from India's Cities,”
       Urban Studies, 47(7), (2010): 1541-1569.
Srivastava, Vivek, Pooja Gupta and Arindam Datta, “The Impact of India’s Economic Reforms
        on Industrial Productivity, Efficiency and Competitiveness: A Panel Study of Indian
        Companies, 1980-97,” National Council of Applied Economic Research Report (2001).
United Nations, World Urbanisation Prospects: The 1999 Revision (New York: United Nations
       Population Division, 2001).
World Bank, “Reshaping Economic Geography,” World Development Report (2009).
World Bank, “World Bank Urban and Local Government Strategy”, Urban Development Unit
      (2011a).
World Bank, “Perspectives on Poverty in India: Stylized Facts from Survey Data,” Economic
      Policy and Poverty Sector (2011b).




                                                24
                          Fig. 1a: India's urban shares, 1989-2005
               0.70


               0.60                                                                              Output


               0.50

                                                                                              Employment
Urban shares




               0.40


               0.30
                                                                                       Plants

               0.20


               0.10   Notes: Figure plots urban shares of plants, employment
                      and output for each year using survey data of plants from
                      organized and unorganized sectors.

               0.00
                              1989                        1994                         2000                2005


                        Fig. 1b: Urban shares in organized sector
               0.80


               0.70
                                                                                                Organized Output
               0.60        Organized Employment

                                                                                  Organized Plants
               0.50
Urban shares




               0.40


               0.30


               0.20


               0.10


               0.00
                              1989                        1994                         2000                2005


                                                                                  25
                      Fig. 1c: Urban shares in unorganized sector
               0.80


               0.70                                    Unorganized Output


               0.60


               0.50
Urban shares




               0.40                              Unorganized Employment


               0.30
                                                        Unorganized Plants
               0.20


               0.10


               0.00
                         1989         1994            2000            2005




                                                 26
                                      Fig. 2a: India's spatial mismatch, 1989-2005
                               0.35


                               0.30
Urban spatial mismatch index




                               0.25                                                                  Plants


                               0.20

                                                                                                     Employment
                               0.15


                               0.10


                               0.05   Notes: Figure plots spatial mismatch in plants
                                      and employment each year using the Ideal
                                      Metrics for both the organized and unorganized
                                      sectors combined together.

                               0.00
                                              1989                      1994                  2000                2005


                                             Fig. 2b: Spatial mismatch by sectors
                               0.35


                               0.30
Urban spatial mismatch index




                                                                                  Unorganized Plants
                               0.25

                                                        Unorganized Employment
                               0.20


                               0.15

                                                                                       Organized Employment
                               0.10


                               0.05                                                     Organized Plants


                               0.00
                                              1989                      1994                  2000                2005


                                                                                         27
Fig. 3a: India's manufacturing urbanization by district




  Fig. 3b: India's urbanization mismatch by district




                            28
29
                      Table 1: Descriptive statistics for districts
                                                                                 Mean        Standard
                                                                                             deviation

Urban manufacturing share for plants, 2000                                            0.30         0.23
Urban manufacturing share for employment, 2000                                        0.36         0.24
Urban manufacturing share for output, 2000                                            0.46         0.26
Share of population with a graduate education                                         0.06         0.03
Index of infrastructure quality for district (0-4 scale)                              2.90         0.72
  Share of villages in district with paved roads                                      0.61         0.26
  Share of villages in district with electric power access                            0.82         0.24
  Share of villages in district with telecommunications access                        0.50         0.27
  Share of villages in district with sanitation and safe water                        0.97         0.09
Manufacturing wage rate                                                              3,505        2,696
Urban-rural wage ratio                                                                1.49         1.73
District land area (km-sq)                                                           9,581        8,486
Urban build-up share                                                                  0.02         0.09
Urban population share, 2001                                                          0.23         0.18
Urban population share, 1991                                                          0.22         0.17
Notes: Indian descriptive statistics taken from Annual Survey of Industries, National Sample Statistics,
and Population Census. District land area comes from Geographic Information System (GIS) data files
of district boundaries in India.
                                     Table 2: State-level urbanization rates for India's manufacturing sector
                                         Total establishment                      Urbanization rate                Urbanization rate                Urbanization rate
                                                counts                              establishments                   employment                         output
State                              1994          2000         2005             1994      2000     2005          1994    2000       2005          1994    2000       2005
Andhra Pradesh                   748,360     1,469,307 1,437,720               0.25      0.27      0.30         0.40    0.38       0.38          0.56    0.46       0.43
Bihar                           1,053,839 1,250,688 1,307,078                  0.11      0.13      0.12         0.18    0.17       0.16          0.56    0.52       0.56
Chandigarh                         3,906         6,046        1,534            0.93      0.89      0.54         0.95    0.94       0.85          0.96    0.97       0.98
Delhi                            131,842       230,598       99,712            0.81      0.95      0.96         0.87    0.97       0.97          0.98    0.97       0.94
Gujarat                          551,254       545,122      647,845            0.63      0.55      0.54         0.70    0.62       0.61          0.68    0.58       0.56
Haryana                           90,898       189,548      227,445            0.41      0.49      0.49         0.62    0.66       0.65          0.71    0.74       0.67
Himachal Pradesh                  80,096        94,708      102,682            0.10      0.08      0.07         0.16    0.17       0.18          0.29    0.30       0.35
Karnataka                        526,997     1,032,334      942,142            0.25      0.34      0.31         0.36    0.42       0.41          0.70    0.64       0.66
Kerala                           237,391       481,157      572,320            0.18      0.18      0.23         0.27    0.23       0.27          0.41    0.39       0.41
Madhya Pradesh                   463,195       957,108     1,019,022           0.25      0.28      0.32         0.41    0.36       0.38          0.68    0.55       0.60
Maharashtra                      629,357     1,223,468 1,116,648               0.50      0.46      0.51         0.66    0.61       0.64          0.71    0.68       0.60
Orissa                          1,078,820      955,560      831,287            0.04      0.06      0.10         0.07    0.09       0.13          0.37    0.43       0.38
Punjab                           151,520       331,683      290,789            0.54      0.46      0.50         0.72    0.65       0.64          0.80    0.71       0.68
Rajasthan                        343,140       599,027      608,407            0.32      0.37      0.36         0.44    0.46       0.51          0.64    0.58       0.65
Tamil Nadu                       943,138     1,463,466 1,465,806               0.42      0.45      0.42         0.49    0.51       0.48          0.57    0.52       0.47
Uttar Pradesh                   1,894,046 2,302,322 2,257,163                  0.24      0.29      0.29         0.30    0.37       0.39          0.53    0.59       0.59
West Bengal                     1,628,708 2,733,376 2,694,214                  0.17      0.23      0.20         0.30    0.30       0.29          0.69    0.63       0.63
Totals and wtd averages         10,928,081 16,517,785 16,307,628               0.26       0.30       0.30       0.40       0.41        0.41       0.64       0.59       0.56
Unweighted averages              620,971    933,266    918,930                 0.36       0.38       0.37       0.47       0.47        0.47       0.64       0.60       0.60
Notes: Indian descriptive statistics taken from Annual Survey of Industries and National Sample Statistics. Totals and weighted averages at the bottom of the table are for the
full manufacturing sector, including states and industries not in the final sample. Urbanization rate in establishments is measured as the share of establishments in urban
areas. Urbanization rates for employment and output are similarly defined.
                               Table 3a: Industry-level urbanization rates for India's manufacturing sector
                                                                    Total establishment             Urbanization rate          Urbanization rate
                                                                           counts                     establishments             employment
                                                              1994          2000         2005    1994      2000     2005    1994    2000       2005
15   Food products and beverages                           2,391,234 2,962,970 2,572,043         0.19      0.22      0.20   0.24    0.27       0.25
16   Tobacco products                                      1,004,510 2,062,543 2,753,644         0.20      0.22      0.17   0.32    0.28       0.24
17   Textiles                                              1,971,821 2,239,348 2,312,117         0.24      0.31      0.32   0.37    0.42       0.45
18   Wearing apparel; dressing and dyeing of fur             90,952     2,785,199 3,158,538      0.67      0.40      0.40   0.85    0.52       0.52
19   Leather tanning; luggage, handbags, footwear           190,786       171,759      144,328   0.44      0.49      0.74   0.63    0.68       0.80
20   Wood and wood products; straw and plating articles    1,957,120 2,720,752 1,895,690         0.15      0.13      0.11   0.20    0.16       0.15
21   Paper and paper products                                63,172        90,214      165,652   0.59      0.70      0.38   0.60    0.66       0.47
22   Publishing, printing and media reproduction            105,479       144,293      116,764   0.76      0.84      0.86   0.84    0.88       0.87
23   Coke, refined petroleum and nuclear fuel                 5,075         7,429        6,435   0.48      0.27      0.20   0.48    0.43       0.34
24   Chemicals and chemical products                         98,048       216,410      401,055   0.44      0.51      0.29   0.60    0.53       0.42
25   Rubber and plastic products                             74,771        95,352       74,108   0.76      0.65      0.67   0.81    0.69       0.61
26   Other non-metallic mineral products                    686,560       784,551      606,049   0.15      0.16      0.17   0.22    0.22       0.22
27   Basic metals                                            38,086        43,127       39,461   0.80      0.65      0.62   0.74    0.70       0.57
28   Fabricated metal products, except machinery            422,420       640,256      616,937   0.44      0.43      0.41   0.64    0.61       0.60
29   Machinery and equipment, n.e.c.                        319,227       171,138      178,220   0.33      0.53      0.61   0.63    0.73       0.76
30   Office, accounting and computing machinery                498           303          931    0.95      0.94      0.91   0.77    0.88       0.86
31   Electrical machinery and apparatus, n.e.c.              29,495        67,896      112,788   0.67      0.66      0.54   0.83    0.79       0.66
32   Radio, television, and comm. equipment                   7,355         7,589        5,863   0.75      0.84      0.71   0.76    0.79       0.70
33   Medical, precision and optical instruments, watches     11,715         9,190       10,283   0.96      0.82      0.85   0.82    0.80       0.77
34   Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers               6,924        24,186       16,664   0.65      0.84      0.63   0.84    0.77       0.60
35   Other transport equipment                               22,955        17,495       26,002   0.76      0.70      0.78   0.82    0.77       0.76
36   Furniture, manufacturing n.e.c.                       1,429,878 1,255,784 1,094,058         0.38      0.54      0.54   0.47    0.60       0.62
Totals and wtd averages                                    10,928,081 16,517,785 16,307,628      0.26     0.30      0.30    0.40     0.41     0.41
Unweighted averages                                         496,731    750,808    741,256        0.52     0.53      0.50    0.60     0.59     0.55
Notes: See Table 2.
                                    Table 3b: Industry-level urbanization rates for India's manufacturing sector, continued
                                                                     Urbanization rate                     Industry traits in 2000                 Urban-rural ratio in 2000
                                                                         output                     Labor    Capital Materials Land         Labor    Capital Materials       Land
                                                                  1994    2000      2005          intensity intensity intensity intensity intensity intensity intensity intensity
15   Food products and beverages                                  0.48    0.45       0.45           0.040     0.239       0.808    0.045    0.884     0.606       1.024      0.603
16   Tobacco products                                             0.72    0.62       0.60           0.084     0.112       0.515    0.027    1.903     1.227       0.826      1.198
17   Textiles                                                     0.60    0.53       0.49           0.067     0.475       0.736    0.084    2.090     0.777       0.921      1.119
18   Wearing apparel; dressing and dyeing of fur                  0.96    0.81       0.80           0.063     0.219       0.602    0.045    0.606     0.319       0.919      0.405
19   Leather tanning; luggage, handbags, footwear                 0.70    0.72       0.78           0.047     0.179       0.773    0.044    1.487     1.460       0.987      1.343
20   Wood and wood products; straw and plating articles           0.55    0.45       0.39           0.063     0.369       0.759    0.051    0.987     0.460       0.969      0.539
21   Paper and paper products                                     0.52    0.48       0.42           0.058     0.659       0.730    0.087    1.335     0.657       0.969      0.701
22   Publishing, printing and media reproduction                  0.93    0.86       0.84           0.078     0.441       0.591    0.068    2.168     0.289       1.069      0.178
23   Coke, refined petroleum and nuclear fuel                     0.67    0.60       0.47           0.052     0.378       0.796    0.037    1.296     1.018       0.963      0.755
24   Chemicals and chemical products                              0.66    0.57       0.53           0.052     0.528       0.670    0.064    1.392     0.849       1.003      0.866
25   Rubber and plastic products                                  0.71    0.53       0.48           0.048     0.469       0.712    0.064    1.716     0.816       1.034      1.005
26   Other non-metallic mineral products                          0.40    0.36       0.35           0.066     0.931       0.619    0.119    1.468     0.690       1.055      0.691
27   Basic metals                                                 0.65    0.60       0.51           0.046     0.410       0.809    0.058    1.529     0.810       1.006      0.850
28   Fabricated metal products, except machinery                  0.85    0.69       0.69           0.076     0.300       0.717    0.041    1.741     0.681       0.925      0.704
29   Machinery and equipment, n.e.c.                              0.83    0.72       0.72           0.096     0.314       0.654    0.065    1.447     0.642       1.003      0.602
30   Office, accounting and computing machinery                   0.71    0.84       0.76           0.035     0.403       0.755    0.034    1.830     3.293       1.255      0.988
31   Electrical machinery and apparatus, n.e.c.                   0.84    0.88       0.66           0.096     0.348       0.704    0.067    1.966     0.823       0.974      0.918
32   Radio, television, and comm. equipment                       0.61    0.67       0.60           0.065     0.412       0.718    0.049    1.650     0.676       1.084      0.876
33   Medical, precision and optical instruments, watches          0.73    0.72       0.76           0.110     0.350       0.591    0.074    1.460     0.873       1.349      1.000
34   Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                   0.83    0.65       0.53           0.075     0.594       0.680    0.079    1.532     0.905       0.945      0.553
35   Other transport equipment                                    0.65    0.62       0.55           0.072     0.291       0.759    0.065    1.952     0.816       0.962      0.944
36   Furniture, manufacturing n.e.c.                              0.78    0.77       0.83           0.055     0.189       0.730    0.039    0.989     0.552       1.017      0.607
Totals and wtd averages                                            0.64       0.59      0.56
Unweighted averages                                                0.70       0.64      0.60        0.07        0.39        0.70        0.06         1.52        0.87        1.01         0.79
Notes: See Table 2. Land intensity includes land and buildings. Urban-rural ratio provides ratio of mean values for urban plants in the industry divided by mean values for rural plants in the
industry.
                                        Table 4: Decompositions of urban share changes, 1994-2005
                                                     Total Activity                             Organized Sector                        Unorganized Sector
                                              Plants   Employ.      Output               Plants    Employ.       Output            Plants   Employ.      Output
                                                (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)
A. Sector change in urbanization level using balanced panel
 Urban share start                      0.247       0.376                  0.615          0.688         0.667         0.620        0.239          0.302         0.565
 Urban share ending                     0.289       0.395                  0.528          0.595         0.567         0.514        0.279          0.347         0.589
 Urban share change                     0.042       0.019                 -0.087         -0.093        -0.100        -0.106        0.041          0.045         0.024
B. Decomposition: Bailey et al. (1992)
 Within-district component                     0.045         0.022        -0.074         -0.095        -0.086        -0.091         0.047         0.057         0.010
 Between-district component                    0.030         0.029        -0.001         -0.014        -0.009        -0.001         0.024         0.014        -0.016
 Covariance term                              -0.033        -0.032        -0.011          0.015        -0.005        -0.014        -0.030        -0.025         0.030
 Total                                         0.042         0.019        -0.087         -0.093        -0.100        -0.106         0.041         0.045         0.024
C. Decomposition: Griliches and Rejev (1995)
 Within-district component             0.029                 0.006        -0.080         -0.087        -0.089        -0.098        0.032          0.044         0.025
 Between-district component            0.013                 0.013        -0.007         -0.006        -0.012        -0.008        0.009          0.001        -0.001
 Total                                 0.042                 0.019        -0.087         -0.093        -0.100        -0.106        0.041          0.045         0.024
Notes: Table decomposes changes in urban shares. Column headers indicate metrics and time periods. Panel A presents the urbanization change using a balanced
panel of districts employed in the decomposition. Decomposition technique follows Foster et al. (2001), Baily et al. (1992), and Griliches and Regev (1995). For the
Bailey et al. (1992) technique, the within component represents changes in urban shares within districts with districts weighted by initial employment shares for the
Indian economy. Positive values indicate that districts tended to have increasing urban shares when weighted by initial employment. The between component
represents changes in employment shares across districts interacted with the initial deviation of districts from the national urban share. Positive values indicate that
employment tended to be reallocated towards districts that had higher initial urban shares. The covariance component term represents the interaction of changes in
urban shares for districts across the period with changes in employment shares for districts across the period. Positive values indicate that fast-growing districts also
experienced rising urban shares. The three components by definition sum to the total change in urban share for India, with some minor deviations due to panel
composition changes. Appendix Tables 1a and 1b present the decompositions for the 1994-2000 and 2000-2005 sub-periods, respectively.
                               Table 5: Estimations for 1994-2005 urbanization changes in manufacturing sector
                                                                     DV: Change in urbanization share for total district-industry employment
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)
Initial urban share                     -0.693+++ -0.743+++ -0.689+++ -0.739+++ -0.694+++ -0.741+++ -0.711+++ -0.754+++ -0.692+++ -0.741+++
                                          (0.031)   (0.029)   (0.030)   (0.029)   (0.030)   (0.029)   (0.029)   (0.029)   (0.030)   (0.029)
Education level                          0.055+++      0.059+++      0.056+++      0.062+++      0.057+++       0.060+++      0.044+++      0.041+++      0.057+++      0.059+++
                                          (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.010)       (0.012)
Infrastructure level index               0.030+++       0.042++       0.027++       0.039++       0.026++        0.036+        0.020+         0.019         0.022+        0.036+
                                          (0.011)       (0.019)       (0.011)       (0.019)       (0.011)        (0.019)       (0.011)       (0.019)        (0.012)       (0.020)
Log average wage                                                       -0.020       -0.031++        -0.019      -0.031++        -0.023      -0.035++       -0.026+       -0.040++
                                                                      (0.015)        (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.016)        (0.016)
Urban/rural wage ratio                                                -0.021+         -0.015       -0.020+        -0.016       -0.021+        -0.015       -0.019+         -0.014
                                                                      (0.011)        (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.010)
Log total district land area                                                                        0.007         -0.013        0.017         0.002          0.009         -0.012
                                                                                                   (0.014)       (0.016)       (0.014)       (0.017)        (0.014)       (0.016)
Change in urban population                                                                          0.235         -0.019        0.194         0.067          0.238         -0.016
                                                                                                   (0.219)       (0.203)       (0.186)       (0.189)        (0.212)       (0.199)
Urban build-up [50th,75th]                                                                                                      0.033        0.046++
                                                                                                                               (0.024)       (0.022)
Urban build-up [75th,100th]                                                                                                   0.082+++      0.100+++
                                                                                                                               (0.027)       (0.028)
Log land use intensity                                                                                                                                       0.017        0.019+
                                                                                                                                                            (0.011)       (0.011)
Industry fixed effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
State fixed effects                         No            Yes           No             Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes
Number of observations                     1700          1700          1700           1700          1700          1700          1700          1700           1700          1700
Adjusted R-squared                         0.353         0.381         0.357          0.385         0.358         0.385         0.364         0.391          0.359         0.386
Notes: Estimations consider changes in district-industry employment shares in urban areas for 1994-2005. Positive values indicate an increase across the period in the urban
employment share of the district-industry. Explanatory variables are calculated from the 2001 Census or the 2000 manufacturing surveys as indicated in the text. Change in
urban population share is calculated as the change in urban population from the 1991 Census to the 2001 Census. Estimations report standard errors clustered by district,
include state and industry fixed effects as indicated, have 1700 observations, and weight observations by the interaction of log district size and log industry size. + significant
at 10% level; ++ significant at 5% level; +++ significant at 1% level.
                               Table 6a: Extensions to Table 5 with alternative time periods
                                                DV: Change in urbanization share for total district-industry employment
                                             Base               1994-2000                  2000-2005               1989-2005
                                          estimation              period                     period                  period
                                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
Initial urban share                 -0.694+++ -0.741+++ -0.681+++ -0.728+++ -0.644+++ -0.695+++ -0.801+++ -0.869+++
                                      (0.030)   (0.029)   (0.028)   (0.026)   (0.028)   (0.028)   (0.034)   (0.033)
Education level                      0.057+++   0.060+++    0.042+++    0.034+++    0.061+++    0.067+++    0.070+++    0.073+++
                                      (0.010)    (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.015)
Infrastructure level index           0.026++     0.036+     0.029+++      0.032     0.025++       0.030     0.033+++      0.024
                                     (0.011)     (0.019)     (0.009)     (0.020)    (0.011)      (0.019)     (0.012)     (0.023)
Log average wage                       -0.019   -0.031++     0.025+       0.011      -0.027+    -0.035++      -0.018     -0.039+
                                      (0.014)    (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.019)     (0.020)
Urban/rural wage ratio                -0.020+     -0.016   -0.023+++ -0.019++         -0.008      -0.005    -0.021++      -0.015
                                      (0.011)    (0.010)     (0.009)  (0.008)        (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Log total district land area           0.007      -0.013      0.007       -0.027      0.011       -0.007      0.002     -0.039++
                                      (0.014)    (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.019)     (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.018)
Change in urban population             0.235      -0.019      -0.080      -0.283     0.367+       0.097     0.624++       0.317
                                      (0.219)    (0.203)     (0.200)     (0.215)     (0.200)     (0.183)    (0.309)      (0.289)
Industry fixed effects                 Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
State fixed effects                    No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes
Observations                          1700        1700        1700        1700        1700        1700        1276        1276
Adjusted R-squared                    0.358       0.385       0.369       0.400       0.313       0.337       0.430       0.462
Notes: See Table 5.
                               Table 6b: Extensions to Table 5 with alternative metrics and by sector
                                                           DV: Change in urbanization share for total district-industry
                                        Base                 Plant                 Output                    Organized            Unorganized
                                     estimation           urbanization          urbanization                   sector               sector
                                   (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)
Initial urban share            -0.694+++ -0.741+++ -0.727+++ -0.774+++ -0.632+++ -0.669+++ -0.479+++ -0.490+++ -0.791+++ -0.852+++
                                 (0.030)   (0.029)   (0.031)   (0.029)   (0.028)   (0.027)   (0.045)   (0.043)   (0.036)   (0.034)
Education level                 0.057+++   0.060+++   0.065+++   0.070+++     0.039+++     0.034++       0.004       0.001    0.074+++   0.082+++
                                 (0.010)    (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.013)      (0.014)     (0.016)      (0.014)     (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.016)
Infrastructure level index      0.026++     0.036+    0.032+++     0.034        0.005       0.036        0.000      0.049+    0.036+++     0.028
                                (0.011)     (0.019)    (0.012)    (0.021)      (0.011)     (0.023)      (0.018)     (0.027)    (0.013)    (0.022)
Log average wage                  -0.019   -0.031++     -0.024   -0.038++       -0.006      -0.017       -0.012      -0.004     -0.019   -0.034++
                                 (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.015)      (0.018)     (0.019)      (0.029)     (0.030)    (0.016)    (0.015)
Urban/rural wage ratio          -0.020+      -0.016     -0.015     -0.010       -0.007      -0.000       -0.010      0.002      -0.010     -0.005
                                (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.008)
Log total district land area      0.007      -0.013     0.008     -0.028+       0.001       -0.014     -0.030+       -0.016     0.011    -0.036+
                                 (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.016)      (0.015)     (0.018)     (0.016)      (0.019)    (0.018)   (0.021)
Change in urban population        0.235      -0.019   0.479++      0.088        -0.008      -0.006       -0.240      -0.087    0.480+      -0.057
                                 (0.219)    (0.203)   (0.226)     (0.193)      (0.157)     (0.188)      (0.175)     (0.212)    (0.244)    (0.221)
Industry fixed effects            Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes
State fixed effects               No          Yes       No          Yes          No          Yes         No           Yes       No         Yes
Observations                     1700        1700      1700        1700         1700        1700         566          566      1105       1105
Adjusted R-squared               0.358       0.385     0.350       0.381        0.323       0.343       0.273        0.303     0.382      0.416
Notes: See Table 5.
                                     Table 7: Interaction estimations for industry capital and land intensity
                                                                           DV: Change in urbanization share for district-industry
                                                         Plants                              Employment                                             Output
                                       1994-2005       1994-2000      2000-2005 1994-2005 1994-2000 2000-2005 1994-2005                           1994-2000      2000-2005
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                                                   A. Estimations using industry land intensity
Initial urban share                     -0.824+++      -0.840+++      -0.777+++       -0.811+++     -0.811+++      -0.739+++       -0.730+++      -0.814+++      -0.761+++
                                          (0.033)        (0.031)        (0.032)         (0.034)       (0.030)        (0.035)         (0.031)        (0.029)        (0.031)
Education level x                         -0.021        -0.026+          -0.015         -0.026         -0.020         -0.018          -0.028         -0.007         -0.019
 Industry land intensity                 (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.018)        (0.014)        (0.019)         (0.023)        (0.019)        (0.023)
Infrastructure level index x            -0.036++       -0.042+++       -0.030+          -0.022      -0.039+++         -0.016          -0.022       -0.035++         -0.012
 Industry land intensity                 (0.016)         (0.016)       (0.016)         (0.015)        (0.014)        (0.015)         (0.018)        (0.017)        (0.019)
Industry fixed effects                     Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
District fixed effects                     Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Adjusted R-squared                        0.428          0.490           0.399          0.445          0.486          0.406          0.418           0.451          0.433

                                                                                  B. Estimations using industry capital intensity
Initial urban share                     -0.824+++      -0.839+++      -0.776+++       -0.810+++     -0.809+++      -0.739+++       -0.731+++      -0.817+++      -0.761+++
                                          (0.034)        (0.031)        (0.032)         (0.034)       (0.030)        (0.035)         (0.031)        (0.029)        (0.031)
Education level x                         -0.026          -0.025         -0.018         -0.022        -0.029+         -0.012          -0.016         0.000          -0.008
 Industry capital intensity              (0.016)         (0.016)        (0.016)        (0.017)        (0.015)        (0.017)         (0.020)        (0.017)        (0.020)
Infrastructure level index x             -0.025+        -0.026+        -0.025+          -0.015        -0.024+         -0.014          -0.007         -0.027         -0.004
 Industry capital intensity              (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.015)         (0.015)        (0.013)        (0.015)         (0.018)        (0.019)        (0.018)
Industry fixed effects                     Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
District fixed effects                     Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Adjusted R-squared                        0.428          0.489           0.399          0.444          0.486          0.406          0.417           0.451          0.432
Notes: Estimations consider changes in district-industry employment shares in urban areas for 1994-2005. Positive values indicate an increase across the period in the urban
employment share of the district-industry. Estimations report standard errors clustered by district, include state and industry fixed effects, include 1700 observations, and
weight observations by the interaction of log district size and log industry size. + significant at 10% level; ++ significant at 5% level; +++ significant at 1% level.
                             Table 8: Estimations for changes in urban spatial mismatch in manufacturing sector
                                                                         DV: Change in urban spatial mismatch for district employment
                                           Total employment,            Organized sector,   Unorganized sector,       Total employment,                       Total employment,
                                               1994-2005                   1994-2005             1994-2005                 1994-2000                              2000-2005
                                             (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)           (10)
Initial urban spatial mismatch          -0.688+++ -0.738+++ -0.343+++ -0.404+++ -0.789+++ -0.819+++ -0.708+++ -0.764+++ -0.617+++ -0.698+++
                                          (0.057)   (0.060)   (0.063)   (0.070)   (0.057)   (0.060)   (0.050)   (0.056)   (0.090)   (0.094)
Change in urban share                   -0.172+++ -0.169+++ -0.186+++ -0.180+++ -0.174+++ -0.170+++ -0.199+++ -0.188+++ -0.216+++ -0.198+++
                                          (0.036)   (0.035)   (0.033)   (0.028)   (0.035)   (0.033)   (0.032)   (0.032)   (0.027)   (0.031)
Education level                         -0.024+++ -0.028+++            -0.009+         -0.008     -0.028+++ -0.033+++ -0.026+++ -0.026+++ -0.020+++ -0.027+++
                                          (0.006)   (0.008)            (0.005)        (0.006)       (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.008)
Infrastructure level index                 -0.009         -0.008        0.006          -0.018        -0.006        0.012       -0.025+++       -0.020+        -0.007         -0.009
                                          (0.007)        (0.017)       (0.007)        (0.018)       (0.007)       (0.017)        (0.006)       (0.012)       (0.007)        (0.017)
Log average wage                           -0.001         0.008         -0.005         0.002         -0.007        0.002          -0.002        0.003         -0.002         0.007
                                          (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.010)       (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.011)
Urban/rural wage ratio                     -0.004         -0.007        0.001          -0.001        0.003         0.000          -0.001        -0.002        -0.001         -0.003
                                          (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.006)
Log district land area                    -0.014+         -0.015        0.006          0.008       -0.022++        -0.018         -0.010        0.007         -0.008         -0.014
                                          (0.009)        (0.013)       (0.008)        (0.013)       (0.009)       (0.012)        (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.008)        (0.012)
Change in urban population                 0.038          0.033         -0.079         -0.051        -0.184        -0.196         -0.077        -0.101        0.060          0.107
                                          (0.182)        (0.223)       (0.075)        (0.089)       (0.114)       (0.152)        (0.116)       (0.149)       (0.146)        (0.167)
State fixed effects                         No             Yes           No             Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes           No             Yes
Observations                                250            250           201            201           247           247            250           250           250            250
Adjusted R-squared                         0.608          0.629         0.304          0.367         0.651         0.683          0.597         0.626         0.500          0.520
Notes: Estimations consider changes in district spatial mismatch for 1994-2005. The spatial mismatch index compares the observed industry distribution of district
employment across urban and rural locations to a counterfactual where plants in the district are allocated to urban and rural locations according to national propensities by
industry to be in urban settings (holding constant for the district the total urban and rural activity). Negative values indicate that the industry distribution across the district
shifted to be in closer alignment to the counterfactual distribution. Estimations report robust standard errors, include state fixed effects as indicated, and weight observations
by log district size. + significant at 10% level; ++ significant at 5% level; +++ significant at 1% level.
                           Appendix Table 1a: Decompositions of urban share changes, 1994-2000
                                                Total Activity                 Organized Sector               Unorganized Sector
                                         Plants   Employ.      Output   Plants    Employ.       Output   Plants   Employ.      Output
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)         (6)      (7)        (8)        (9)
A. Sector change in urbanization level using balanced panel
 Urban share start                      0.247       0.376       0.615    0.688      0.667       0.620    0.239      0.302      0.565
 Urban share ending                     0.294       0.396       0.553    0.626      0.603       0.546    0.285      0.347      0.574
 Urban share change                     0.047       0.020      -0.062   -0.063     -0.064      -0.073    0.046      0.046      0.009
B. Decomposition: Bailey et al. (1992)
 Within-district component                0.038     0.015      -0.055   -0.089     -0.111      -0.093     0.039     0.036       0.001
 Between-district component               0.028     0.013      -0.032   -0.039     -0.045      -0.035     0.022     0.015      -0.033
 Covariance term                         -0.019    -0.008       0.025    0.066      0.092       0.055    -0.016    -0.006       0.041
 Total                                    0.047     0.020      -0.062   -0.063     -0.064      -0.073     0.046     0.046       0.009
C. Decomposition: Griliches and Rejev (1995)
 Within-district component             0.029        0.011      -0.043   -0.056     -0.065      -0.065    0.031      0.033       0.022
 Between-district component            0.018        0.009      -0.020   -0.006      0.001      -0.008    0.015      0.012      -0.013
 Total                                 0.047        0.020      -0.062   -0.063     -0.064      -0.073    0.046      0.046       0.009
Notes: See Table 4.
                           Appendix Table 1b: Decompositions of urban share changes, 2000-2005
                                                Total Activity                 Organized Sector               Unorganized Sector
                                         Plants   Employ.      Output   Plants    Employ.       Output   Plants   Employ.      Output
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)         (6)      (7)        (8)        (9)
A. Sector change in urbanization level using balanced panel
 Urban share start                       0.294       0.396      0.553    0.626      0.603       0.546     0.285     0.347      0.574
 Urban share ending                      0.289       0.395      0.528    0.595      0.567       0.514     0.279     0.347      0.589
 Urban share change                     -0.005      -0.001     -0.025   -0.030     -0.036      -0.033    -0.005     0.000      0.015
B. Decomposition: Bailey et al. (1992)
 Within-district component                0.007    -0.001      -0.038   -0.044     -0.059      -0.048     0.008     0.013      -0.013
 Between-district component               0.002     0.003      -0.002   -0.028     -0.041      -0.019     0.000    -0.014      -0.019
 Covariance term                         -0.015    -0.004       0.016    0.042      0.064       0.034    -0.013     0.000       0.047
 Total                                   -0.005    -0.001      -0.025   -0.030     -0.036      -0.033    -0.005     0.000       0.015
C. Decomposition: Griliches and Rejev (1995)
 Within-district component             0.000       -0.002      -0.030   -0.023     -0.027      -0.031     0.002     0.013      0.011
 Between-district component           -0.005        0.001       0.006   -0.007     -0.009      -0.002    -0.007    -0.014      0.004
 Total                                -0.005       -0.001      -0.025   -0.030     -0.036      -0.033    -0.005     0.000      0.015
Notes: See Table 4.
