                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION
                    AND EFFECTS OF FISCAL POLICIES




                          Jacob A. Frenkel


                            Assaf Razin




                       Working Paper No. 1799




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1986




Prepared for presentation at the AEA annual
                                            meeting, New York,
December 29, 1985. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in International Studies and project in
Government Budgets. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1799
                                                    January 1986

         The International Transmission and Effects of Fiscal Policies




                                      ABSTR ACT




         In recent years the world economy has been subject to large and

 UnSyncronized changes in fiscal policies, high and volatile real rates of

 tnterest, large fluctuations in real exchange rates, and significant varia-

 tions in private—sector spending. This paper reviews some of the key facts

 characterizing the effects of fiscal policies during the first half of the

 1980s and provides a simple analytical framework suitable for the inter-

pretation of these facts. The analytical framework builds on a two—country

model of the world economy which is
                                       applied to the analysis of the transmis—
sion and effects of various changes in the time profile of taxes and of

government spending. Generally, the predictions of the model concerning the

relation among the inter—country patterns of consumption, long and short—

term real rates of interest, real exchange rates and fiscal policies are

consistent with the stylized facts.




Jacob A. Frenkel
                                                   Assaf azin
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Chicago                             Tel—Aviv University
1126 E. 59th Street
                                                  Ramat—Aviv, Tel—Aviv 66978
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Israel
(312)962—8253                                     (972)—3—42o—733
         In recent years the world economy has been subject to large and unsyncronized

 changes in fiscal policies, high and volatile real rates of interest, large fluctua-

 tions in real exchange rates and significant variations in private sector spending.

 During the first half of the 1980s national fiscal policies have exhibited large

 divergencies. The United States adopted an expansionary course while the other major

 countries taken together followed a relatively contractionary course. Policies

undertaken by the major economies affected the rest of the world through the in-

 tegrated capital market. This paper deals with the international transmission of

fiscal policies and their effects on real exchange rates and real interest rates.

Section I reviews key facts and section II provides an analytical framework relevant

for the interpretation of these facts.



I. Selected Facts

        Since the beginning of 1980 short and long—term real rates of interest ex—

hibted different patterns. A weighted average of the annual short—term real interest

rates in the five major industrial countries (the United States, Canada, Japan

Germany and the United Kingdom) rose from 2.1 percent in January 1980 to .0 percent

in July 1985; the corresponding long—term rates rose from 0.6 percent in January 1980

to 5.7 percent in July 1985. Both rates peaked and surpassed 8 percent in mid 1982.

Thus during 1980—85 real rates of interest have been high (in comparison with early

1980) and the slope of the real yield curve which was negative until the third quar-

ter of 1981, has turned positive starting from mid 1982. The same period also witt—

nessed sharp changes in real exchange rates. In the first quarter of 1985, the real

effective value of the U.S. dollar was about 143 percent above its average value f or

the decade 19714—83 and 57 percent above its low point of the third quarter of 1980.

(The source of all data used in this paper is IMF, World Economic Outlook, 1985).

       These changes in real interest rates and real exchange rates were associated

with large and divergent changes in world fiscal policies. The budget deficit of the
                                            2



General U.S. government as a fraction of GNP rose from about one percent in 1980 to

about 3.5 percent in 1985 (after reaching a peak of I.1 percent in 1983). At the

same time the budget deficit as a fraction of GNP declined in Japan, Germany and the

United Kingdom. Similarly, since 1980 according to IMF measures, the fiscal impulse

(which is a more exogenous measure of fiscal policy) has been expansionary for the

United States and contractionary for the other major industrial countries taken

together. Another indicator of the levels and divergence among national fiscal

policies is provided by a comparison among annual percentage changes in public—sector

consumption. As seen in Table 1 the percentage annual growth of U.S. public—sector

consumption accelerated in the past two years exceeding 4 percent in 1985. During

the late 1970s and early 1980s public—sector consumption in Japan grew faster than in

the United States (the difference reaching i4•3 percent in 1981), and during the past

two years it grew slower (the difference in "favor" of the United States reaching 2.1

percent in 1985).

        Concomitantly, the annual percentage changes in real private—sector con-

sumption also displayed large fluctuations which differed across countries. In the

United States these changes ranged from 0.5 percent in 1980 to 5.3 percent in 1984

and, as seen in Table 1 ,   the growth of private—sector consumption in Japan exceeded
that in the United States during 1978—80 and fell short of it during 1983—85 (the

differential growth rate of fixed investment displays a similar pattern).



II. A Conceptual Framework

        In this section we outline a simple two—country model of the world economy

suitable for an interpretation of the facts outlined in section I. The model pro-

vides insights into the interactions among fiscal policies, interest rates, real

exchange rates and the comovements of private—sector consumption. In order to deal

with the real exchange rate we assume that each country produces internationally

tradable and non—tradable goods and, in view of the high correlation among national
                            TABLE 1


 DIFFERENCES IN PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CONSUMPTION:
         UNITED STATES AND JAPAN 1977-85
           (Annual Percentage Changes)



                 U.S.             U.S. minus Japan

        Private         Public   Private      Public

1977      5.0             1.5         +1.2     —2.14
1978      14.5            2.0         —0.2     —3.1
1979      2.7             1.3         —3.2     —3.0
1980      0.5             2.2         —0.8     —0.7
1981      2.0            0.9          +1.2     —14.3
1982      1.14           2.0          —2.8     +0.2
1983      14.8          —0.3          +1.5     —3.2
198)4     5.3             3.5         +2.14    +1.2
1985     11.1            14.5         +07      +2.1




Source: computed from data in IMF World
         Economic Outlook, October 1985.
                                                 3


real rates of interest, we focus on world rates of interest and assume that mdlvi—

duals have unlimited access to perfect world capital markets and that there are no

distortions. For a meaningful analysis of budget deficits we depart from the

"Ricardian proposition" and introduce a "myopic" element as in Blanchard (1985).

Accordingly, there are overlapping generations of rational individuals but due to

mortality each individual has a finite horizon. The coefficient of "myopia" reflects

the finiteness of the horizon. Suppose that I is the probability that an indivi-

dual survives from one period to the next and let I < 1 .              The magnitude of 1

influences savings in two ways. First, it introduces a risk premium (1—I) which

raises the rate of interest applicable to individuals, p ,          above the world rate of

interest, r , where   p =   r   +   (1—1).   Hence, it impacts on current wealth through the

heavier discounting of future disposable incomes. Second, it lowers the effective

saving propensity from 5        (in the absence of mortality) to 1S

        Government budgets are intertemporally balanced and government commitments

are honored. Hence, government debt (at the beginning of period zero) equals the

present values of current and future budget surpluses and the discount rate appli-

cable to government debt is the world rate of interest, r. We first divide the

horizon into two: the current period and the future period. All quantities pertain—

ing to the current period are indicated by a zero subscript and the paths of the

exogenous variables are assumed stationary across future periods.

        Equilibrium necessitates that in the current period world output of tradable

goods is demanded and the discounted sum of future outputs of tradable goods equals

the discounted sums of future domestic and foreign demands. Likewise, in each

country current and future period outputs of non—tradable goods must be demanded.

The conditions that world markets for tradable goods clear in both current and future

periods are stated in equations (1)—(2). These equations already incorporate the

requirement that in each country the markets for non—tradable goods clear.
                                                                 14




 (1)                   (1—)(1—i)W + (1_*)(1_Yó*)W*[r,B*                                      =
                                                                                 ;B
                                                                                                 To       GT0



 (2)                                            (1—Y)(1+r)                            + (1—s
                                                                                             *            **
                                                                                                          *
                       (i—)(Yw0 +                    rp        I{r,w;T,e])                     )('rs W0[rBg0;B0]


                                            +    (1—Y)(1+r)                          — I (y           —
                                                                                                          T)
                                                                I*{r,B* ;B })
                                                      rp                  goo            r       T


where                  p =     r + 1—1          ,   and



        B
            *      *
                 = T   —   G
                               *    — 0
                                          ** *             *
                                                      ;B o] + —
                                           Y p o[r,B go         (T
                                                                  *   1
                                                                            —    G
                                                                                     *   — 0
                                                                                                 ***      *
                                                                                                  Y p [r,B ;B ])
            go     o           To         oNo                 r                      T            N            go o


Equation (1) states that the sum of world private demand for current tradable goods

equals world supply                         To +      To       net of government spending (GTO                    GT0 + GTO).
In equation (1), W denotes aggregate domestic private wealth in period zero, (i-i)

denotes the spending propensity and (1—s) is the consumption share of tradable goods.

Hence, (1—)(1—yS)w0 is the home country's private demand. Analogously, foreign
private demand is (1—s )(1—Ió )                            times foreign wealth W0. The specification of
private demands as a function of aggregate wealth reflects the assumption that in-

dividuals have an unlimited access to world capital markets. The value of wealth

equals the difference between the discounted sum of labor income and net private

debt. In equation (1) foreign current wealth                                    is expressed as a negative func-

tion of the rate of interest, relfecting the role of r in discounting future in-

comes, and as a negative function of private debt B (square brackets indicate

functional dependence). The latter in turn equals the difference between the foreign

country's net external debt (which is the negative of the home country's net external

debt, —B0) and its net government debt,

        Equation (2) states that the discounted sum of domestic and foreign demands

for future tradable goods equals the discounted sum of future world supply net of

government spending. The first term is the product of the consumption share of
                                             5



tradable goods (1—s) and total domestic future consumption. The latter equals the

sum of the savings of those alive in period zero, I6WQ , and the discounted sum of

the demand for future goods of those who will be born in the future and whose dis-

posable income in each period is     1.1 Disposable income (in terms of tradable goods)

depends negatively on taxes, T , and positively on the relative price of non—tradable

goods p which in turn depends negatively on r (through its effect on future

wealth of those yet unborn) and positively on            (through its effect on the demand

of those alive). The price, and thereby disposable income, also depends positively

on the parameter       8   which measures the share of output of non—tradable goods

absorbed by the government. Analogous interpretation applies to the second term on

the left—hand—side of equation (2) representing the foreign demand for future
                                                                      *
tradable   goods. In specifying foreign disposable income, I , we incorporated the

functional dependence of         on Bg0 and B. The right—hand—side of equation (2)

denotes the discounted sum of world supply of future tradable goods net of government

spending. Finally, the explicit expression for Bg0 reflects the intertemporal

budget constraint of the foreign government by which initial government debt must

equal the discounted sum of current and future budget surpluses. In that expression
               ** *
the terms 0ONOO and 8 YMP              measure current and future foreign government

spending on non—tradable goods, N where p            is expressed as a negative function

of r and a positive function of B           and Bo
                                       go
        Equations (1)—(2) yield the equilibrium values of the home country's initial

wealth, W      ,   and the world rate of interest, r ,   for   any given values of the para-

meters. In equilibrium the demand for non—tradable goods (1—lo)W0 equals the

supply net of government absorption (1_80)poYNo. Hence, the equilibrium price (the

inverse of the real exchange rate) is p = (1—lo)wQ/[(1—eO)YNO]                .    The equilibrium

is represented by point A in Figure 1. The PP schedule shows combinations of r

and p      that clear the market for present tradable goods. It is positively sloped

since a rise in r lowers foreign demand (by lowering                      )       and a rise In p0
r                F'
            F
                                                  P



r1

r0




                                                      F'
                                                 F

     0                       pp                              p0


         Figure 1: Budget Deficits, the Real Exchange Rate
                    and the Real Rate of Interest.
                                             6



raises domestic demand (by raising W0). Future tradable goods market clears along

the FF schedule. For a relatively small non—tradable goods sector the FF
schedule is negatively sloped since a rise in r creates an excess demand for future

tradable goods which must be offset by a fall in W0 (and therefore p0).

            A budget deficit arising from a current tax cut necessitates a corresponding

rise in future taxes. As seen from equation (2) the rise in future taxes lowers

domestic disposable income, I , and lowers the demand for future goods. For a given

world rate of interest the fall in demand can be eliminated by a rise in              and

     •   Thus the FF schedule shifts to the right to F'F'. As is evident the horizon—
•0
tal      shift of the FF schedule is proportional to (1—1); if I =   1   the schedule and

the initial equilibrium remain intact (the Ricardian equivalence case). The new

equilibrium obtains at point B with a higher rate of interest, a higher relative

price of non—tradable goods, p0 , and a higher level of domestic wealth and

tion. The higher rate of interest lowers foreign wealth and consumption and reduces

the foreign relative price of non—tradable goods. Thus, on the basis of the correla—

tions between domestic and foreign private sector's spending and between domestic and

foreign real exchange rates,the international transmission of the budget deficit is

negative. As an interpretation we note that since the budget deficit transfers

income from future generations (whose propensity to consume present goods is zero) to

the current generation (whose propensity to spend on present goods is positive), it

creates an excess demand for present tradable goods resulting in a rise in their

intertemporal relative price (the rate of interest). Likewise, it creates an excess

demand for domestic non—tradable goods and an excess supply of foreign non—tradable

goods and changes the temporal relative prices (the real exchange rates). Generally

speaking, this pattern of consumption, real interest rates, real exchange rates and

the underlying fiscal positions is roughly in accord with the selected facts reported

in section I (for a related analysis see Branson (1985)).
                                               7



          A key characteristic of the conceptual framework
                                                             underlying the model is that
 it is forward looking. Hence, the timing of policy actions plays a critical role.

 To illustrate this point we apply a simplified version of the model in which the

 economy produces only tradable goods, to an analysis of transitory and permanent

 balanced—budget changes in government spending. In that case equations (1)—(2) are

 modified in an obvious manner2 and the equilibrium is
                                                            illustrated by point A in
 Figure 2.    The positively sloped PP schedule shows combinations of r and
 that clear the market for present goods. The
                                                   negatively sloped FF schedule de-
 scribes combinations of r and W         that clear the market for future goods. In this

 simplified version of the model a current tax cut shifts the         FF schedule to the
right (to F"F") and, as before, in the new equilibrium (point B) the rate of interest

and domestic wealth are higher. A transitory rise in current government spending by

LG creates an excess demand for present goods (since the private sector propensity

to spend on current goods is 1—15) and raises the rate of interest. Diagrama—

tically, the PP schedule shifts to the left by         G0/(1—Yó) to P'P' and the new
equilibrium obtains at point C. Analogously, a balanced budget rise in future

government spending by G creates an excess demand for future goods, shifts the FF

schedule to the left by G/[(r+1—y)] to F'F', and lowers the rate of interest.
The new equilibrium obtains at point D.     In the former case both domestic and foreign

wealth fall and the transmission is positive; in the latter case domestic wealth

falls, foreign wealth rises and the transmission is negative. A permanent balanced—

budget rise in government spending raises demand for both present and future goods

and shifts both schedules (with G = AG).            The impact on the rate of interest
depends on the relative excess demands in both markets. If the home country was a
net   saver (i.e., if o   >   1/(1+r), or equivalently if
                                                                *
                                                             > 5 )   the permanent rise in
government spending raises the relative demand for present goods and the rate of

interest rises; in that case foreign wealth falls. The opposite, illustrated by

point E in Figure 2, holds if       S < 6. These results suggest that the (apparently
                      F'
r,                                             /   P1

                                                            P
                                           /
                                   \   ,


     F'
                               ,
                           ,
                      I,
r0                                             \

              /
     /
     F,
          ,
                                                        \
                                                            "F'
                  P



 V                                     we                         1!
                                                                  'G


     Figure 2: Current and Future Government Spending,
                Wealth and the Real Rate of Interest.
                                             8


  unstable) relations between government spending, real rates of interest and the

  international transmission can be explained in part in terms of different

  expectations concerning future spending.

           In order to analyse the effects of future budget deficits we modify the

  specification of the time aggregation of the model and divide the horizon into three:

 the present, the near future, and the distant future. It can be shown (see Frenke].

 and Razin, 1986), that analogously to the effects of current deficits a tax cut in

 the near future (followed by a corresponding tax rise in the distant future) creates

 an excess demand for goods in the near future, and, raises the future rate of

 interest, domestic wealth and spending while lowering foreign wealth and spending.

 Thus, the transmission of future budget deficits
                                                     is negative. Their impact on the
 current   short—term rate of interest depends on the saving propensities; ii s      *

 thecurrent short—term interest rate rises and vice versa. In interpreting this
result we note that in the present period no government action takes place and
changes in the current rate of interest result only from changes in world savings.
At the prevailing short term interest rate
                                           foreign wealth falls because of the rise
in the future rate of interest while the rise in domestic wealth consequent on the

future budget deficit Is mitigated by the rise in the future rate of interest. These

changes in wealth lower the foreign demand for current goods and raise the domestic

demand for these goods. World demand for current goods rises or falls depending on

the difference between the two spending propensities. The unambiguous fall in

foreign wealth indicates that even though the current short—term rate of interest may

fall, the future budget deficit must raise the overall "appropriate average" of short

and long—term rates of interest. In this context we recall from section I that in

recent years changes of long—term real rates of interest exceeded those of short—term

rates. In addition to being induced by other factors, this fact can result in part

from expectations of future large U.S. budget deficit.
                                          9



        In summary the model offers predictions about the inter—country correlations

among private—sector spending as well as about the links between fiscal policies real

exchange rates and world real interest rates. It was shown that budget deficits

arising from current or future tax cuts result in a negative inter—country correla-

tions among private consumption. On the other hand, the correlations implied by

changes in government spending depend on the timing of these changes and on the

current—account positions of the various countries. It was also shown that a budget

deficit arising from a tax cut raises real interest rates linking the period of the

tax cut and the future. The effect on the current short—term rate of interest of

either a future budget deficit or of permanent changes in government spending depend

on the current—account positions of the various economies. Finally, the current

short—term real rate of interest rises in response to a current transitory rise in

government spending and falls in response to a future transitory rise in government

spending.

        Before concluding it is important to emphasize that by focusing on fiscal

policies and by excluding monetary considerations the analytical framework is limi-'

ted. As a result, although the analysis accounts for some of the facts outlined in

section I, it does not provide an explanation for the timing of the initial rise in

real rates of interest (in the late 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s) and the

timing of the decline in real rates since mid 198g. The likely explanations for

these facts can be given in terms of U.S. monetary policy. Therefore, a useful

extension would include monetary considerations.
                                                       10



                                                  FOOTNOTES


              *
                  Professors       of Economics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 and

 the NBER; Tel—Aviv University, Tel—Aviv, Israel and the NBER,
                                                               respectively.


          11n order to verify this we note that in this model 11(1—i)
                                                                                                    is the
population size and hence (1—i) I is each cohort's disposable income. Since

the effective discount factor is                   Y/(1-1-r) ,         the wealth of each cohort is the
discounted sum of each cohort's disposable
                                                                    income [(i—i) IJ/[p/(1÷r) 1     where
(1+r)/p is the annuity value of a perpetuity discounted by the effective

discount factor. Since in each period there is a newly born cohort, the

discounted sum of all cohorts incomes is                           (1/i') times each cohort's wealth.
                    the absence of non—tradable goods we eliminate the subscript T

w: set =            =0         ,i[.J=    Y — T    1*1.]             y —   T   ,
                                                                                  N   N 0 ,   and
W 0[•]   =Y       — T       + (Y   — T )Y/p + B    +                The resulting model is analysed in
          0             o         go
                                                       B
                                                           a
                                                               .



detail in Frenkel and Razin (1986).
                                     11



                                 REFERENCES




Blanchard, Olivier J. ,   "Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons" Journal of
     Political Economy 93, No. 2 (April 1985): 223-47.

Branson, William H., "Causes of Appreciation and Volatility of the Dollar"

     NBER Working Paper Series, No. 1777, 1985.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, "Fiscal Policies in the World Economy"

     Journal of Political Economy 914, No. 3 (June 1986)

International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C., October

     1985.
