NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE AND INEQUALITY:
FROM THEORY TO ESTIMATION
Elhanan Helpman
Oleg Itskhoki
Marc-Andreas Muendler
Stephen J. Redding
Working Paper 17991
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17991
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012
We thank the National Science Foundation for financial support. We also thank SECEX/MEDIC and
Ricardo Markwald at FUNCEX Rio de Janeiro for sharing firm trade data. We are very grateful to
Sam Bazzi, Lorenzo Casaburi, Itzik Fadlon, Adam Guren, Eduardo Morales and Jesse Schreger for
excellent research assistance. We thank Mark Aguiar, Carlos Henrique Corseuil, Kerem Co sar, Angus
Deaton, Thibault Fally, Cecilia Fieler, Leo Feler, Penny Goldberg, Gita Gopinath, Gene Grossman,
Bo Honor e, Guido Imbens, Larry Katz, Francis Kramarz, Rasmus Lentz, Brian McCaig, Marc Melitz,
Naercio Menezes-Filho, Eduardo Morales, Ulrich Muller, Andriy Norets, Richard Rogerson, Esteban
Rossi-Hansberg, Andres Santos, Mine Senses, Robert Shimer, Chris Sims, John Van Reenen, Jon Vogel,
Yoto Yotov and seminar participants at the Administrative Data for Public Policy Conference Singapore,
Bayreuth, CESifo, IAE Workshop at UAB, CEPR, Columbia, EITI, FGV Rio de Janeiro, Georgia,
Harvard, Humboldt Berlin, IAS, IGC Trade Programme Meeting at Columbia, JHU-SAIS, Maryland,
Munich, NBER, Notre Dame, Princeton, SED, Syracuse, Toronto, the Philadelphia Fed Trade Workshop,
UBC Vancouver, UC San Diego, Wisconsin, World Bank and WTO for helpful comments and suggestions.
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Stephen J. Redding. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade and Inequality: From Theory to Estimation
Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 17991
April 2012, Revised September 2013
JEL No. E24,F12,F16
ABSTRACT
While neoclassical theory emphasizes the impact of trade on wage inequality between occupations
and sectors, more recent theories of firm heterogeneity point to the impact of trade on wage dispersion
within occupations and sectors. Using linked employer-employee data for Brazil, we show that much
of overall wage inequality arises within sector-occupations and for workers with similar observable
characteristics; this within component is driven by wage dispersion between firms; and wage dispersion
between firms is related to firm employment size and trade participation. We then extend the heterogenous-firm
model of trade and inequality from Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010) and estimate it with Brazilian
data. We show that the estimated model provides a close approximation to the observed distribution
of wages and employment. We use the estimated model to undertake counterfactuals, in which we
find sizable effects of trade on wage inequality.
Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu

Marc-Andreas Muendler
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
muendler@ucsd.edu

Oleg Itskhoki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall 306
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
itskhoki@princeton.edu

Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
reddings@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

The field of international trade has undergone a transformation in the last decade, as attention
has shifted to heterogeneous firms as drivers of foreign trade. Until recently, however, research on
the labor market effects of international trade has been heavily influenced by the Heckscher-Ohlin
and Specific Factors models, which provide predictions about relative wages across skill groups,
occupations and sectors. In contrast to the predictions of those theories, empirical studies find
increased wage inequality in both developed and developing countries, growing residual wage
dispersion among workers with similar observed characteristics, and increased wage dispersion
across plants and firms within sectors. In a large part due to this disconnect, previous studies
have concluded that the contribution of international trade to growing wage inequality is modest
at best (see for example the survey by Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007).
This paper argues that these apparently discordant empirical findings are in fact consistent
with a trade-based explanation for wage inequality, but one rooted in recent models of firm
heterogeneity rather than neoclassical trade theories. For this purpose we develop a theoretical
model of heterogeneous firms that determines the cross-section distribution of firm wages, employment and export status. We develop a methodology for estimating this model and illustrate
with Brazilian data how the estimated model can be used to quantify the contribution of trade
to wage inequality.
To motivate our theoretical model, we first provide evidence on a number of stylized facts
about wage inequality. These stylized facts combine approaches from different parts of the
trade and labor literatures to provide an integrated view of the sources of wage inequality in
Brazil. First, much of overall wage inequality occurs within sectors and occupations rather than
between sectors and occupations. Second, a large share of this wage inequality within sectors
and occupations is driven by wage inequality between rather than within firms. Third, both
of these findings are robust to controlling for observed worker characteristics, suggesting that
this wage inequality between firms within sector-occupations is residual wage inequality. These
features of the data motivate our theoretical model’s focus on wage inequality between firms for
workers with similar observed characteristics.
We measure the between-firm component of wage inequality by including a firm-occupationyear fixed effect in a Mincer regression for log worker wages on controls for observed worker
characteristics. This firm wage component includes both wage premia for workers with identical
characteristics and unobserved differences in workforce composition across firms. Our analysis
focuses on this overall wage component because recent theories of firm heterogeneity emphasize
both sources of wage differences across firms. We estimate the firm wage component separately
for each sector-occupation-year, because these theories emphasize that the firm wage component
can vary across sectors, occupations and time. We find a strong relationship between the firm
wage component and trade participation: exporters are on average larger and pay higher wages
than non-exporters. While these exporter premia are robust features of the data, there is overlap
in the exporter and non-exporter employment and wage distributions, so that some non-exporters
1

are larger and pay higher wages than some exporters.
To account for these features of the data, we extend the theoretical framework of Helpman,
Itskhoki, and Redding (2010) to include two additional sources of heterogeneity across firms
besides productivity: the cost of screening workers and the size of the fixed cost of exporting.
Heterogeneous screening costs allow for variation in wages across firms after controlling for their
employment size and export status, while idiosyncratic exporting costs allow some small lowwage firms to profitably export and some large high-wage firms to serve only the domestic market.
We use the theoretical framework to derive an econometric model of firm employment, wages and
export status. This econometric model explains positive exporter premia for employment and
wages and predicts imperfect correlations between firm employment, wages and export status.
It also highlights that the exporter wage premium depends on both the selection into exporting
of more productive firms that pay higher wages and the increase in firm wages because of the
greater market access of exporters.
We derive the closed-form solution for the econometric model’s likelihood function and estimate its parameters using maximum likelihood. We show that the parameterized model provides
a good fit to the data, both for first and second moments of wages, employment and export status and for the distributions of wages and employment across firms and workers. We show that
trade participation is important for the model’s fit, which deteriorates substantially when we
shut down the market access effects of exporting. We use the estimated model to undertake
counterfactuals, in which we find sizable effects of trade on wage inequality, comparable in magnitude to the inequality movements observed in our sample. Additionally, we provide bounds
on the effect of trade on wage inequality in a class of econometric models consistent with the
size and exporter wage premia observed in the cross-section of Brazilian manufacturing firms.
Our paper is related to a number of strands of the existing literature. As mentioned above,
several empirical studies have suggested that the Heckscher-Ohlin and Specific Factors models—
as conventionally interpreted—provide at best an incomplete explanation for observed wage
inequality. First, changes in the relative returns to observed measures of skills (e.g., education
and experience) and changes in sectoral wage premia account for a limited share of change
in overall wage inequality, leaving a substantial role for residual wage inequality.1 Second,
the Stolper-Samuelson theorem predicts a rise in the relative skilled wage in skill-abundant
countries and a fall in the relative skilled wage in unskilled-abundant countries in response to
trade liberalization. Yet wage inequality rises following trade liberalization in both developed
and developing countries (e.g., Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007).2 Third, much of the change in
the relative demand for skilled and unskilled workers in developed countries has occurred within
1

For developed country evidence, see for example Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce
(1993), and Lemieux (2006). For developing country evidence, see for example Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik
(2004), Ferreira, Leite, and Wai-Poi (2010), Goldberg and Pavcnik (2005), Gonzaga, Menezes-Filho, and Terra
(2006), and Menezes-Filho, Muendler, and Ramey (2008).
2
Increasing wage inequality in both developed and developing countries can be explained by re-interpreting the
Stolper-Samuelson Theorem as applying within sectors as when production stages are offshored (see for example
Feenstra and Hanson (1996), Feenstra and Hanson (1999) and Trefler and Zhu (2005)).

2

sectors and occupations rather than across sectors and occupations (e.g., Katz and Murphy 1992
and Berman, Bound, and Griliches 1994). Fourth, while wage dispersion between plants and
firms is an empirically-important source of wage inequality (e.g., Davis and Haltiwanger 1991
and Faggio, Salvanes, and Van Reenen 2010), neoclassical trade theory is not able to elucidate
it. Each of these features of the data can be explained within the class of new trade models
based on firm heterogeneity.
Models of firm heterogeneity suggest two sets of reasons for wage variation across firms.
One line of research assumes competitive labor markets, so that all workers with the same
characteristics are paid the same wage, but wages vary across firms as a result of differences in
workforce composition (see for example Yeaple 2005, Verhoogen 2008, Bustos 2011, Burstein and
Vogel 2012, Monte 2011 and Sampson 2012). Another line of research introduces labor market
frictions so that workers with the same characteristics can be paid different wages by different
firms. For example, efficiency or fair wages can result in wage variation across firms when the
wage that induces worker effort, or is perceived to be fair, varies with the revenue of the firm
(see for example Egger and Kreickemeier 2009, Amiti and Davis 2012 and Davis and Harrigan
2011). Furthermore, search and matching frictions and the resulting bargaining over the surplus
from production can induce wages to vary across firms (see for example Davidson, Matusz, and
Shevchenko 2008).3 Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010; HIR henceforth) develop a model
with frictional assortative matching of workers to firms, and hence featuring both mechanisms
for wage variation across firms. We estimate the extended HIR model, for which we show
that the reduced-form representation takes a log linear selection form. We conjecture that
such a reduced form can be derived from other models of heterogeneous firms, and hence it
is potentially more general than the particular microfoundations we rely on. Nonetheless, by
providing microfoundations for our econometric model, we ensure that the estimated model is
consistent with individual optimization and equilibrium, obtain theoretical restrictions, and are
able to undertake model-based counterfactuals.
Methodologically, our work connects with the wider literature quantifying models of international trade and labor markets: Coşar, Guner, and Tybout (2011) fit and calibrate a model of
search and matching frictions in which convex hiring costs induce wage variation across firms;
Coşar (2010), Dix-Carneiro (2013) and Kambourov (2009) examine the role of sector-specific
human capital in influencing the response of the economy to trade liberalization; Das, Roberts,
and Tybout (2007) use a Bayesian approach to structurally estimate market entry costs from
firm turnover; Irarrazabal, Moxnes, and Opromolla (2011) examine the determinants of trade
versus multinational activity; Eaton, Kortum, Kramarz, and Sampogaro (2013) explore the labor market effects of trade liberalization in a model of firm-to-firm trade; Egger, Egger, and
Kreickemeier (2011) provide evidence on the wage inequality predictions of a model of firm
heterogeneity and fair wages.
Our paper also relates to the existing literature estimating search-theoretic equilibrium mod3
Search and matching frictions may also influence income inequality through unemployment, as in Davidson
and Matusz (2010), Felbermayr, Prat, and Schmerer (2011), and Helpman and Itskhoki (2010).

3

els of the labor market, including Burdett and Mortensen (1998), Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and
Robin (2006), Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002), and Postel-Vinay and Thuron (2010). The focus
of this literature is typically on employment and wage dynamics. In contrast, the focus of our
analysis is the cross-section variation in employment and wages across firms. More specifically,
we study how international trade affects the employment and wage distribution across firms,
which requires a substantially richer product market structure (e.g., as in Melitz 2003) than
what is typically assumed in the labor-macro literature (i.e., perfect substitutes under perfect
competition). Furthermore, firm size is at the core of the mechanism that we explore, and hence
we need to depart from the assumptions in the labor-macro literature which cast the analysis in
terms of jobs rather than firms, as in this literature firm boundaries are often not well-defined.
As a result, we choose to abstract from the labor market dynamics that are central for the labormacro literature, in order to embed a rich frictional labor market into a model of international
trade in differentiated product markets that we use to analyze the cross-sectional relationship
between firm employment, wages and export participation.
Finally, our work is also related to empirical research using plant and firm data that has found
substantial differences in wages and employment between exporters and non-exporters following
Bernard and Jensen (1995, 1997). More recent research using linked employer-employee datasets
has sought to determine the sources of the exporter wage premium, including Schank, Schnabel,
and Wagner (2007), Munch and Skaksen (2008), Frı́as, Kaplan, and Verhoogen (2009), Davidson,
Heyman, Matusz, Sjöholm, and Zhu (2011), Krishna, Poole, and Senses (2011), and Baumgarten
(2011). This literature typically makes the assumption that the matching of workers to firms
is random after controlling for firm fixed effects, worker fixed effects and time-varying worker
observables. Under this assumption, these empirical studies typically find that the exporter wage
premium is composed of both unobserved differences in workforce composition and wage premia
for workers with identical characteristics, with the relative importance of these two forces varying
across studies. Since we focus on the overall firm wage component, including both these sources
of differences in wages across firms, we need not rely on the assumption of conditional random
matching of workers to firms which is violated in our theoretical framework. Furthermore, while
the above empirical studies typically estimate a time-invariant wage fixed effect for each firm, a
key feature of our approach is that the firm component of wages can change over time with firm
revenue (e.g., with both changes in market conditions and firm entry into export markets). In
contrast to these empirical studies, we use our theoretical framework to derive an econometric
model that jointly determines firm employment, wages and export status and can be estimated
using exclusively the cross-section of the data.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we introduce our data
and some background information. In Section 3, we present some stylized facts about wage
inequality in Brazil. Motivated by these findings, Section 4 develops a heterogeneous-firm model
of trade and inequality, derives an econometric model that we estimate using these data, and
reports our counterfactuals for the impact of trade liberalization on wage inequality. Section 5
concludes. A supplementary web appendix contains detailed derivations, description of the data,
4

and additional results.4

2

Data and Background

Our main dataset is a linked employer-employee dataset for Brazil from 1986-1998, which we
briefly describe here and discuss in further detail in the web appendix. The source for these
administrative data is the Relação Anual de Informações Sociais (Rais) database of the Brazilian Ministry of Labor. By law, all formally-registered firms are required to report information
each year on each worker employed by the firm, as recorded in Rais. The data contain a unique
identifier for each worker, which remains with the worker throughout his or her work history as
well as the tax identifier of the worker’s employer.
We focus on the manufacturing sector, because manufacturing goods are typically tradable
and there is substantial heterogeneity across sectors, occupations and firms within manufacturing. Therefore this sector provides a suitable testing ground for traditional and heterogeneous
firm theories of international trade. Manufacturing is also an important source of employment
in Brazil, accounting in 1990 and 1998 for around 23 and 19 percent of total employment (formal and informal) respectively. Our data cover all manufacturing firms and workers in the
formal sector, which Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003) estimates accounts for around 84 percent of
manufacturing employment.
Our annual earnings measure is a worker’s mean monthly wage, averaging the worker’s wage
payments over the course of a worker’s employment spell during a calendar year.5 For every
worker with employment during a calendar year, we keep the worker’s last recorded job spell
and, if there are multiple spells spanning into the final month of the year, the highest-paid job
spell (randomly dropping ties). Therefore our definition of firm employment is the count of
employees whose employment spell at the firm is their final (highest-paid) job of the year.
We undertake our analysis at the firm rather than the plant level, because recent theories
of firm heterogeneity and trade are concerned with firms, and wage and exporting decisions are
arguably firm based. For our baseline sample we focus on firms with five or more employees,
because we analyze wage variation within and across firms, and the behavior of firms with a
handful of employees may be heavily influenced by idiosyncratic factors. But we find a similar
pattern of results using the universe of firms. Our baseline sample includes an average of 6.38
million workers and 92,513 firms in each year.
Each worker is classified in each year by her or his occupation. In our baseline empirical
analysis, we use five standard occupational categories that are closely related to skill groups,
described in Table 1 which also reports the employment shares of each occupation and the mean
log wage in each occupation relative to manufacturing overall. In robustness checks, we also
4

Access at http://www.princeton.edu/~itskhoki/papers/TradeInequalityEvidence_appendix.pdf.
Wages are reported as multiples of the minimum wage, which implies that inflation that raises the wages of all
workers by the same proportion leaves this measure of relative wages unchanged. Empirically, we find a smooth
left tail of the wage distribution in manufacturing, which suggests that the minimum wage is not strongly binding
in manufacturing during our sample period. Rais does not report hours, overtime, investment or physical capital.
5

5

Table 1: Occupation Employment Shares and Relative Mean Log Wages, 1994
CBO
1
2
3
4
5

Employment
share (percent)
7.2
10.8
8.8
63.1
10.0

Occupation
Professional and Managerial
Skilled White Collar
Unskilled White Collar
Skilled Blue Collar
Unskilled Blue Collar

Relative mean
log wage
1.12
0.38
0.07
−0.14
−0.39

Note: Share in total formal manufacturing-sector employment; log wage minus average log wage in formal manufacturing sector.

Table 2: Sectoral Employment Shares and Relative Mean Log Wages, 1994

IBGE
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Sector
Non-metallic Minerals
Metallic Products
Mach., Equip. and Instruments
Electrical & Telecomm. Equip.
Transport Equip.
Wood & Furniture
Paper & Printing
Rubber, Tobacco, Leather, etc.
Chemical & Pharm. Products
Apparel & Textiles
Footwear
Food, Beverages & Alcohol
All Manufacturing Sectors

Emplmnt
share
(percent)
4.6
10.3
5.9
4.3
6.0
6.9
5.5
5.1
9.4
15.1
5.4
21.3
100

Relative
mean
log wage
−0.21
0.31
0.48
0.41
0.73
−0.51
0.20
−0.05
0.31
−0.34
−0.44
−0.18
0.00

Exporter share
(percent)
Firms
Emplmnt
4.7
34.6
9.9
57.6
25.4
71.8
19.9
70.9
13.6
75.3
8.0
39.7
4.8
37.0
12.8
56.7
15.6
56.8
4.8
42.7
16.8
72.3
4.1
42.2
9.0
51.8

Note: Share in total formal manufacturing-sector employment; log wage minus average log wage in formal manufacturing sector; share of firms that export; employment share of exporters.

make use of the more disaggregated Classificação Brasileira de Ocupações (CBO) definition of
occupations, which breaks down manufacturing into around 350 occupations.
Each firm is classified in each year by its main sector according to a classification compiled by
the Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatistica (IBGE), which disaggregates manufacturing
into twelve sectors roughly corresponding to two-digit International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) sectors. Sectoral employment shares and the mean log wage in each sector relative
to the overall manufacturing mean log wage are reported in Table 2. From 1994 onwards, firms
are classified according to the more finely-detailed National Classification of Economic Activities
(CNAE), which breaks down manufacturing into over 250 industries. In robustness checks we
use this more detailed classification when it is available. In the web appendix, we report the concordance between our baseline five occupations and twelve sectors and the more disaggregated
occupations and sectors.

6

From Tables 1 and 2, there is substantial variation in average wages across both occupations
and sectors. Skilled White Collar workers are paid on average 52 and 77 log points over Skilled
and Unskilled Blue Collar workers respectively, which correspond to wage premia of roughly
68 and 116 percent respectively. Machinery and equipment sectors 4–6 pay an average wage
premium of around 72 percent compared to the typical manufacturing wage, while furniture and
footwear sectors (7 and 12) pay on average less than two thirds of the typical manufacturing wage.
Therefore both occupations and sectors are consequential for wages, leaving open the possibility
that between-sector and between-occupation effects could be important for the evolution of
overall wage inequality. We provide evidence on the extent to which this is the case below.
Rais also reports information on worker educational attainment. Our choice of educational
classification is guided by the existing labor economics literature, including Autor, Katz, and
Krueger (1998) and Katz and Autor (1999). In our baseline specification, we distinguish the
following four categories: (i) Less than High School, (ii) High School, (iii) Some College, and
(iv) College Degree. We also report the results of a robustness test using nine more disaggregated
educational categories.6 During our sample period, the shares of workers with some college
education or a college degree are relatively constant, while the share of workers with highschool education rises by around 10 percentage points. In addition to these data on educational
attainment, Rais also reports information on age and gender for each worker. Finally, we
construct a measure of a worker’s tenure with a firm based on the number of months for which
the worker has been employed by the firm.
We combine the linked employer-employee data from Rais with trade transactions data
from Secretaria de Comércio Exterior (secex) that are available from 1986-1998. These trade
transactions data report for each export and import customs shipment the tax identifier of the
firm, the product exported and the destination country served. We merge the trade transactions
and linked employer-employee data using the tax identifier of the firm. As shown in Table 2,
exporters account for a much larger share of employment than the number of firms: the fraction
of exporters ranges from 4.1 to 25.4 percent, while the exporter share of employment ranges
from 34.6 to 75.3 percent. Since exporters account for a disproportionate share of employment,
differences in wages between exporters and non-exporters can have disproportionate effects on
the distribution of wages across workers.
Our sample period includes changes in both trade and labor market policies in Brazil. Tariffs
are lowered in 1988 and further reduced between 1990 and 1993, whereas non-tariff barriers are
dropped by presidential decree in January 1990. Following this trade liberalization, the share
of exporting firms nearly doubles between 1990 and 1993, and their employment share increases
by around 10 percentage points.7 In contrast, following Brazil’s real exchange rate appreciation
of 1995, both the share of firms that export and the employment share of exporters decline by
6

The nine more disaggregated categories are: Illiterate, some primary, complete primary, some middle, complete middle, some high, complete high, some college, and complete college.
7
For an in-depth discussion of trade liberalization in Brazil, see for example Kume, Piani, and Souza (2003).
The changes in the exporter employment share discussed above are reflected in a similar pattern of aggregate
manufacturing exports, as shown in the web appendix.

7

around the same magnitude. In 1988, there was also a reform of the labor market. Finally,
the late 1980s and early 1990s witnessed some industrial policy initiatives, which were mostly
applied on an industry-wide basis.8
Our theoretical model is concerned with the cross-section distribution of wages and employment. Therefore we estimate it using data across firms and workers for a given year. We find
consistent predictions for the effects of trade on wage inequality across years both before and
after the reforms.

3

Stylized Facts

In this section, we combine different approaches from the trade and labor literatures to develop a set of stylized facts on wage inequality in Brazil. We present a sequence of variance
decompositions that quantify the relative importance of alternative possible sources of wage
inequality. In each year, we decompose overall wage inequality (T ) into a within (W ) and a
between component (B) as follows:
Tt
Tt
Wt
Bt

= Wt + Bt
P P
= N1t ` i∈` (wit − w̄t )2 ,
P P
= N1t ` i∈` (wit − w̄`t )2 ,
P
= N1t ` N`t (w̄`t − w̄t )2 ,

(1)

where workers are indexed by i and time by t; ` denotes sector, occupation or sector-occupation
cells depending on the specification; Nt and N`t denote the overall number of workers and
the number of workers within cell `; wit , w̄`t and w̄t are the log worker wage, the average log
wage within cell ` and the overall average log wage. The use of the log wage ensures that the
decomposition is not sensitive to the choice of units for wages and facilitates the inclusion of
controls for observable worker characteristics.
When undertaking this decomposition, we report results for the level of wage inequality for
1994, because this year is after trade liberalization and before the major appreciation of the
real. We report growth results for 1986-1995, because this is the period over which the growth
in wage inequality in Brazilian manufacturing occurs. We find a similar pattern of results for
different years, as shown in the figures in subsections D2-D4 of the web appendix, which displays
the evolution of overall wage inequality and its components for each year in our sample.
8

The main elements of the 1988 labor market reform were a reduction of the maximum working hours per week
from 48 to 44, an increase in the minimum overtime premium from 20 percent to 50 percent, and a reduction in
the maximum number of hours in a continuous shift from 8 to 6 hours, among other institutional changes. Among
the industrial policy initiatives, some tax exemptions differentially benefited small firms while foreign-exchange
restrictions and special import regimes tended to favor select large-scale firms until 1990.

8

Table 3: Contribution of the Within Component to Log Wage Inequality
A. Main Period
Within occupation
Within sector
Within sector-occupation
Within detailed-occupation
Within sector–detailed-occupation
B. Late Period
Within detailed-sector–detailed-occupation

Level (percent)
1994
82
83
68

Change (percent)
1986–95
92
73
66

61
56
1994
47

60
54
1994–98
141

Note: Each cell in the table reports the contribution of the within component to total log wage inequality. The
unreported between component is 100 percent minus the reported within component. The within component
exceeds 100 percent when the between component moves in the opposite direction partially offsetting its effect.

3.1

Within versus between sectors and occupations

We start by decomposing overall wage inequality into within and between components using the
decomposition (1) for sector, occupation and sector-occupation cells, building upon Davis and
Haltiwanger (1991) and Katz and Murphy (1992).9
In Panel A of Table 3, we report the contribution of each within component to the level and
growth of overall wage inequality. Although the contribution of the within component inevitably
falls as one considers more and more disaggregated categories, it accounts for 82, 83 and 68
percent of the level of overall wage inequality for occupations, sectors and sector-occupations
respectively (first column). Similarly, the majority of the growth in the variance of log wages
of around 17.4 percent (corresponding to a 8.3 percent increase in the standard deviation of
log wages) is explained by wage inequality within occupations, sectors and sector-occupations
(second column).
Fact 1 The within sector-occupation component of wage inequality accounts for the majority of
both the level and growth of wage inequality in Brazil between 1986 and 1995.
While our baseline results use the IBGE classification of twelve manufacturing sectors and
five occupations, the importance of the within component is robust to the use of alternative more
detailed definitions of sectors and occupations. In Panel A of Table 3, we report results using
detailed occupation cells based on more than 300 occupations in the CBO classification (fourth
row) and using sector-detailed-occupation cells defined using IBGE sectors and CBO occupations
(fifth row). As a further robustness check, Panel B of Table 3 reports results for a later time
period 1994–98, for which the more finely-detailed CNAE sector classification is available. Here
we consider detailed-sector-detailed-occupation cells based on around 350 CNAE sectors and
more than 250 CBO occupations. While some occupations do not exist in some sectors, there
9

See also Barth, Bryson, Davis, and Freeman (2011) for additional evidence using U.S. plant-level data and
Faggio, Salvanes, and Van Reenen (2010) for evidence using U.K. firm-level data.

9

are still around 40,000 sector-occupation cells in this specification. Yet we continue to find that
the within component accounts for around half of the level and most of the growth of wage
inequality.
Neoclassical theories of international trade emphasize wage inequality between different types
of workers (Heckscher-Ohlin model) or sectors (Specific Factors model). Our findings suggest
that this focus on the between component abstracts from an important potential channel through
which trade can affect wage inequality. Of course, our results do not rule out the possibility that
Heckscher-Ohlin and Specific-Factors forces play a role in the wage distribution. As shown in
Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999) and Trefler and Zhu (2005), the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem
can be re-interpreted as applying at a more disaggregated level within sectors and occupations
such as production stages. But these neoclassical theories emphasize dissimilarities across sectors and occupations, and if their mechanisms are the dominant influences on the growth of wage
inequality, we would expect to observe a substantial between-component for grossly-different occupations and sectors (e.g., Managers versus Unskilled Blue-collar workers and Textiles versus
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals). Yet the within component accounts for a substantial proportion of overall wage inequality and continues to do so even when we consider around 40,000
disaggregated sector-occupations. Therefore, while the forces highlighted by neoclassical trade
theory may be active, there appear to be other important mechanisms that are also at work.

3.2

Worker observables and residual wage inequality

We now examine whether the contribution of the within-sector-occupation component of wage
inequality is robust to controlling for observed worker characteristics, building on the recent
literature on residual wage inequality including Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), Juhn, Murphy,
and Pierce (1993), and Lemieux (2006). To control for worker observables, we estimate the
following OLS Mincer regression for log worker wages:
0
wit = zit
ϑt + νit ,

(2)

where i still denotes workers, zit is a vector of observable worker characteristics, ϑt is a vector
of returns to worker observables, and νit is a residual. We estimate this Mincer regression for
each year separately, allowing the coefficients on worker observables (ϑt ) to change over time to
capture changes in the rate of return to these characteristics. We control for worker observables
nonparametrically by including indicator variables for the following categories: education (we
use our baseline four categories discussed above and report a robustness test using the nine more
disaggregated categories), age (using the categories 10-14, 15-17, 18-24, 25-29, 30-39, 40-49, 5064, 65+), quintiles of experience (tenure) at the firm, and gender.
The empirical specification (2) serves as a conditioning exercise, which allows us to decompose the variation in log wages into the component correlated with worker observables and the

10

Table 4: Worker Observables and Residual Log Wage Inequality
Level (percent)
1994

Change (percent)
1986–95

59
89

49
90

Residual wage inequality
— within sector-occupation

Note: The first row decomposes the level and growth of overall log wage inequality into the contributions of
worker observables and residual (within-group) wage inequality using (2) and (3). The unreported contribution
of worker observables equals 100 percent minus the reported contribution of residual wage inequality. The second
row reports the within sector-occupation component of residual wage inequality.

orthogonal residual component:

0
Tt = var (wit ) = var zit
ϑ̂t + var (ν̂it ) ,

(3)

where the hat denotes the estimated value from regression (2). We refer to var (ν̂it ) as residual
wage inequality. We can further decompose residual wage inequality into its within and between
components using sector, occupation or sector-occupation cells, by applying (1) to the estimated
residuals ν̂it .
Table 4 reports the results of the variance decomposition (3). In the first row, we find
that the worker observables and residual components make roughly equal contributions towards
both the level (1990) and growth (1986–1995) of overall wage inequality.10 In the second row,
we decompose the level and growth of residual wage inequality into its within and between
sector-occupation components. We find that the within sector-occupation component dominates, explaining around 90 percent of both level and growth of the residual wage inequality.11
Comparing the results in Tables 4 and 3, the within sector-occupation component is more important for residual wage inequality than for overall wage inequality, which is consistent with the
fact that much of the variation in worker observables is between sector-occupation cells. This
enhanced dominance of the within-sector-occupation component after controlling for worker observables suggests that the majority of residual wage inequality is a within sector-occupation
phenomenon.
Note that residual wage inequality is measured relative to the worker characteristics included
in the regression (2). In principle, there can be other unmeasured worker characteristics that
matter for wages and that are observed by the firm but are uncorrelated with the worker characteristics available in our data. To the extent that this is the case, the contribution of worker
characteristics could be larger than estimated here. On the other hand, the decomposition (3)
10

Consistent with Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik (2004) and Menezes-Filho, Muendler, and Ramey (2008),
we find an increase in the estimated returns to education and experience (tenure) in the Mincer log wage equation,
as reported in the web appendix.
11
We find a similar pattern of results using the nine more disaggregated education categories: for example, the
residual component accounts for 57 percent of the level (1994) of wage inequality and 46 percent of the growth
(1986–95) of wage inequality. Around 90 percent of both the level and growth of this residual wage inequality is
again explained by the within sector-occupation component.

11

Table 5: Regional Robustness

Within
Within
Within
Within

sector-occupation
sector-occupation, São Paulo
sector-occupation-state
sector-occupation-meso

overall inequality

residual inequality

Level
1994

Change
1986–95

Level
1994

Change
1986–95

68
64
58
54

66
49
38
30

89
89
76
72

90
71
56
49

Note: All entries are in percent. The first line duplicates the baseline results from Table 3 (overall inequality)
and 4 (residual inequality). The second line reports the same decomposition for the state of São Paulo. The last
two lines report the within component using sector-occupation-region cells, where regions are first 27 states and
second 136 meso regions.

projects all variation in wages that is correlated with the included worker characteristics on
worker observables. Therefore, if the firm component of wages is correlated with these worker
characteristics, some of its contribution to wage variation can be attributed to worker observables. In the next subsection, we use a different decomposition, in which we explicitly control
for firm fixed effects and find a smaller contribution from worker observables towards overall
wage inequality. Keeping these caveats in mind, we state:
Fact 2 Residual wage inequality is at least as important as worker observables in explaining
the overall level and growth of wage inequality in Brazil from 1986-1995. Most of the level and
growth of residual wage inequality is within-sector-occupation.
One potential concern is that regional differences in wages could drive wage inequality within
sector-occupations for workers with similar observed characteristics.12 In Table 5, we demonstrate the robustness of our results to controlling for region. In the first row, we restate our
baseline results. In the second row, we report results for the state of São Paulo, which accounts
for around 45 percent of formal manufacturing employment in our sample. In the third and
fourth rows, we report results using sector-occupation-region cells instead of sector-occupation
cells, where we define regions in terms of either 27 states or 136 meso regions. These specifications abstract from any variation in wages across workers within sector-occupations that
occurs between regions. Nonetheless, in each specification, we continue to find that a sizeable
fraction of wage inequality is a within phenomenon. This is particularly notable for residual
wage inequality, where the within component still accounts for over two thirds of the level and
around half of the growth of residual inequality even for the detailed meso-regions.13
12
For empirical evidence of wage variation across Brazilian states, see for example Fally, Paillacar, and Terra
(2010) and Kovak (2011).
13
While we find that the majority of residual wage inequality is within sector-occupation-region, we also estimated the Mincer wage regression (2) including meso region fixed effects and sector fixed effects, where the sector
fixed effects capture the between-sector component of wage inequality after controlling for worker observables and
region. As shown in Figure D8 in the web appendix, these estimated sector fixed effects are relatively stable over
time, and do not account for the rising and declining pattern of wage inequality over time.

12

Another potential concern is that our findings for wage inequality could be influenced by
changes in workforce composition if, for example, residual wage inequality is more prevalent
within certain skill groups. We follow Lemieux (2006) to address this concern by holding workforce composition across cells constant at its beginning of the sample values, and find the same
pattern of residual wage inequality, as discussed further in the web appendix.

3.3

Between versus within-firm wage inequality

We now decompose wage inequality within sectors and occupations into the contributions of
within-firm and between-firm components. Here we build on the recent literature in labor
economics that has used linked employer-employee data to estimate firm wage components,
including Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999), Abowd, Kramarz, Margolis, and Troske (2001),
Menezes-Filho, Muendler, and Ramey (2008) and Lazear and Shaw (2009).
For each sector-occupation-year cell, we decompose wage inequality across workers in that
cell into within and between-firm components. To do so, we regress log worker wages on firm
fixed effects and observable worker characteristics for each sector-occupation-year separately:14
0
wit = zit
ϑ`t + ψj`t + νit ,

(4)

where i again indexes workers, j indexes firms, and ` indexes sector-occupation cells; we normalize the firm-occupation-year fixed effects ψj`t to sum to zero for each sector-occupation-year,
which implies that the regression constant is separately identified (and we absorb it into the
0 ϑ ); we allow the coefficients (ϑ ) on observed worker charworker observables component, zit
`t
`t
0 ) to differ across sector-occupations ` and time t to capture variation in their rate
acteristics (zit

of return; and νit is a stochastic error.15
Although ψj`t is a firm fixed effect, the regression (4) is estimated for each sector-occupationyear, and therefore this firm-occupation-year fixed effect varies over time and across occupations.
To emphasize this difference from time-invariant firm fixed effects, we refer to ψj`t as a firm
wage component. We allow the firm wage component to change over time, because theories of
heterogeneous firms and trade such as Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010) emphasize that
firm wages vary with firm revenue (e.g., as firms enter and exit export markets). Similarly, we
allow the firm wage component to differ across occupations because these theories imply that
the sensitivity of firm wages to firm revenue can differ across occupations. We also consider a
14

While we estimate a separate regression for each sector-occupation-year, we could equivalently pool sectoroccupation-year observations and allow all coefficients to vary by sector-occupation-year. With this log linear
regression specification, these two procedures generate the same estimated firm-occupation-year fixed effects.
15
In Table 6, we treat the firm-occupation-year fixed effects (ψ̂j`t ) as data. In the model developed below, we
make the theoretical assumption that the firm observes these wage components and that the model is about these
wage components, which can be therefore taken as data in its estimation. In contrast, without this theoretical
assumption, ψ̂j`t should be interpreted as estimates, in which case the variance of these estimates equals their
true variance plus the variance of a sampling error that depends on the average number of workers employed by a
firm. Since this average is around 70 workers in our data, the resulting correction for the variance of the sampling
error is small, as discussed further in the web appendix.

13

0 ϑ
restricted version of equation (4) excluding the controls for worker observables (so that zit
`t

consists solely of the regression constant). We distinguish between our estimates of ψj`t with and
without the controls for worker observables by using the terms conditional and unconditional
C and ψ U ).
firm wage components respectively (ψj`t
j`t

We use the estimated firm-occupation-year fixed effects controlling for worker observables
C )
(ψ̂j`t

as our baseline measure of the firm component of wages in the econometric model below.

These firm-occupation-year fixed effects capture both firm wage premia for workers with identical characteristics and unobserved differences in workforce composition across firms (including
average match effects). The theoretical literature on heterogeneous firms and labor markets
considers both these sources of wage differences across firms, and our objective is to quantify
the overall contribution of the firm component to wage inequality, rather than sorting out further its different components. Our baseline specification allows the firm-occupation-year fixed
C ) to be correlated with worker observables, as will be the case, for example, if there
effects (ψ̂j`t

is assortative matching on worker observables across firms.
Using the estimates from (4), we decompose wage inequality within each sector-occupationyear into the following four terms:




0
0
C
C
+ var ν̂it .
var (wit ) = var zit
ϑ̂`t + var ψ̂j`t
+ 2 cov zit
ϑ̂`t , ψ̂j`t

(5)

These four terms are: (1) worker observables; (2) the between-firm component (firm-occupation
year fixed effects); (3) the covariance between worker observables and the firm component;
(4) the within-firm component (residual), which by construction is orthogonal to the other
terms. In the restricted version of equation (4) excluding the controls for worker observables,
the decomposition (5) includes only the between-firm and within-firm components.
We summarize the aggregate results from these decompositions as the employment-weighted
average of the results for each sector-occupation-year cell. These aggregate results capture the
average importance of the between-firm and within-firm components in accounting for wage
variation within sector-occupation-year cells. Note that these results do not capture average
differences in wages between occupations within firms, because the firm-occupation-year fixed
effects have a mean of zero for each sector-occupation-year.
In the first two columns of Table 6, we report the results for the unconditional firm wage
U ). We find that between and within-firm wage inequality make roughly equal
component (ψ̂j`t

contributions to the level of wage inequality within sector-occupations (first column, top panel).
In contrast, the growth of wage inequality within sector-occupations is almost entirely explained
by wage inequality between firms (second column, top panel).
In the final two columns of Table 6, we summarize the results for the conditional firm wage
C ). As shown in the third column, we find that the between-firm and withincomponent (ψ̂j`t

firm (residual) components account for roughly equal amounts of the level of wage inequality
within sector-occupations (39 and 37 percent respectively). Of the other two components, worker
observables account for around one eighth, and the covariance between worker observables and
14

Table 6: Decomposition of Log Wage Inequality within Sector-Occupations

Between-firm wage inequality
Within-firm wage inequality
Worker observables
Covar observables–firm effects
Between-firm wage inequality
— Between-firm within meso region

unconditional
firm wage
U
component, ψ̂j`t
Level
Change
1994
1986–1995
55
115
45
−15

64

52

conditional
firm wage
C
component, ψ̂j`t
Level
Change
1994
1986–1995
39
86
37
−11
13
2
11
24
58

51

Note: All entries are in percent. Decomposition of the level and growth of wage inequality within sectoroccupations (employment-weighted average of the results for each sector-occupation). The decomposition in
the first two columns corresponds to the unconditional firm wage component that does not control for worker
observables. The decomposition in the last two columns corresponds to the conditional firm wage component that
controls for worker observables. Figures may not sum exactly to 100 percent due to rounding.

the firm component of wages accounts for the remaining one tenth. In contrast, in the fourth
column, changes in between-firm wage dispersion account for most (86 percent) of the growth in
wage inequality within sector-occupations. The next largest contribution (around one quarter)
comes from an increased correlation between worker observables and the firm wage component
(consistent with increased assortative matching on worker observables). Changes in the residual
within-firm wage dispersion make a small negative contribution.16
We find a similar pattern of results for other years and definitions of sectors and occupations.
And although for brevity we concentrate on aggregate results, the same pattern is pervasive
across sectors and occupations. Note that the contribution of worker observables is smaller in
Table 6 than in Table 4, because we now control for firm-occupation-year fixed effects and focus
on wage inequality within-sector occupations.17
Since location is a fixed characteristic of the firm within a sector-occupation-year cell, the
Mincer regression (4) cannot be augmented with region fixed effects, because these are perfectly
16
We find similar results using firm-year rather than firm-occupation-year fixed effects. For example, estimating
the regression (4) for each sector-year and implementing the decomposition (5), we find the following contributions
to the within-sector component of wage inequality in 1994: worker observables (21 percent); between-firm component (29 percent); covariance (13 percent); within-firm component (37 percent). Over time, the between-firm
component accounts for 76 percent of the growth in wage inequality within sectors from 1986-1995. This similarity
of the results using firm-year fixed effects is consistent with our normalization of the firm-occupation-year fixed
effects to sum to zero for each sector-occupation-year, which implies that they do not capture average differences
in wages between occupations within firms.
17
The reduced contribution from worker observables is explained by two differences from the specification in
Section 3.2. First, the Mincer regression (4) is estimated separately for each sector-occupation-year, instead
of pooling observations across sectors and occupations for each year. Since much of the variation in worker
observables occurs across sectors and occupations (sorting across sectors and occupations), this generates a smaller
contribution from worker observables. Second, the Mincer regression (4) includes firm-occupation-year fixed
effects, which can be correlated with worker observables (sorting across firms). Once we allow for this correlation,
we again find a smaller contribution from worker observables. Empirically, these two differences are of roughly
equal importance in explaining the reduction in the contribution from worker observables.

15

colinear with the firm-occupation-year fixed effects. However, in the bottom panel of Table 6, we
decompose the variation in the firm-occupation-year fixed effects (between-firm wage inequality)
into variation within and between meso regions. Although this specification is conservative,
because the within-meso-region component abstracts from any differences in firm wages across
meso regions, more than one half of between-firm wage inequality within sector-occupations
occurs within meso regions.
Fact 3 Between-firm and within-firm dispersion make roughly equal contributions to the level
of wage inequality within sector-occupations, but the growth of wage inequality within sectoroccupations is largely accounted for by between-firm wage dispersion.
This importance of between rather than within firm variation points towards theories of
heterogeneity between firms as the relevant framework for understanding both the overall wage
distribution and the wage distribution across workers with similar observed characteristics.

3.4

Size and exporter wage premia

We now examine the relationship between the firm wage component and firm employment and export status, building on the empirical trade literature following Bernard and Jensen (1995, 1997).
We first construct a measure of firm wages in each year by aggregating our firm-occupation-year
wage components from the previous subsection to the firm-year level using employment weights.
We next regress both these firm wage components on firm employment and export status for
each year:
ψjt = λo`t + λst hjt + λxt ιt + νjt ,

(6)

where we again index firms by j; ` now denotes sectors; hjt is log firm employment; ιjt ∈ {0, 1}
is a dummy for whether a firm exports; νjt is the residual; λo`t is a sector-time fixed effect; λst is
the employment size wage premium and λxt is the exporter wage premium, where we allow both
of these premia to vary over time.
In Table 7, we report the results for 1994 for both measures of the firm wage component.
Consistent with the existing labor and international trade literatures (e.g., Oi and Idson 1999,
Bernard and Jensen 1995, 1997), we find positive and statistically significant premia for employment size and export status. Using the firm wage component controlling for worker observables
C ), we find a size premium of λ̂s = 0.104 and an exporter premium of λ̂x = 0.168.18 In this
(ψ̂jt

reduced-form specification, the exporter wage premium does not have a causal interpretation,
because it captures both the non-random selection of high-wage firms into exporting (beyond
that captured by firm size) and the impact of exporting on the wage paid by a given firm. In
contrast, our structural model below separates out these two components of the exporter wage
premium by modeling a firm’s endogenous decision to export.
18

Augmenting regression (6) with firm employment growth has little effect on either the estimated size and
exporter wage premia or on the regression fit. In Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler, and Redding (2012), we show
that exporter wage premia are also observed in a panel data specification including firm fixed effects.

16

Table 7: Size and Exporter Wage Premia, 1994

Firm Employment Size
Firm Export Status
Sector Fixed Effects
Within R-squared
Observations

unconditional
firm wage
U
component, ψ̂jt
0.122∗∗∗
(0.010)

conditional
firm wage
C
component, ψ̂jt
0.104∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.262∗∗∗
(0.042)
yes
0.165
91, 410

Note: Parameter estimates from the cross-section specification (6);
1 percent level; standard errors are heteroscedasticity robust.

0.168∗∗∗
(0.024)
yes
0.130
91, 410
∗∗∗

denotes statistical significance at the

Although the employment size and exporter wage premia are statistically significant in both
specifications, the correlation between firm wages, employment and export status is imperfect.
After netting out the sector fixed effects, the within R-squared is around 0.15. This pattern
of results suggests that there is a systematic component of firm wages (related to firm size
and export status) and an idiosyncratic component. While the R-squared of the reduced-form
regressions in Table 7 suggests that the idiosyncratic component is large relative to the systematic
component, this does not rule out changes in the systematic component having economicallymeaningful effects on wage inequality. Indeed, changes in the systematic component shift the
entire wage distribution and hence can have a substantial effect on overall wage dispersion.
Furthermore, the regressions in Table 7 are run at the level of the firm, and hence the estimated
exporter wage premium applies to all workers employed by exporting firms. Since exporters
account for a large share of employment, the average differences in wages between exporters and
non-exporters have a disproportionate effect on the distribution of wages across workers. The
next section quantifies the effect of trade on inequality using an estimated model that captures
both the systematic and idiosyncratic components of firm wages and hence reproduces the crosssection relationship between firm wages, employment and export status in these regressions.
Fact 4 Larger firms on average pay higher wages. Controlling for size, exporters on average
pay higher wages than non-exporters. Nonetheless, controlling for size and export status, the
remaining variation in wage across firms is substantial.
Taken together, the findings of this section have established a number of key stylized facts
that point towards the relevance of recent theories of wage inequality based on firm heterogeneity. Within-sector-occupation inequality accounts for much of overall wage inequality in
Brazil. Most of this within-sector-occupation dispersion is residual wage inequality. Furthermore, between-firm variation in wages accounts for most of this residual wage inequality within
sector-occupations. Finally, wage variation across firms exhibits robust employment size and
exporter wage premia.
17

4

Structural Model

Guided by the empirical findings in the previous section, we now develop and estimate an
extension of the Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010, HIR henceforth) model. In the HIR
model, wages vary between firms within sector-occupations for workers with similar observed
characteristics, and these between-firm differences in wages are correlated with firm employment
and export status.19 Our stylized facts suggest that these are essential ingredients for a model
to capture the empirical patterns of inequality and its relationship with trade openness. In
what follows we first describe and generalize the HIR model; we then develop a method for
estimating this extended model; and lastly we apply the model to the Brazilian data and conduct
counterfactuals.

4.1

Theoretical framework

We begin by briefly describing the theoretical framework of HIR, emphasizing the modifications
we make in order to take the model to the data. The economy consists of many sectors, some
or all of which manufacture differentiated products. The model’s predictions for wages and
employment across firms within each differentiated sector hold regardless of general equilibrium
effects. Therefore we focus on variation across firms and workers within one such differentiated
sector. We are concerned with cross-section dispersion in wages and employment across firms
in a given year and develop a static model to characterize such cross-section dispersion.
Within the sector there are a large number of monopolistically competitive firms, each supplying a distinct horizontally-differentiated variety. Demand functions for varieties emanate from
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences. As a result, a firm’s revenue in market m
(domestic or foreign) can be expressed in terms of its output supplied to this market (Ym ) and
a demand shifter (Am ):
Rm = Am Ym β ,

m ∈ {d, x} ,

where d denotes the domestic market and x the export market. The demand shifter Am depends
on aggregate sectoral expenditure and the sectoral price index in market m. Since every firm is
small relative to the sector, the firm takes this demand shifter as given. The parameter β ∈ (0, 1)
controls the elasticity of substitution between varieties.
In order to export, a firm has to incur a fixed cost eε Fx , where ε is firm-specific and Fx is
common to all firms in the sector. In addition, there are iceberg variable trade costs: τ > 1 units
of a variety have to be exported for one unit to arrive in the foreign market. An exporting firm
allocates its output between the domestic and export market to maximize revenue. As a result,
19

We focus our econometric analysis on firm exporting rather than firm importing. While the mechanism
linking trade and wage inequality in our theoretical model is driven by firm export-market participation as in
Melitz (2003), the model can also be extended to capture firm selection into importing as in Amiti and Davis
(2012). To the extent that firm importing increases productivity and raises revenue per worker, it results in a
similar importer wage premium, and our methodology could be applied to this other dimension of firm selection.
In practice, firm exporting and importing are strongly positively correlated in the cross section, and hence in our
estimation we capture most of the overall effect of firm trade participation.

18

the firm’s revenue (R = Rd + Rx ) can be expressed as a function of its output (Y = Yd + Yx ),
the demand shifter in the domestic market, and a market access variable (Υx ):
1−β

R = [1 + ι (Υx − 1)]

β

Ad Y ,

where

Υx = 1 + τ

−β
1−β



Ax
Ad



1
1−β

(7)

and ι is an indicator variable, equal to one when the firm exports and equal to zero otherwise.
β
The revenue of a non-exporter is R = Ad Y β , while the revenue of an exporter is R = Υ1−β
x Ad Y .

The firm revenue premium from exporting (Υ1−β
x ) is decreasing in the variable trade cost parameter (τ ) and increasing in the foreign demand shifter relative to the domestic demand shifter
(Ax /Ad ).
We assume that firm output (Y ) depends on firm productivity (θ), the measure of workers
hired by the firm (H), and the average ability of these workers (ā):
Y = eθ H γ ā,

0 < γ < 1.

(8)

HIR show that this production function can be derived from human capital complementarities
(e.g., production takes place in teams and the productivity of a worker depends on the average
productivity of her team), or from a model of a managerial time constraint (e.g., a manager
with a fixed amount of time who needs to allocate some time to every worker, as in Rosen
1982). Importantly, the production technology (8) exhibits complementarity between the firm’s
productivity and average worker ability.
Firms and workers are matched in a labor market that exhibits search and matching frictions
of the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides type. A firm bears a search cost bN in order to randomly
match with N workers. The hiring cost b is endogenously determined by the tightness of the
labor market and is taken as given by each firm in the sector. In our econometric model, labor
market tightness is absorbed in the constants of the estimation equations. For this reason we
do not elaborate these details below, and the interested reader can find them in HIR.
Workers are heterogenous in their ability, a, which is drawn from a Pareto distribution
G (a) = 1 − (amin /a)k for a ≥ amin > 0 and k > 1. We assume that both firms and workers are
ex ante equally unaware of the realizations for ability and only know the underlying distribution.
In our static model, the worker ability draws admit two interpretations: they can be inherent
unobserved worker characteristics or match-specific productivities, as well as any combination
of the two. This modeling assumption is consistent with our empirical focus on the component
of wages for workers with similar observable characteristics. In HIR we extend the framework
to explicitly account for observable worker heterogeneity and different occupations, but here we
do not attempt to explain this additional dimension of wage variation and keep the analysis
focused on residual wage dispersion within occupations.
Although a firm cannot observe the individual abilities of its N workers, it can invest resources in screening in order to obtain a signal of these abilities. By choosing an ability threshold
ac , a firm can identify workers with abilities below ac , but it cannot identify the precise ability of
19

δ
each worker. Screening costs increase with the ability threshold and equal e−η C ac /δ, where
η is firm specific while δ and C are common to all firms. We assume δ > k, which ensures
a positive equilibrium size-wage premium, as found empirically in the previous section. The
incentive to screen workers results from the complementarity of firm productivity and worker
abilities in the production function (8), and we show that the more productive firms choose to
be more selective in the labor market. Therefore, higher-ability workers are more likely to end
up employed by more productive firms, and the model features imperfect (noisy) assortative
matching on unobservables in the labor market.
The timing of decisions is as follows. Each firm in a given sector learns its idiosyncratic
draw (θ, η, ε), corresponding to productivity, screening costs, and fixed export costs respectively.
Given this triplet, the firm chooses whether to serve only the domestic market or to also export.20
Each firm pays the search costs and matches with the chosen number of workers. After matching,
each firm chooses its screening threshold and hires the workers with abilities above this threshold.
Therefore, a firm that has searched for N workers and has chosen the ability cutoff ac hires

H = N 1 − G(ac ) = N



amin
ac

k
(9)

workers whose expected ability is

ā = E a|a ≥ ac =

k
ac ,
k−1

(10)

by the properties of the Pareto distribution. Neither the firm nor its hired workers have information on the abilities of individual workers beyond the fact that they are above the cutoff ac .
After the firm has paid all the costs—exporting, search and screening—it engages in multilateral bargaining with its H workers over wages, as in Stole and Zwiebel (1996). HIR show
that the outcome of this bargaining game is a wage rate
W =

βγ R
,
1 + βγ H

so that the wage bill is a fixed fraction of firm revenue. Workers who have not been matched
with firms, or whose abilities have fallen below their firm’s threshold, become unemployed and
are not observed in our data.
Anticipating this bargaining outcome, a firm maximizes its profits by choosing the number
of workers to match with (N ), the screening threshold (ac ), and whether to export:

Π=

max

N,ac ,ι∈{0,1}


δ
1
Ce−η
ε
R(N, ac , ι) − bN −
ac − ιFx e ,
1 + βγ
δ

20

All firms serve the domestic market since we assume no associated fixed costs. In our empirical implementation, we condition on firm entry into production and analyze a firm’s decision to serve the export market and its
choices of employment and wages. Therefore we do not model the firm’s entry decision here. Similarly, we do not
explicitly characterize workers’ decisions to search for employment in a given sector, and refer the reader to HIR.

20

where the revenue function R (N, ac , ι) is defined by (7)–(10). HIR show that the solution to
this problem yields (see (S16) in the online supplement to HIR, and the web appendix):
 1−β  θ  Γβ  η  β(1−γk)
δΓ
R = κr 1 + ι (Υx − 1) Γ e
e
,



 (1−β)(1−k/δ)  θ 
Γ
H = κh 1 + ι (Υx − 1)
e

β(1−k/δ)
Γ



 k(1−β)  θ  βk
δΓ
W = κw 1 + ι (Υx − 1) δΓ
e
eη

(11)
 
eη

β(1−γk)(1−k/δ)
− kδ
δΓ



 k 1+ β(1−γk)
δ
δΓ

,

,

(12)
(13)

and a firm chooses to export in addition to serving the domestic market if and only if:


1−β
Γ

κπ Υx

   β   β(1−γk)
Γ
δΓ
eη
≥ Fx eε ,
− 1 eθ

(14)

where Γ ≡ 1 − βγ − β(1 − γk)/δ > 0 is a derived parameter and the κs ’s (s = r, h, w, π) are
combinations of variables and parameters that are common to all firms in the sector. Condition (14) requires that the additional profits from exporting net of the fixed exporting cost are
positive, and derives from the fact that operational profits are a constant fraction of revenues.
When condition (14) holds, ι = 1; otherwise ι = 0.
Equations (12)–(14) describe firm employment, wages, and export participation. This model
features two additional sources of firm heterogeneity that do not exist in HIR: heterogeneity
in fixed export costs and in screening costs. Without heterogeneous export-market entry costs,
a firm’s revenue and wage bill would perfectly predict its export status. This prediction is
inconsistent with the data, in which there is considerable overlap in the wage and employment
distributions between non-exporters and exporters. Some small low-wage firms export in the
data, but nonetheless, exporters are on average larger and pay higher wages, consistent with
the selection and market access forces in the model. Without heterogeneous screening costs,
employment and wages are perfectly correlated across firms, whereas in the data this correlation
is imperfect. Incorporating these two additional sources of heterogeneity enables the model to
match the empirical cross-sectional distribution of firm employment, wages and export status.
Our theoretical model predicts that firms with higher productivity θ hire more workers, are
more likely to export, and pay higher wages.21 Firms with higher screening productivity η are
both more selective in the labor market and more profitable, and hence pay higher wages and
are more likely to export. However, the effect of screening cost draws on firm employment is
more subtle because of two opposing forces. Lower screening costs raise a firm’s profitability and
result in a larger scale of operation (i.e., increase the number of matches N ), but also increase
a firm’s selectivity in the labor market (reduce the ratio of hires H/N ). On net, the effect of
21

In this model with Stole-Zwiebel bargaining, equilibrium wages are equalized with the firm’s outside option
to replace a worker, since the outside option for all workers is unemployment. Firms that are more selective in
the labor market have workforces that are more costly to replace and hence end up paying higher wages. Due
to complementarity in production, more productive firms choose to be both larger and more selective, and hence
pay higher wages. Through this mechanism, exporters are larger and pay higher wages than non-exporters.

21

lower screening costs on employment is negative.
Therefore productivity shocks alone lead to a perfect correlation between employment and
wages, while in the data this correlation is positive yet far from perfect. Incorporating the
screening shocks allows the model to produce a positive but imperfect correlation between employment and wages, as observed in the data. We make the identifying assumption that the
productivity shocks (θ) and screening shocks (η) are orthogonal to one another and show that
the resulting model can explain the observed empirical correlations between wages, employment
and export status. In the robustness exercises below, we relax this orthogonality assumption
and examine how consequential it is for the predictions of the estimated model.
The model features a two-way relationship between exporting and firm characteristics. On
the one hand, there is a selection effect, whereby firms with high productivity have large employment and high wages and are more likely to find it profitable to export. On the other hand,
there is a market access effect, whereby exporting feeds back into higher firm employment and
wages. Access to the foreign market requires a larger scale of production, which is complementary with greater selectivity in the labor market. Hence, exporters have workforces of greater
average ability and pay higher wages. In the theoretical literature following Melitz (2003), these
two effects are typically not separated because firm productivity perfectly predicts export status. Our framework emphasizes the distinction between these two effects and our econometric
estimation separately identifies them. Using the estimated model, we show that the magnitude
of the trade effects on wage inequality depends on the relationship between these two forces.
As discussed in the Introduction, there exist other models of heterogeneous firms with competitive and frictional labor markets—including competitive assignment, search-and-matching,
fair-wage and efficiency-wage models—that can generate a firm-size wage premium and exporter
premia for wages and employment. We conjecture that our reduced-form specification (12)–(14)
captures to a first approximation the predictions for wages, employment and export status
of a variety of heterogeneous firm models.22 However, by providing explicit microfoundations
for these equations, we ensure that they are consistent with individual optimization and equilibrium, obtain theoretical restrictions on parameters, and are able to undertake model-based
counterfactuals.

4.2

Econometric model

Having described the theoretical structure of the model, we now adapt it for empirical estimation.
Taking logarithms in (12)–(14) and assuming that the shocks (θ, η, ) are jointly normally
distributed, we obtain the following log linear selection model for employment, wages and export
22

It is important to note that not every model that predicts variation in firm wages, size and export status
is capable of explaining the data. For example, if we were to replace the shock to screening in our theoretical
model with a shock to the bargaining power of a firm relative to its workers, the resulting correlations would not
be consistent with the data. Indeed, the high wage of a firm in this case is a signal of its low bargaining power,
which in turn reduces its profitability and hence diminishes its chances to export. In other words, controlling for
employment, exporters should be relatively low-wage firms, reflecting their high bargaining power and hence high
profitability. Similar logic is likely to rule out the importance of heterogeneity in monitoring ability across firms.

22

status:


 h = αh + µh ι + u,
w = αw + µw ι + ζu + v,


ι = I{z ≥ f },


u, v, z

0





σu2

0

ρu σ u

 
∼ N 0, 

0

σv2


ρv σ v   ,
1

ρu σ u ρv σ v

(15)

where h and w are the natural logarithms of employment and wages respectively and I{·} denotes
an indicator function. The reduced-form shocks (u, v, z) are functions of the underlying structural shocks (θ, η, ε) as defined in the appendix. The mean-zero normalization for all shocks,
the unit-variance normalization for the export-participation shock z and the orthogonality normalization for the shocks to employment and wages (u, v) are all without loss of generality.23
The coefficients µh and µw capture the market access effects of trade on employment and wages.
The correlations (ρu , ρv ) between (u, v) and z capture the selection effects of high employment
and wage firms into exporting.
Our econometric model (15) is the reduced-form of the structural model, and consequently
the estimated coefficients, Θ ≡ {αh , αw , ζ, σu , σv , ρu , ρv , µh , µw , f }, are reduced-form functions
of the parameters of our theoretical model and variables such as trade and labor market costs. A
(1−β)/Γ

reduction in variable trade costs raises firm revenue through improved market access (Υx

),

and hence increases the market access effects for firm employment and wages (µh , µw ) and
reduces the export threshold (f ). Both the market access effects and the export threshold also
depend on relative market demands in the domestic and export market (Ax /Ad ), and hence can
rise and fall over time with fluctuations in the real exchange rate. Since the econometric model’s
coefficients are likely to change over time, we rely only on cross-section data on firms in each
given year to estimate this model.
In the appendix we provide the closed-form relationships between the reduced-form and
the structural parameters. Not all structural parameters are identified. Nonetheless, we show
that the reduced-form coefficients provide sufficient statistics for the impact of trade on the
wage distribution. In other words, the estimated model offers enough information to undertake
counterfactuals for the impact of reductions in fixed and variable trade costs on wage inequality,
as shown below. Specifically, variable trade costs τ affect only (µh , µw , f ), through their impact
on the market access variable Υx , while the fixed exporting cost Fx affects only f .24 Below
we use these relationships between the reduced-form and structural parameters to quantify the
effects of reductions in τ and Fx on wage inequality.
Finally, we discuss the restrictions on the reduced-form coefficients imposed by the theory.
The model requires non-negative market access effects on employment and wages (see footnote 24), while the assumption of orthogonality between the structural shocks θ and η results
23
Note that the latter orthogonality normalization is not an outcome of the orthogonality assumption for
structural shocks (θ, η), the implication of which we describe below.
 (1−β)/Γ

(1−β)/Γ
(1−β)/Γ
24
We have f = απ + log Fx − log Υx
− 1 /σ, µh = (1 − k/δ) log Υx
and µw = (k/δ) log Υx
where Υx is defined in (7), and απ and σ are defined in the appendix. In the theoretical model, Υx > 1,
(1−β)/Γ
0 < k/δ < 1, and Γ > 0, which implies µh , µw > 0. Note that exp{µh + µw } = Υx
, which allows us to use
the estimates of (µh , µw ) to isolate the effect of variable trade costs on the export threshold f .

23

in two additional inequalities on µw /µh (see the appendix). We summarize these restrictions in:
µh , µw ≥ 0,

ζ ≤ µw /µh ≤ ζ +

σv2
.
(1 + ζ)σu2

(16)

The interpretation of the second set of inequalities is as follows. In the model without screening
shocks (η ≡ 0), employment and wages are perfectly correlated, which implies ζ = µw /µh =
k/(δ −k). The second equality (µw /µh = k/(δ −k)) does not depend on the presence of screening
shocks and follows from the general definition of µh and µw (see footnote 24). The first equality
(ζ = µw /µh ) becomes an inequality when screening shocks are introduced, because ζ controls the
covariance between employment and wages within the groups of non-exporters and exporters,
and this covariance becomes weaker with the importance of screening shocks. This explains
the role of ζ as the lower bound in (16). At the same time, the difference between µw /µh and
ζ is bounded above by the relative dispersion of the screening and productivity shocks, which
explains the upper bound in (16). In practice, we find that this upper bound is never binding
in the estimation.
We estimate the model using Maximum Likelihood. Our econometric model (15) takes a
form similar to a Tobit Type 5 model in Amemiya (1985) or a regression model with endogenous
switching in Maddala (1983). A unit of observation in the model is a firm j, and each observation
is a triplet of firm log employment, log wages and binary export status, xj = (hj , wj , ιj )0 . The
 Q
likelihood function of the data L Θ|{xj } ≡ j PΘ {xj } admits a simple closed-form expression
(see the appendix):
"
!#1−ιj "
!#ιj
f − ρu ûj − ρv v̂j
f − ρu ûj − ρv v̂j
1
1
PΘ {xj } =
φ(ûj )
φ(v̂j ) Φ p
1−Φ p
, (17)
σu
σv
1 − ρ2u − ρ2v
1 − ρ2u − ρ2v



where ûj ≡ hj − αh − µh ιj /σu , and v̂j ≡ (wj − αw − µw ιj ) − ζσu ûj /σv . The functions
φ(·) and Φ(·) in (17) are respectively the density and cumulative distribution functions of a
standard normal. This simple expression for the density of the data xj is intuitive: the first two
terms reflect the likelihood of the continuous distribution of shocks which result in the observed
employment and wages, while the last two terms are a standard Probit likelihood for binary
export status given the employment and wages of the firm. Given the data {xj }, we maximize
the likelihood function defined in (17) with respect to Θ subject to (16).
The coefficients Θ of our econometric model are identified through the functional form and
distributional assumptions summarized in (15), as well as the theoretical restrictions (16). There
are at least two alternative identification strategies that have been used in the related empirical
literature on trade and labor markets. First, one can rely on time-series shocks to trade costs
and export demand (such as MERCOSUR or exchange rate devaluation, as used for example
in Verhoogen 2008). However, in the context of our theoretical model, such shocks affect both
the market access coefficients (µh and µw ) and selection into exporting (f ). Therefore, they do
not help to separately identify the market access and selection effects, which is the focus of our
24

estimation.25 Second, following Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999), another reduced-form
literature has used linked employer-employee datasets to seek to separately identify firm, worker
and match wage effects. To do so, this literature typically relies on the assumption that the
mobility of workers across firms is random after controlling for firm fixed effects, worker fixed
effects and time-varying worker observables. However, since our model features (noisy) assortative matching of workers on unobservables across firms, the assumption that the time-varying
unobserved component of wages is uncorrelated with movements of workers between firms is
unlikely to be satisfied. Therefore, instead of seeking to separate out the various components
of firm wages, we focus on the overall firm wage component (including the firm, average worker
and average match effects). We use the cross-sectional dimension of the data together with the
structure of our model and its identifying assumptions to quantify the effects of trade in the
estimated model.

4.3

Estimation and model fit

We now turn to the empirical estimation of the model. We first discuss the coefficient estimates
and the model fit. We later use the estimated model to undertake model-based counterfactuals
and evaluate the contribution of trade to wage inequality. Finally, we close with a discussion of
a number of robustness and sensitivity checks, which in particular provide bounds for the effect
of trade on wage inequality.
As for our stylized facts above, we pick 1994 as the baseline year for our estimation, because
this year is after trade liberalization and before the major appreciation of the Real in 1995. We
also estimate the model for all other years and find very similar results, both qualitatively and
quantitatively. The data for the baseline estimation consists of firm export status, employment
C ) from the Mincer
and wages. Our baseline firm wage variable is the firm wage component (ψjt

regression (4), consistent with our focus on residual wage inequality within occupations.
Table 8: Coefficient estimates, 1994
µh
µw
ρu
ρv
f

Coefficient
1.992
0.197
0.023
0.199
1.341

Std Error
0.019
0.022
0.004
0.024
0.006

Note: Number of observations: 91,410 (firms). Maximum likelihood estimates and robust (sandwich-form) asymptotic standard errors (see the web appendix).

We start by discussing the coefficients Θ. The key coefficients of interest for the effects of
trade on wage inequality are the market access coefficients (µh , µw ), the selection correlation
25
Within our theoretical model, a suitable instrument would both affect the firm export cost shock ε and be
uncorrelated with the firm’s returns to exporting captured by the market access variable Υx . Such variables
are inherently hard to find, because most firm-level variables are endogenously determined by analogy with
employment and wages, and hence cannot be used as instruments.

25

coefficients (ρu , ρv ), and the export threshold (f ). In Table 8, we report the estimated values
of these coefficients and their standard errors for our baseline year, and the estimates for all
other coefficients and for all other years can be found in the web appendix. As shown in the
table, we find positive market access and selection effects. Therefore exporting raises both the
employment and wages of a given firm (µh , µw > 0) and there is selection of high employment
and high wage firms into exporting (ρu , ρv > 0). The export threshold f captures the fraction
of non-exporters, which is equal to Φ(f ) in the model. Small standard errors reported in the
second column of Table 8 reflect that all coefficients are estimated precisely given the large size
of the sample. In the robustness section below we discuss the values of these parameters under
alternative estimation assumptions, as well as contrast the estimated market access coefficients
with the reduced-form exporter wage premium.
In the appendix, we show the evolution of these and all other coefficients for each year of
our sample. While the selection correlations are relatively stable over time, the market access
coefficients and export threshold experience some dynamics, which is consistent with changes
in variable trade costs and relative foreign market demand.26 The intercepts αh and αw fit
the means of firm log employment and wages, and among other things depend on equilibrium
variables common to all firms such as the domestic demand shifter and labor market costs.
The coefficient ζ controls the covariance between firm employment and wages, and is relatively
stable over time. Finally, σu accounts for the residual variance of employment, and σv for the
residual variance of wages conditional on employment and export status. Since employment and
wages are not very closely correlated, changes over time in σv account for a large part of the
fluctuation in wage dispersion. Nonetheless, as we show below, other model parameters also play
an important role in shaping wage inequality in both the cross-section and for counterfactual
changes in model parameters such as trade costs.
We next examine the model’s fit. In Table 9 we report moments in the data and in an artificial
dataset simulated using the estimated model. We focus on the first and second moments of the
firm employment and wage distributions, both unconditional and conditional on firm export
status. These moments provide a good characterization of the overall joint distribution of firm
employment, wages and export status, so that an efficient GMM procedure based on the subset
of moments reported in Table 9 recovers parameter estimates close to our maximum-likelihood
estimates (see the appendix).
Table 9 shows that the model matches all first moments, both conditional and unconditional,
as well as the unconditional second moments. The fit of the model is worse for the conditional
second moments, in particular for the standard deviations of firm employment and wages among
exporters. Indeed, the model does not allow the standard deviations of wages and employment
26

Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011) find net employment reductions in comparative-advantage industries and
at exporters. Consistent with these results, we find a decline in the market access effect for employment (µh ) over
time, which reflects in part exchange rate appreciation. Despite these time-series changes, the cross-section data
used in our estimation exhibit a substantial positive market access effect for employment (µh ) in each year in our
sample. As a result, we find similar predicted impacts of trade on cross-section wage dispersion for each year in
our sample.

26

Table 9: Firm moments, 1994
All firms
2.96
−0.33
1.20
0.43
0.33

Mean h
Mean w
Std deviation h
Std deviation w
Correlation h & w
Fraction of exporters

Data
Non-exp.
2.78
−0.37
1.00
0.43
0.24

Exporters
4.82
−0.01
1.46
0.38
0.32

9.0%

All firms
2.96
−0.33
1.20
0.43
0.32

Model
Non-exp. Exporters
2.78
4.83
−0.37
0.00
1.05
1.05
0.42
0.42
0.25
0.24

9.0%

C
Note: h is firm log employment and w is firm log wage (conditional firm wage component, ψjt
, from (4) used as

data in estimation).

Table 10: Moments of worker wage dispersion, 1994
Data
0.42
0.42
0.35

Model
0.46
0.42
0.42

Gini coefficient

0.23

0.25

90/10-ratio
— 90/50
— 50/10

2.95
1.63
1.81

3.23
1.80
1.80

Std deviation
— non-exporters
— exporters

Note: Each worker is assigned the wage of the firm (conditional firm wage component from 4) to construct the
distribution of wages across workers. 90/10-ratio is the ratio of the wages in the 90th percentile and the 10th
percentile in the wage distribution (and similar for 90/50 and 50/10).

to differ across exporters and non-exporters, while the data exhibit such variation.
We next examine the model’s ability to fit the moments of the wage distribution across
workers. Consistent with the model, we calculate the worker-level moments by assigning the
firm wage (firm wage component from (4)) to each worker employed by the firm. Table 10
shows the model’s fit for moments capturing worker wage dispersion—the standard deviation
of log wages, Gini coefficient and percentile ratios. The model overpredicts wage dispersion
in the upper tail and among exporters, while matching it closely in the lower tail and among
non-exporters. Although these moments are complex non-linear transformations of the firm
employment and wage distributions that are not targeted directly in the estimation, we find
that the model matches these moments relatively closely. Furthermore, the quality of the fit is
similar across the different measures of wage inequality. We thus proceed with the remainder of
the analysis by using the standard deviation of worker log wages as our main inequality measure,
but the results are similar for the other measures of wage inequality.
In Figure 1, we examine the ability of the model to fit the entire distributions of observed
employment and wages. In the first panel of the figure, we display kernel densities for firm
employment and wages, for all firms and for exporters and non-exporters separately. In the
second panel of the figure, we display kernel densities for the distribution of wages across workers,
27

Log Employment

Log Firm Wages
Data

0.4

0.8

Model

0.2

0

0.4

1

10

100

0

1000 10000

1/4

Exporters vs Non-exporters
1.2

0.4

0.8

0.2

0.4

1

10

100

Data (non-exp)

1

2

4

Exporters vs Non-exporters

0.6

0

1/2

0

1000 10000
Data (exporters)

1/4

1/2

1

Model (non-exp)

Log Worker Wages
1.2

2

4

Model (exporters)

Exporters vs Non-exporters

0.8
0.8

0.4

0

0.4

1/4

1/2

1

2

0

4

1/4

1/2

1

2

4

Figure 1: Kernel densities for firm and worker employment and wages, 1994
Note: Log firm employment (scale: number of workers) and log firm and worker wages (scale: multiples of sample
average log wage).

28

Table 11: Employment and exporter wage premia, 1994
Employment premium
Exporter premium
R-squared

Data
0.10
0.16
0.11

Model
0.10
0.16
0.11

Note: Coefficients and R-squared from the regression of firm log wages (firm wage component from (4)) on firm
log employment and export status. To ensure the comparability of the results in the data and model, these
regressions exclude industry fixed effects (which explains the small difference in estimates from Table 7).

both for all workers and for workers employed by exporters and non-exporters separately. We
find that the model is overall successful in fitting these distributions, and in particular captures
both the wide overlap in the employment and wage distributions across exporters and nonexporters, as well as the noticeable rightward shift in the employment and wage distributions of
exporters relative to non-exporters.27
Finally, we examine the model’s ability to fit the cross-sectional relationship between firm
wages, employment and export status in the reduced-form regressions in Table 7. In Table 11, we
compare the coefficients and R-squared in these regressions in the data to those in the simulated
dataset from the estimated model (we again use the firm wage component from (4)). To ensure
the comparability of the results in the data and model, these regressions exclude industry fixed
effects (which explains the small difference in the estimates between Tables 7 and Table 11).
The model matches the employment-size and exporter premia as well as the overall fit of the
regressions. In both the data and model, larger firms pay higher wages (with an elasticity of 10
percent) and exporters pay higher wages conditional on their employment size (by 16 percent).
In both cases, this relationship is noisy, and hence firm size and export status explain only
around 11 percent of the variation in wages. This cross-sectional relationship between firm size,
export status and wages is at the core of the trade-and-inequality mechanism that we emphasize
in this paper, and hence the ability of the model to replicate this empirical relationship is an
important specification check.
Having established the ability of the model to match the empirical patterns of employment,
wages and exporting, we next use the estimated model to undertake counterfactuals.

4.4

Counterfactuals

Using the estimated model, we carry out two counterfactual exercises. While we again focus on
our benchmark year of 1994, results are similar for all years in our sample. In both counterfactuals we hold all parameters of the model constant apart from trade costs. In the first exercise,
we only change the fixed cost of exporting Fx by gradually lowering it from high levels at which
no firm exports to low levels at which all firms export. These changes in the fixed cost of ex27

One noticeable failure in the fit of the distributions is that the employment distribution in the data is more
skewed than the log-normal distribution assumed in the structural model. As a result, the model underpredicts
the employment share of the exporters, despite matching exactly the fraction of exporting firms.

29

porting influence wage inequality through the export threshold f in the equation for selection
into export markets in (15). In the second exercise, we only change the variable (iceberg) trade
cost τ , again lowering it gradually from prohibitively high levels to low levels at which most
firms find it optimal to export. These changes in the variable trade cost affect wage inequality
through both the export threshold f in the selection equation and the market access premia
{µw , µh } in the wage and employment equations in (15).28
We report the results of these counterfactuals in the two panels of Figure 2, where we plot
the standard deviation of log worker wages against the exporter employment share. For ease
of interpretation, the inequality measure in each panel is normalized by its counterfactual value
in autarky (equal to 0.43). We vary trade costs and trace out counterfactual wage inequality
for all values of the exporter employment share in between zero and one. Therefore we compare the actual level of wage inequality in 1994 to both the counterfactual autarky value and
counterfactual values in open economy equilibria in which some or all firms export.
As shown in Figure 2, both counterfactual exercises emphasize a hump-shape relationship
between wage inequality and trade openness. This inverted-U-shape pattern is a key theoretical
result in the HIR model, in which it is obtained under substantially more stylized assumptions
(no heterogeneity in screening or fixed exporting costs and a Pareto distribution of productivity). Therefore, we now confirm that this theoretical conclusion also holds in a substantially
richer quantitative model capable of capturing the salient features of the employment and wage
distributions for the cross-section of firms.
Quantitatively, we find that the wage inequality predicted by the model for 1994 (corresponding to the red dot in both panels of Figure 2) is 7.6 percent above the counterfactual level
of inequality in autarky.29 Interestingly, this corresponds roughly to the peak of inequality when
we vary the fixed costs of exporting in the left panel of Figure 2. Therefore, starting from the
level of inequality in 1994, further reductions in fixed exporting costs do not lead to additional
increases in inequality. This is because at this level of trade openness almost half of the Brazilian
manufacturing labor force is employed by exporting firms, and hence further increases in trade
participation make the distribution of wages only more equal.
This is not the case, however, for the variation in variable trade costs shown in the right
panel of Figure 2. The reason is that reductions in variable trade costs affect wage inequality
through both an increase in the extensive margin of export participation and an increase in
the intensive margin of the exporter premia for inframarginal exporters. In this case, the peak
28

Using the structure of the model, a reduction in variable trade costs corresponds to a proportional increase
in the market access coefficients µh and µw , as well as a reduction in the exporting threshold f in (15). We
provide the details of the design of this counterfactual in the appendix. Note that, in the general equilibrium of
the model, changes in fx and τ typically lead to changes in variables common to all firms that are captured by
the intercepts αh and αw in equation (15). However, the measures of wage inequality that we consider are not
sensitive to the values of these intercepts that are common to all firms, and hence our counterfactuals are robust
to these general equilibrium considerations (HIR provide further discussion of this point).
29
The autarky counterfactual is the most straightforward to calculate, as when no firms export (ρu , ρv , µh , µw )
are inconsequential and only the values of (ζ, σu , σv ) are required to simulate the joint distribution of employment and wages up to the intercepts (αh , αw ), which are common across firms and do not affect the inequality
calculations.

30

Std deviation w (relative to autarky)

Std deviation w (relative to autarky)

1.1

1.08

1.08

1.06

1.06

1.04

1.04

1.02

1.02

1

0

1.1

20%

40%

60%

80%

Exporter Employment Share

100%

1

0

20%

40%

60%

80%

Exporter Employment Share

100%

Figure 2: Counterfactuals: (a) Fixed export costs and (b) Variable trade cost
Note: The figure plots counterfactual standard deviation of log worker wages (scaled by its counterfactual autarky
level equal to 0.43) against exporter employment share in the simulated model. The parameters of the model are
held constant at their 1994 estimated values, with the exception of fixed exporting cost Fx in the left panel and
variable trade cost τ in the right panel (which are varied from high to low values to cover the full range of exporter
employment share). The red dot denotes the points corresponding to the 1994 estimated model.

of inequality is 9.6 percent above the autarky level, and it is reached when over 60 percent of
workers are employed by exporters. Finally, around the estimated level of trade openness in
1994 in the right panel of Figure 2, further reductions in variable trade costs that lead to a 10
percentage point increase in the exporter employment share result in about a 2 percent increase
in wage inequality.
To put these numbers into perspective, the increase in the relevant component of wage
inequality in Brazil between 1986 and 1995 amounted to an increase of around 20 percent in the
standard deviation of log worker wages.30 Export participation rises in the early 1990s before
reaching a peak in 1993 and declining thereafter. Over these years, the exporter employment
share increased by around 10 percentage points, while wage inequality rose by around 4 percent.
Our counterfactual exercises have the caveats that we focus solely on the mechanism of firmbased variation in wages and do not consider other possible influences on inequality. Nonetheless,
the results of these counterfactuals suggest that the trade-channel in the model can generate
sizeable movements in wage inequality, of a similar order of magnitude as the movements in
wage inequality observed in Brazil in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Bounds of inequality effects We now study the robustness of our quantitative conclusions
by considering counterfactual exercises under alternative specifications. We begin by relaxing
our identifying assumption that θ and η are orthogonal by considering special cases of the model
that put bounds on the possible inequality effects of trade openness.
Given the correlation between wages, employment and export status, the magnitude of the
30

We quote here the increase in the between-firm within-sector-occupation component of worker wage inequality
which is the focus of our model. The increase in overall wage inequality was more modest: the overall standard
deviation of log worker wages increased by 8 percent.

31

Table 12: Alternative specifications

Theoretical restriction (16)
No market access effect (µw = 0)
No selection effect (ρv = 0)
No trade effects (µh = µw = 0)

Estimated
µh
µw
1.99 0.20
1.92 —
2.04 0.36
—
—

coefficients
ρu
ρv
0.02 0.20
0.06 0.42
0.00 —
0.60 0.18

GMM
objective
0.038
0.027
0.043
0.149

Note: Theoretical restriction corresponds to our maximum likelihood estimates under the theoretical restriction
(16) from Table 8. No-market-access, no-selection, and no-trade-effects lines correspond to maximum likelihood
estimates under the restrictions that µw = 0, ρv = 0 and µh = µw = 0 respectively. The last column reports
the square root of the GMM objective based on eleven first and second moments of employment and wages for
exporters and non-exporters (as reported in Table 9) using the diagonal of the efficient weighting matrix (see the
text and appendix for details).

effect of trade on inequality depends on the balance between the selection and market access
effects. The selection effect suggests that more productive, higher-wage-firms are more likely to
select into exporting, and in the model it is captured by the selection correlations ρu and ρv .
The market access effect, in contrast, suggests that access to foreign markets induces firms to
increase both their employment and wages, and in the model it is captured by the coefficients
µh and µw . Intuitively, the trade effects on inequality are stronger, the stronger is the market
access channel relative to the selection channel.31
In our estimation of the model, we use the assumption that the productivity shocks (θ) and
screening shocks (η) are orthogonal to identify the relative importance of the market access and
selection effects. We now drop this assumption and use the econometric model (15) to provide
lower and upper bounds on the importance of each one of them consistent with the theoretical
restriction that µh , µw ≥ 0. Specifically, we estimate a version of the model in which we shut
down the market access effect in the wage equation (setting µw = 0 and estimating µh ) and
also a version of the model in which we shut down the wage-equation selection effect (setting
ρv = 0 and estimating ρu ). We expect the former model to correspond to the lower bound on
the effects of trade on inequality and the latter model to correspond to the upper bound.
The first three rows of Table 12 compare the parameter estimates under our identifying
assumption that θ and η are orthogonal with those for the two limiting cases of the model—
with no market access and no selection effects, respectively. The estimated parameters for the
wage equation, not surprisingly, vary a lot across the three cases.32 In particular, the market
access coefficient µw equals 0.2 in our baseline specification, which is about half way between
the value of zero under the no-market-access specification and the value of 0.36 under the noselection specification. These estimates of the market access effect of exporting on wages (µw )
31

Indeed, if the data can be fully explained by the selection mechanism with absolutely no market access effect
(µh = µw = 0), trade participation merely reflects selection and does not lead to any changes in the wage or
employment distributions.
32
At the same time, the estimated parameters for the employment equation are not sensitive across specifications: the selection correlation ρu is always close to zero and the market access coefficient µh is around two.

32

can be contrasted with the reduced-form estimate of the exporter wage premium of 0.16 in
Table 11. This contrast emphasizes that the reduced-form coefficient by itself is insufficient to
determine the market access effect, implying that back-of-the-envelope calculations based on the
reduced-form estimates are unlikely to be reliable.
Similarly, the selection correlation ρv equals 0.20 in our baseline specification, which is again
about half-way between zero under no selection and 0.42 under no market access effects. Therefore, our baseline parameter estimates incorporate both selection and market access forces, and
lie squarely within the two bounds without being close to either extreme.
In the last column of Table 12, we report a measure of the model’s fit across specifications,
as captured by the square root of a GMM objective function based on the eleven first and second
moments for exporters and non-exporters reported in Table 9.33 We find that our maximum
likelihood estimates under our identifying assumption that θ and η are orthogonal fit the data
well, with a value for the GMM objective function equal to 0.038, which implies a cumulative
discrepancy between the moments in the model and in the data equal to 3.8 percent of the
sample standard deviation of the moments. The no-market-access and no-selection estimates
have a similar level of fit with GMM objectives of the same order of magnitude.34 Notably, all
three specifications reproduce the empirical employment-size and exporter wage premia (as in
Table 11). Therefore, by considering the no-selection and no-market-access bounds, we do not
sacrifice the ability of the model to account for the observed correlation structure between firm
employment, export status and wages.
Finally, the last row of Table 12 considers an additional specification, in which we completely
shut down the effects of trade on employment and wage distributions by setting both µh = 0
and µw = 0. Unsurprisingly, this specification generates large estimated selection correlations
ρu and ρv , which enables even this restricted version of the model to reproduce the pattern of
empirical correlations of employment, export status and wages. Nonetheless, this specification
falls short of matching the average differences in employment size and wages between exporters
and non-exporters, and as a result, its fit (as reflected in the GMM objective) is an order of
magnitude worse than that of the other three specifications discussed above. Therefore, the data
reject this specification in which there are no market access effects of trade on employment and
wages. In other words, the data viewed through the prism of our econometric model suggests
that trade participation is an important determinant of employment and wage variation across
firms.
We now examine the sensitivity of the model’s quantitative conclusions to the relative importance of the selection and market access forces. In Table 13, the first column of Panel A
33

Specifically, the GMM objective function we use is the sum of the squared moment conditions scaled by the
respective standard deviation of the moment in the data, as discussed further in the appendix. Since we use an
overidentified set of moments, the GMM objective is separated from zero even when we use the unconstrained
GMM procedure to estimate the model. Specifically, for the 1994 sample in Table 12, the efficient GMM procedure
results in the square root of the GMM objective equal to 0.024 which is the comparison benchmark for the last
column of the table.
34
While the no market access bound has a slightly smaller value for the GMM objective for the 1994 sample,
all three specifications have a similar level of fit with the exact rankings differing across years.

33

Table 13: Trade effects on inequality

Panel A: Inequality bounds
Theoretical restriction (16)
Lower bound (no market access, µw = 0)
Upper bound (no selection, ρv = 0)
Panel B: Robustness and extensions
Sector-region heterogeneity
Multi-destination A
Multi-destination B

1994 over
autarky

Peak over
autarky

7.6%
3.3%
8.3%

7.8%
5.0%
8.8%

8.8%

—

14.0%
15.9%

—
—

Note: Percent changes in inequality (standard deviation of log worker wages) relative to autarky. The first
column computes the change in inequality between the predicted values for 1994 and the autarky counterfactual.
The second column computes the peak change in inequality, going from autarky to the counterfactual value of
f resulting in maximal inequality given the other parameters (i.e., corresponding to the peak in the left panel
of Figure 2). The sector-region dummies specification allows the parameters (αh , αw , f ) to differ across sectorregions (12 sectors × 136 meso regions). The multi-destination specifications distinguish between exporters serving
different numbers of destination markets (see the text for further discussion).

reports the percentage changes in inequality between the fitted 1994 cross-section and the counterfactual of autarky. We report this comparison for both our baseline estimates and for the
no-market-access and no-selection bounds. Our baseline estimates predict 7.6 percent higher
wage inequality in the 1994 cross-section than under autarky (as in Figure 2). In comparison,
the no-market-access and no-selection bounds predict an increase in wage inequality of 3.3 and
8.3 percent respectively. Therefore, our baseline estimates fall within the two bounds, closer to
the no-selection bound. It is worth discussing why the no-market-access bound still produces
sizeable inequality effects, despite no market access effects of exporting on wages (µw = 0). The
reason is that there are positive market access effects of exporting on employment (µh > 0),
so that reductions in trade costs reallocate employment towards larger firms that pay higher
wages, inducing an increase in wage inequality.
The second column of Panel A reports an alternative quantification of the bounds on inequality effects by comparing the maximum inequality effects across the three specifications.
Specifically, we calculate the counterfactual change between autarky and peak inequality in the
open economy.35 We find smaller differences in peak wage inequality across the three specifications: our baseline specification implies peak inequality 7.8 percent above autarky, while
the corresponding lower (no-market-access) bound is 5 percent and the corresponding upper
(no-selection) bound is 8.8 percent. The reason for this tighter interval is that peak inequality
is attained for different levels of trade openness across specifications. Without market access
effects, the peak inequality is attained already when 4 percent of firms export, while without
35
For this counterfactual, we vary the export threshold f (and hence the fraction of exporting firms) holding
other parameters constant (as in the left panel of Figure 2) to find the maximum level of inequality.

34

selection effects the peak does not happen until 11.5 percent of firms export. As a point of
comparison, the fraction of exporters in 1994 is 9 percent, and this roughly corresponds to the
peak level of inequality under our baseline estimates.
We conclude that our baseline estimates identify an interior point in a fairly tight interval of
the possible trade effects on inequality, consistent with the observed cross-section relationship
between firm employment, wages and export status.
Further robustness and extensions

We close this section by considering an additional

robustness test and extension. One potential concern is that employment and wages could vary
systematically across industries and regions in ways that are correlated with export status. To
address this concern, we extend our econometric model to allow the constants of the employment
and wage equations (αh , αw ) and the export threshold f to vary by sector-region.36 In this
specification, we find similar market access and selection effects (µh , µw , ρu , ρv ) and similar
predicted impacts of trade on wage inequality as in our baseline estimates. As shown in the first
row of Panel B of Table 13, predicted wage inequality in 1994 in the model with sector-region
heterogeneity is 8.8 percent above the counterfactual autarky level, slightly above the value for
our baseline estimates. This suggests that our findings are robust to unobserved heterogeneity
across sectors and regions.
More generally, we find an impact of trade on wage inequality that is in line with our baseline
estimates across a range of additional robustness tests. For example, when we re-estimate the
model for 1990, the predicted increase in wage inequality relative to autarky is 7.4 percent.
Additionally, we re-estimate the model using the unconditional firm wage component instead of
the conditional firm wage component from the Mincer regression (4), and find a slightly larger
counterfactual increase in inequality over autarky equal to 8.8%. This is the case because a
portion of the exporter wage premium is accounted for by sorting of workers on observables across
firms, which we net out from our baseline analysis focused on residual wage dispersion within
occupations. Indeed, the model estimation using the unconditional wage component results in
both a slightly larger market access effect µw and a slightly larger selection correlation ρv .
Finally, we consider an extension in which we refine our definition of exporting. The distinction between exporters and non-exporters potentially abstracts from heterogeneity among
exporters. In particular, some Brazilian firms export only to Argentina, whereas others export
to multiple destinations, some of which may be remote. In a generalization of the theoretical
model to incorporate multiple destinations, each additional export market increases firm market
access and hence employment and wages (that is, µh and µw depend on the set of export markets served), and firms that export to more destinations are on average more productive, larger
and pay higher wages (through the selection correlations ρu and ρv ). Since exporting to more
destinations raises employment and wages, this generalization is likely to magnify the impact
36

Specifically, we estimate separate values for (αh , αw , f ) for each sector-region bin, which allows the model to
perfectly match mean employment and wages, as well as export participation, within each bin. We do so for the
12 sectors and 136 meso-regions, amounting to 1,632 sector-region bins.

35

of trade on wage inequality. While a complete treatment of this generalization is outside the
scope of this paper, the appendix derives the likelihood function for a simple extension of our
econometric model to incorporate multiple destinations. In this extension, we split exporters
into three mutually-exclusive bins based on their number of destination markets and estimate
separate values of (µh,j , µw,j ) for each bin j, as well as separate exporting cutoffs fj . We report
results for two alternative definitions of bins. In specification A, we distinguish between firms
exporting to only one destination, 2–5 destinations, and 6 and more destinations. In specification B, we consider firms exporting to 5 and fewer countries, 6–24 counties, and 25 and more
countries.
The last two rows of Table 13 report the results from these multi-destination extensions.
We indeed find substantially larger inequality effects: the fitted 1994 cross-section has a level
of inequality 14 to 16 percent above the counterfactual autarky level, which is around twice
as large as in our baseline estimates. Furthermore, the introduction of a finer partitioning of
firms by export status implies greater scope for further increases in wage inequality beyond the
levels achieved in Brazil in 1994. As trade costs are reduced further, there is a reallocation of
employment not only from non-exporters to exporters but also towards exporters serving more
destination markets that are larger and pay higher wages.

5

Conclusion

Using linked employer-employee data for Brazil, we provide evidence on between-firm differences
in wages as a mechanism for trade to affect wage inequality in recent theories of heterogeneous
firms. We begin by developing a set of stylized facts that provide support for this mechanism.
We find that around two thirds of overall wage inequality occurs within sector-occupations.
Most of this within-sector-occupation inequality is residual wage inequality. Between-firm wage
dispersion accounts for a substantial proportion of this residual wage inequality within sectors
and occupations. These between-firm differences in wages are systematically but imperfectly
related to trade participation: exporters on average pay higher wages than non-exporters even
after controlling for employment.
Guided by these stylized facts, we extend the heterogeneous-firm model of trade and inequality from Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010) and estimate it using the Brazilian data.
This extended model incorporates three dimensions of firm heterogeneity—productivity, fixed
exporting costs and worker screening—each of which is central to matching the data. We use the
theory to derive an econometric model for wages, employment and export status that features
two channels through which trade affects wage inequality: a market access effect (exporting
raises the employment and wages of a given firm) and a selection effect (exporting firms are on
average larger and pay higher wages than other firms). Using maximum likelihood, we estimate
the model to quantify the implied effects of trade on wage inequality, as well as provide bounds
on these effects for both the cases of no market access and no selection effects.
We show that the estimated model matches first and second moments of wages and employ36

ment for exporters and non-exporters and approximates the observed distributions of wages and
employment for both firms and workers. Our estimates imply substantial effects of trade on
wage inequality and lie squarely within the bounds for no market access effects and no selection
effects. Opening the closed economy to trade raises wage inequality by around 10 percent, which
is a similar order of magnitude as the movements in wage inequality observed in Brazil in the
late 1980s and early 1990s. The estimated model implies a non-monotonic relationship between
wage inequality and trade openness, where trade liberalization at first raises and later reduces
wage inequality, confirming the theoretical prediction of Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010).
Although trade expands the set of opportunities for all firms and workers, only some firms
find it profitable to take advantage of these opportunities, which is the mechanism driving trade’s
effect on wage inequality in our model. Enriching the model to introduce a finer partitioning
of trading opportunities (e.g., distinguishing between multiple destination markets) magnifies
trade’s effect on wage inequality through this mechanism.

37

References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999): “High Wage Workers and High Wage
Firms,” Econometrica, 67(2), 251–333.
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, D. N. Margolis, and K. R. Troske (2001): “The Relative Importance
of Employer and Employee Effects on Compensation: A Comparison of France and the United States,”
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 15(4), 419–436.
Amemiya, T. (1985): Advanced Econometrics. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Amiti, M., and D. R. Davis (2012): “Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence,” Review of
Economic Studies, 79(1), 1–36, forthcoming.
Attanasio, O., P. K. Goldberg, and N. Pavcnik (2004): “Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality in
Colombia,” Journal of Development Economics, 74(2), 331–366.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2008): “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising
the Revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 300–323.
Barth, E., A. Bryson, J. C. Davis, and R. Freeman (2011): “The Contribution of Dispersion
across Plants to the Increase in US Earnings Dispersion,” Presented at the EEA-ESEM meetings,
unpublished manuscript.
Baumgarten, D. (2011): “Exporters and the Rise in Wage Inequality: Evidence from German Linked
Employer-Employee Data,” RWI, unpublished manuscript.
Berman, E., J. Bound, and Z. Griliches (1994): “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(2), 367–97.
Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen (1995): “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing:
1976-1987,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1995(1), 67–112.
(1997): “Exporters, Skill Upgrading, and the Wage Gap,” Journal of International Economics,
42(1-2), 3–31.
Burdett, K., and D. T. Mortensen (1998): “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment,” International Economic Review, 39(2), 257–273.
Burstein, A., and J. Vogel (2012): “Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Premium: A Quantitative Analysis,” Columbia University, mimeograph.
Bustos, P. (2011): “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact
of Mercosur on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review, 101(1), 30440.
Cahuc, P., F. Postel-Vinay, and J. M. Robin (2006): “Wage Bargaining with On-the-Job Search:
Theory and Evidence,” Econometrica, 74(2), 323–64.
Coşar, A. K. (2010): “Adjusting to Trade Liberalization: Reallocation and Labor Market Policies,”
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, unpublished manuscript.
Coşar, A. K., N. Guner, and J. Tybout (2011): “Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage Distributions in an Open Economy,” IMDEA Working Paper, 2011/06.
Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2007): “Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity,
and Export Dynamics,” Econometrica, 75(3), 837–873.
Davidson, C., F. Heyman, S. Matusz, F. Sjöholm, and S. C. Zhu (2011): “Globalization and
Imperfect Labor Market Sorting,” Research Institute of Industrial Economics Working Paper, 856,
Stockholm.

38

Davidson, C., and S. J. Matusz (2010): International Trade with Equilibrium Unemployment. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Davidson, C., S. J. Matusz, and A. Shevchenko (2008): “Globalization and Firm Level Adjustment
with Imperfect Labor Markets,” Journal of International Economics, 75(2), 295–309.
Davis, D. R., and J. Harrigan (2011): “Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization,” Journal of
International Economics, 84(1), 26–36.
Davis, S. J., and J. C. Haltiwanger (1991): “Wage Dispersion Between and Within U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-86,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1991(1), 115–80.
Dix-Carneiro, R. (2013): “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Duke University, Unpublished Manuscript.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, F. Kramarz, and R. Sampogaro (2013): “Firm-to-Firm Trade: Imports,
Exports and the Labor Market,” Yale University, unpublished manuscript.
Egger, H., P. Egger, and U. Kreickemeier (2011): “Trade, Wages, and Profits,” University of
Tübingen, unpublished manuscript.
Egger, H., and U. Kreickemeier (2009): “Firm Heterogeneity and the Labor Market Effects of Trade
Liberalization,” International Economic Review, 50(1), 187–216.
Faggio, G., K. G. Salvanes, and J. Van Reenen (2010): “The Evolution of Inequality in Productivity and Wages: Panel Data Evidence,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(6), 1919–1951.
Fally, T., R. Paillacar, and C. Terra (2010): “Economic Geography and Wages in Brazil: Evidence
from Micro-Data,” Journal of Development Economics, 91(1), 155–168.
Feenstra, R. C., and G. H. Hanson (1996): “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative Wages,”
in The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Baghwati, ed. by R. C. Feenstra,
G. M. Grossman, and D. A. Irwin, chap. 6, pp. 89–128. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
(1999): “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the
United States, 1979-1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), 907–40.
Felbermayr, G., J. Prat, and H.-J. Schmerer (2011): “Globalization and Labor Market Outcomes:
Wage Bargaining, Search Frictions, and Firm Heterogeneity,” Journal of Economic Theory, 146(1), 39–
73.
Ferreira, F. H. G., P. G. Leite, and M. Wai-Poi (2010): “Trade Liberalization, Employment Flows
and Wage Inequality in Brazil,” in The Poor under Globalization in Asia, Latin America and Africa,
ed. by M. Nissanke, and E. Thorbecke, UNU-Wider Studies in Development Economics, chap. 8, pp.
199–254. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Frı́as, J. A., D. S. Kaplan, and E. A. Verhoogen (2009): “Exports and Wage Premia: Evidence
from Mexican Employer-Employee Data,” Columbia University, unpublished manuscript.
Goldberg, P. K., and N. Pavcnik (2003): “The Response of the Informal Sector to Trade Liberalization,” Journal of Development Economics, 72(2), 463–96.
(2005): “Trade, Wages, and the Political Economy of Trade Protection: Evidence from the
Colombian Trade Reforms,” Journal of International Economics, 66(1), 75–105.
(2007): “Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 45(1), 39–82.
Gonzaga, G., N. A. Menezes-Filho, and M. C. Terra (2006): “Trade Liberalization and the
Evolution of Skill Earnings Differentials in Brazil,” Journal of International Economics, 68(2), 345–67.

39

Helpman, E., and O. Itskhoki (2010): “Labour Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment,” Review
of Economic Studies, 77(3), 11001137.
Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, M. Muendler, and S. Redding (2012): “Trade and Inequality: From
Theory to Estimation,” NBER Working Paper, 17991.
Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, and S. Redding (2010): “Inequality and Unemployment in a Global
Economy,” Econometrica, 78(4), 1239–1283.
Irarrazabal, A., A. Moxnes, and L. D. Opromolla (2011): “The Margins of Multinational Production and the Role of Intra-firm Trade,” Dartmouth College, unpublished manuscript.
Juhn, C., K. M. Murphy, and B. Pierce (1993): “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to Skill,”
Journal of Political Economy, 101(3), 410–442.
Kambourov, G. (2009): “Labour Market Regulations and the Sectoral Reallocation of Workers: The
Case of Trade Reforms,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(4), 1321–1358.
Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand
Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35–78.
Kovak, B. K. (2011): “Local Labor Market Effects of Trade Policy: Evidence from Brazilian Liberalization,” Carnegie Mellon University, unpublished manuscript.
Krishna, P., J. P. Poole, and M. Z. Senses (2011): “Trade Liberalization, Firm Heterogneity,
and Wages: New Evidence from Matched Employer-Employee Data,” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper, 5711.
Kume, H., G. Piani, and C. F. B. d. Souza (2003): “A Polı́tica Brasileira de Importação no Perı́odo
1987-98: Descrição e Avaliação,” in A abertura comercial brasileira nos anos 1990: Impactos sobre
emprego e salários, ed. by C. H. Corseuil, and H. Kume, chap. 1, pp. 9–37. MTE and IPEA, Rio de
Janeiro.
Lazear, E. P., and K. L. Shaw (2009): “Wage Structure, Raises and Mobility: An Introduction to
International Comparisons of the Structure of Wages Within and Across Firms,” in The Structure of
Wages: An International Comparison, ed. by E. P. Lazear, and K. L. Shaw, chap. 1. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lemieux, T. (2006): “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy Data, or Rising
Demand for Skill?,” American Economic Review, 96(3), 461–498.
Maddala, G. S. (1983): Limited-dependent and qualitative variables in econometrics, vol. 3 of Econometric Society Monographs. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.
Menezes-Filho, N. A., and M.-A. Muendler (2011): “Labor Reallocation in Response to Trade
Reform,” NBER Working Paper, 17372.
Menezes-Filho, N. A., M.-A. Muendler, and G. Ramey (2008): “The Structure of Worker Compensation in Brazil, with a Comparison to France and the United States,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 90(2), 324–346.
Monte, F. (2011): “Skill Bias, Trade, and Wage Dispersion,” Journal of International Economics, 83(2),
202–218.
Munch, J. R., and J. R. Skaksen (2008): “Human Capital and Wages in Exporting Firms,” Journal
of International Economics, 75(2), 363–372.

40

Oi, W. Y., and T. L. Idson (1999): “Firm Size and Wages,” in Handbook of labor economics, ed. by
O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, vol. 3B, pp. 2165–2214. Elsevier Science, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
New York and Oxford.
Postel-Vinay, F., and J.-M. Robin (2002): “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and Employer
Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 70(6), 2295–2350.
Postel-Vinay, F., and H. Thuron (2010): “On-the-Job Search, Productivity Shocks and the Individual Earnings Process,” International Economic Review, 51(3), 599–629.
Rosen, S. (1982): “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings,” Bell Journal of Economics,
13(2), 311–323.
Sampson, T. (2012): “Selection into Trade and Wage Inequality,” London School of Economics, unpublished manuscript.
Schank, T., C. Schnabel, and J. Wagner (2007): “Do Exporters Really Pay Higher Wages? First
Evidence from German Linked Employer-Employee Data,” Journal of International Economics, 72(1),
52–74.
Stole, L. A., and J. Zwiebel (1996): “Intra-firm Bargaining under Non-binding Contracts,” Review
of Economic Studies, 63(3), 375–410.
Trefler, D., and S. C. Zhu (2005): “Trade and Inequality in Developing Countries: A General
Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of International Economics, 65(1), 21–48.
Verhoogen, E. A. (2008): “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489–530.
Yeaple, S. R. (2005): “A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages,”
Journal of International Economics, 65(1), 1–20.

41

