                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ENTITLEMENT REFORMS IN EUROPE:
             POLICY MIXES IN THE CURRENT PENSION REFORM PROCESS

                                        Axel H. Börsch-Supan

                                         Working Paper 18009
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18009


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




I am grateful for helpful comments by the editors, my discussant David Wise, and many conference
participants. This review rests on projects with funding provided by the German Science Foundation
(DFG), the State of Baden-Württemberg, the German insurance association (GDV), and the US National
Institute on Aging (NIA) The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Axel H. Börsch-Supan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Entitlement Reforms in Europe: Policy Mixes in the Current Pension Reform Process
Axel H. Börsch-Supan
NBER Working Paper No. 18009
April 2012
JEL No. H51,H55,H68

                                              ABSTRACT

Many European countries have begun (or have announced) programs intended to reduce the growth
of entitlement programs, in particular of public pensions.

Current costs are high, and the pressures will increase due to population aging and negative incentive
effects. This paper focuses on the pension reform process in Europe. It links the causes for current
problems to the cures required to make the pay-as-you-go entitlement programs in Continental Europe
sustainable above and beyond the financial crisis. It discusses examples which appear, from a current
point of view, to be the most viable and effective options to bring entitlement systems closer to fiscal
balance and still achieve their key aims.

There is no single policy prescription that can solve all problems at once. Reform elements include
a freeze in the contribution and tax rates, an indexation of benefits to the dependency ratio, measures
to stop the current trend towards early retirement, an adaptation of the normal retirement age to increased
life expectancy, and more reliance on private savings – elements of a sustainable but complex multipillar
system of pensions and similar entitlement programs.


Axel H. Börsch-Supan
Munich Center for the Economics of Aging
Max Planck Institute for Social Law and Social Pol
Amalienstrasse 33
80779 Munich
GERMANY
and NBER
axel@boersch-supan.de
Entitlement Reforms in Europe:

Policy mixes in the current pension reform process

Axel H. Börsch-Supan



1. Introduction
Europe is proud of its entitlement programs. They include, in approximate order of size: (a)

public pensions, (b) public health care and health insurance, (c) unemployment insurance and

active labor market policies, and (d) others, primarily child care, maternity benefits, family

cash benefits, and means-tested social assistance, plus sickness benefits, long-term care

insurance and many smaller programs. Together, these entitlement programs represent between

20 and 30% of GDP in most European countries, with considerable variation especially in

Eastern Europe (Figure 1), while it is about 18.5% of GDP in the US.


Figure 1: Entitlement Programs in Europe and Other Selected Countries
              (Percent of GDP, 2011)


The generosity of the European entitlement programs is considered a great social achievement

because it has historically provided social stability over the life cycle and across business and

political cycles. Population aging, negative incentive effects, and other design flaws, however,

threaten the very core of these public support systems. As the current debt crisis in Europe

shows, they may themselves become a source for fiscal instability due to their large costs.

Not only the size but also the structure of entitlements by the four above program groups is

quite different across countries, see Table 1.


                                                                                               2
Table 1: Structure of Entitlement Programs, 2011
         Percent of Total Entitlement Programs


Pension expenditures account for more than half of entitlements in Italy and Greece, while they

are less than 20 percent in Ireland and Denmark. Health care, in turn, accounts for the largest

share of entitlements in the US and Canada with more than 40%, while it is only about 22% in

Estonia and Finland. The Mediterranean countries have large pensions systems, but small

unemployment insurance and social assistance systems, a structure of public expenditures that

has regained prominence in the current debt crisis because it worsens both long-term prospects

for debt reduction (due to the implicit debt created by pensions entitlements) and the ability to

sustain austerity programs (due to the lack of sufficient unemployment insurance and social

assistance).

Since public pension expenditures are the single largest item in the social budget in almost all

European countries, this paper largely focuses on public pension systems. They alone represent

a substantial share of GDP. In 2011, Italy and France are frontrunners with some 14 percent of

GDP, and in Greece, Portugal and Austria, this share is about 12 percent, roughly twice the

share of GDP compared to the US (6.7 percent of GDP). In terms of fiscal stability in the

current debt crisis, pension systems are a scary example how current program design, the size

of future entitlements, and political credibility interact as either virtuous or vicious spirals. This

paper argues that it is not a coincidence that the countries which spend the highest share of

GDP in pension entitlements are also the countries which are currently most pressured to offer

very high yields to sell government bonds. Through this mechanism, high pension costs imply

high costs of debt service, thereby worsening the fiscal balance and crowding out other

spending.


                                                                                                    3
Ironically, in spite of their size, some of the expensive pension programs nevertheless fail to

provide adequate support for certain population groups since they are targeted heavily to the

middle-class median voter. Greeks aged 65 and over, for example, face a poverty rate of

22.7%, almost twice as large as the OECD average.

This paper links the causes for current problems to the cures required to make the typically

pay-as-you-go financed entitlement programs in Continental Europe sustainable above and

beyond the financial crisis. It discusses examples which appear, from a current point of view,

to be the most viable and effective options to bring the entitlement system closer to fiscal

balance and still achieve their key aims, e.g. preventing old-age poverty. It stresses that there is

nothing like “the optimal pension reform” since the initial state (in particular the current

institutional set up) varies as much as the causes for problems in the future. In any case,

solutions to the demographic challenges ahead require a mix of reform elements as no single

element is likely to suffice quantitatively in face of the dimensions of population aging.

The first part of the paper sets the stage with a brief overview of the current landscape of

entitlement programs in Europe (Section 2).

The main body of the paper focuses on the pension reform process in Europe. Section 3 is

devoted to the causes for reform, while Section 4 lines out possible cures and presents concrete

examples. Specifically, Section 3 describes (a) the lack of sustainability due to population

aging, (b) the negative incentive effects which threaten not only the stability of pension

systems but economic growth at large, and (c) points out examples where pension adequacy

fails.




                                                                                                  4
Section 4 is then devoted to the respective cures: (a) setting limits to contribution rates and

increasing retirement age will lower the weight of pay-as-you-go financed public pensions; (b)

private saving and longer working lives will have to fill the emerging gaps, obtaining a larger

weight in retirement income; and (c) since the reform steps have large redistributive

consequences, they may require additional targeting.

Section 5 provides some estimates of the fiscal effects of these reforms, and Section 6

concludes.



2. The current design of pension systems in Europe
Figure 1 and Table 1 have shown how different the European entitlement programs are, both in

overall size (as percent of GDP) and structure (pensions vs. healthcare vs. working age vs.

children).

Similarly, pension systems are very different across Europe. We focus on four dimensions

which characterize the pension systems in Europe: pre-funding vs. pay-as-you-go financing;

earnings-related vs. flat benefits; generosity in terms of replacement rate; and eligibility age for

pension benefits. The point is not to provide an exhaustive description of European pension

systems (for that purpose, see, e.g., OECD 2011) but to give an idea how diverse the initial

positions are for potential pension reform in Europe.

The first characterizing dimension is the share of retirement income provided by public pay-as-

you-go pension pillars vis-à-vis occupational and private pillars which are, in general, fully

funded, see Figure 2.1 This dimension is important because pay-as-you-go pensions have to be


1
    Some occupational pensions in France are also at least partly pay-as-you-go.



                                                                                                  5
financed by the next generation through contributions while pre-funded pensions are financed

by the same generation through savings which also enjoys the consumption value of pensions.

The share of the public pay-as-you-go pillars in total retirement income varies greatly between

92% in Spain and 42% in Switzerland.


Figure 2: Public, occupational and private pension income in selected countries
          (Percent of total retirement income)


The second characterizing dimension is the linkage between pension benefits and

contributions, which are usually a fixed percentage of earnings. Its importance stems from the

underlying negative incentive effects on labor supply. It has two extremes: flat pensions

without any link to earnings, usually associated with the name of Lord Beveridge, and pensions

which are strictly proportional to contributions, usually associated with the name of Chancellor

Bismarck. In a Beveridgian system, contributions tend to be interpreted as taxes with resulting

labor supply disincentives, while in a Bismarckian system, contributions are closer to insurance

premiums.2 There are many refinements: some pension systems define pension benefits ex

ante, while in others benefits emerge ex post as the outcome of life-time contributions. Often,

the public pension systems consists of two parts: a flat-benefit part to prevent poverty (“pillar

0” in the language of the World Bank: Holzmann and Hinz, 2005), and an earnings-related part

which is usually capped at a maximum benefit level (“pillar 1”).

Table 2 is adapted from OECD (2011) and characterizes European pension systems along these

lines. The Denmark and the Netherlands, for example, have a basic pension which is

essentially independent from the contributions paid and/or the income earned during working


2
    See Börsch-Supan and Reil-Held (2001).



                                                                                               6
life (Beveridge type). France and Germany, on the other hand, have earnings-related pensions

based on a point system that defines the benefits (Bismarck type). Sweden and Italy introduced

“notional defined contribution systems” (NDC). These are pay-as-you-go pension systems

mimicking funded systems insofar as they accrue interest on the contributions into personal

accounts which are, on retirement, converted into annuities. They feature the closest link

between contributions and benefits, followed by the point systems e.g. in France and Germany.

Table 2: Structure of Pension Programs, 2010

Third, pension replacement rates are a measure for the generosity (and thus costs) of pension

systems. Figure 3 shows the average pension in percentage of average earnings before taxes,

with a very large variation from just over 25% to almost 100%. Ireland has the lowest and

Greece the highest replacement rate in Europe. The OECD average is slightly above 50%.


Figure 3: Gross relative pension level
          (Average pension in percent of average earnings)


Finally, the forth characterizing dimension is the eligibility (commonly: retirement) age

because of its strong influence on labor supply and system costs. Figure 4 shows the statutory

and effective retirement ages. Already the statutory retirement ages display an enormous

variation and even more so the effective retirement ages.


Figure 4: Statutory and effective retirement age

The figures in this section show clearly how different the current pension systems in Europe

are. They vary in all policy-relevant dimensions: financial mechanism, structure, generosity

and labor market influence. Much of this is due to historical country-specific political and



                                                                                            7
cultural preferences. As a first consequence, pension expenditures are only loosely related to

the demographic structure of a country (see next section). Secondly, there is no single optimal

design strategy for pension reform in Europe; rather, pension reform has to focus on different

design dimensions in each country to account for the country-specific initial states.



3. Causes for reform
Population aging is one important reason to align current entitlements with future fiscal

capacity. As a consequence, pension and entitlement reform is an ongoing process in virtually

all European countries. It therefore may come as a surprise, how weakly the current

demographic structure is linked to the current relative size of the European public pension

programs.


Figure 5: Pension Expenditures (Percent of GDP, 2011) by Old-Age Dependency (Percent)

This is mainly due to the many design differences between European pension systems

described in the previous section. Some of these designs are self-stabilizing and thus prevent

high cost increases. This is the case, e.g., for Estonia, Poland and Sweden, and described in

Section 4. Other designs create strong negative incentive effects on labor supply and generate

early retirement, which decreases economic capacity and thus threatens fiscal capacity and

economic growth at large. This, in turn, increases the force of population aging on pension

expenditures. Figure 6 shows, while almost all European countries face increasing pension

costs as percent of GDP, there are very large differences across countries. On average across

the European Union, the cost share increase by 16% until 2030 and by 37% until 2050. In




                                                                                             8
Greece and Luxembourg, however, pension expenditures will more than double until 2050,

while they are projected to decline in Estonia, Poland and Sweden.


Figure 6: Change in Pension Expenditures (Percent, 2030 and 2050 versus 2010)

The weak correlation between aging and projected pension costs, and the huge variation in cost

increases are a symptom of many other reasons for reform. Subsection (a) describes the link

between demography and sustainability as a reason to reform the pension systems. Subsection

(b) analyses the link between expected cost increases and incentive effects that reduce labor

supply. Finally, subsection (c) is concerned with the redistributive features of European

pension systems and the alleviation of old-age poverty.


(a) Population aging and lack of sustainability
While all European countries are aging, there are remarkable differences. Italy, Austria and

Germany will experience a particular dramatic change in the age structure of the population.

Such change is much less incisive in France, Great Britain, and Scandinavia. The severity of

the demographic transition in most of Europe has two causes: a quicker increase in life

expectancy than elsewhere, partly due to a relatively low level until the 1970s, and a more

incisive baby boom/baby bust transition (e.g., relative to the United States) to a very low

fertility rate in some countries (1.2 children per lifetime in Italy, Spain and Greece, 1.3 in

Austria and Germany).

Both demographic developments have a similar consequence: the ratio of elderly to working

age persons – the old age dependency ratio – will increase steeply, see Figure 7. According to

the latest projections of the European Union, the share of elderly (aged 65 and above) will




                                                                                            9
exceed a quarter of the population in 2030. The old age dependency ratio will more than

double during the next 50 years. In Italy, Spain, Austria and Germany, there will be one person

aged 65 and over for every two other persons. Moreover, population aging is not a transitory

phenomenon but will persists even after the baby boom generation will be deceased: the

dependency ratio plateaus after 2040 for most European countries and will not return to pre-

aging levels for the foreseeable future.


Figure 7: The Old-Age Dependency Ratio in Europe and Selected Countries
     (Population 65+/population 20-64: 2010-2050)

While both demographic developments, decreasing fertility and increasing longevity, have

similar consequences, it is important to distinguish the two causes because they imply different

policy responses which is often confused in the public debate. We take Germany as an

example, but similar features exist in its neighboring countries Austria, the Netherlands, and

Switzerland, see Figure 8. The sharpness of the change is generated by the first cause, the

sudden decline in birth rates during the baby boom to baby bust transition in the 1970s. The

number of children born during the baby boom in the 1960s was about 2.4 children per woman

and led to the bulge in the age pyramids of Figure 8. In 1997, these children were about 35

years old. The baby bust started with a sudden decline to 1.3 children per woman, visible in the

much smaller number of persons aged below 35. 30 years from now, the numerous baby

boomers will be pensioners, and the much smaller baby bust generation will have to finance

them. Compensating this by changes in the retirement age is virtually impossible and other

policy responses are needed, see below.




                                                                                             10
Figure 8: Baby Boom to Baby Bust Transition in Europe

The second cause for the demographic transition is the secular change in life expectancy. This

is a more steady development, and it is likely to persist after 2035. Figure 9 shows that since

1970, the remaining life expectancy of German men and women at age 65 has increased by 4

years. It is projected to increase another 3 years until 2030. This implies that a pension in 2030

will be paid 7 more years than in 1970. Since the average length of pension receipt was about

15 years in 1970, the increase in life expectancy represents an expansion of pension benefits by

almost 50 percent. As shown below, an increase in the actual retirement age is a feasible and

effective cure for this cause of financial strain.


Figure 8: Life Expectancy at Age 65, German Men and Women, 1970-2040



Public health insurance (and in particular long-term care insurance, LTC) face similar

sustainability problems because they are financed pay-as-you-go by the younger generation

and give the bulk of benefits (all in LTC) to the older generation.


(b) Design flaws and negative incentive effects
The well-known demographically induced problems are not the only challenges for the

European entitlement programs. Another challenge are the distortions created through

financing mechanisms and design flaws.

Some entitlement programs may be considered a fair insurance because the expected benefits

of the program equals the expected contributions over the life-course. Therefore, at least

according to traditional economics, one would not expect very large labor supply disincentive




                                                                                               11
effects.3 Examples are most defined contribution pensions (including NDC systems) and most

private health insurance. Most programs, however, have strong transfer components, see

Section 2, e.g. payroll-tax financed pension programs with flat benefits (in Great Britain,

Netherlands, Switzerland). Such payroll taxes are known to distort labor supply of the younger

generation (Blundell et al. 1998). Since contributions to social insurance are a large part of

total labor compensation, see Figure 10, and increase total labor costs, demand for labor

declines, with consequent higher unemployment and lower economic growth. Reducing the

contribution burden is therefore not only important for the long-run stability and sustainability

of the pension system itself, but for fiscal stability and economic performance at large. It is

important to keep both in mind, since economic growth is an important source to finance future

pensions.


Figure 10: Composition of total hourly labor compensation in Europe (percent, Eurostat)


There are two additional tax components in pension contributions. Since the implicit return

from a mandatory pay-as-you-go system tends to be lower than the explicit return on the

voluntary investment in a funded pension, there is an implicit tax in all pay-as-you-go systems,

see Börsch-Supan and Reil-Held (2001). Moreover, most public pension systems are not

actuarially neutral because they distort labor supply of the older generation through early

retirement incentives. This creates an implicit tax on working longer, measured e.g. by the

Gruber-Wise group and the OECD.4 Figure 11 links an index of this implicit tax to the share of

those men who are already retired at age 60-64. In countries with a large implicit tax on


3
    See the implicit tax argument in pay-as-you-go systems below.



                                                                                              12
working longer (e.g. Belgium, France, Italy, and the Netherlands), the share of retirees is much

larger than in countries with a low implicit tax (e.g. Sweden, the US and Japan).

Figure 11: Tax force and early retirement




The aggregate correlation in Figure 11 permits no causal interpretation. Supplemental analyses,

however, have produced convincing evidence for causality. First, Figure 12 shows that

especially in Belgium, France, the Netherlands, and Italy, very few workers aged 60-64 are still

in the labor force. This is quite different from what it was in the 1960s, in spite of a lower life

expectancy and a higher prevalence of illness at that time.


Figure       12:    Labor force participation among                   men     aged       60-64,   1960-2008
                    (percent of male population 60 to 64)



Second, this decline is not a “natural trend” tied to secular income growth. It did not occur, for

example, in Japan and Sweden. Rather, the decline happened exactly when the tax force on

working longer increased; the decline has been largely “engineered” by the incentive effects

that are intrinsic in some of the public pension systems, in particular by an incomplete

adjustment of benefits to retirement age. A particularly striking historical example for the

exogenous policy change that can be exploited for formal microeconometric evidence with a

causal interpretation is the German pension reform in 1972, see Figure 13.5




4
    Gruber and Wise (1999), Blondal and Scarpetta (1998).
5
    Cf. Börsch-Supan and Schnabel (1999), Börsch-Supan (2000), Gruber and Wise (2003).



                                                                                                        13
The German public pension system with its “flexible retirement” introduced in 1972 tilted the

retirement decision heavily towards the earliest retirement age applicable because the annual

benefit was essentially independent of the retirement age. Hence, retiring earlier gave a worker

essentially the same pension for a longer time. At the then prevailing generous replacement

rates, this was a pretty good deal. The 1992 reform, in force after 1997, has diminished this

incentive effect, but pension benefits are still not actuarially neutral at conventional interest

rates.


Figure 13: Average Retirement Age in Germany, 1960-2008



The retirement behavior of entrants into the German public retirement insurance system

reflects these incentive effects quite clearly in Figure 13. Immediately after the introduction of

“flexible retirement” in 1972, the average retirement age declined dramatically by more than 3

years. We interpret this as a clear sign of a policy reaction. The most popular retirement age

switched by 5 years from age 65 to age 60. As a striking example of effective reform, a large

part of this decline has been reversed since 1997.



(c) Lack of adequacy and perverse redistribution
Many countries have a minimum pension, either as statutory basic or minimum pension or

effective through social assistance mechanisms.6 As Figure 14 shows, this has kept poverty

rates low in most European countries, at least relative to the OECD average and certainly vis-à-

vis the United States.




                                                                                               14
Figure 14: Old-Age Poverty Rates, 2010
          (OECD, 2008)

There are, however, three striking exceptions where the old-age poverty rate exceeds 20% of

individuals aged 65 and more: Greece, Spain, and Ireland. Ireland spends very little on

pensions as we have seen in Table 1. Greece and Spain, however, have both above average

pension replacement rates (see Figure 3) but nevertheless very high old-age poverty rates.

While in most countries, pension systems and/or their associated social assistance systems

distribute from rich to poor, this suggests some extent of perverse redistribution in Greece and

Spain.



4. Curing the problems
Reform processes are under way in almost all European countries. Some countries reformed

early in the 1980s, e.g. Sweden, most countries much later, some not at all, e.g. Greece.

Typically, we have experienced “reforms in installments”. These reforms have combined

“parametric” elements (introducing actuarial adjustments, changing the benefits indexation

formula, increasing the retirement age) with “fundamental” elements (changing the financial

mechanism by moving substantial parts of retirement income from public pensions to private

savings). Table 3 presents a synopsis.


Table 3: Synopsis of pension reform elements in Europe, 1980-2010




6
  E.g. in Germany: the tax-financed “Grundsicherung im Alter” which is not part of the German public pension
system.



                                                                                                         15
The multitude of reform elements in Europe is partly a result of initially different and different

political preferences. It also reflects the fact that there is no single reform measure that can lead

to a stable and sustainable system of old-age provision; rather, a mix of several reform

elements is needed. If the goal is to restore fiscal sustainability, then reform will require an

overhaul of the existing pay-as-you-go systems as well as the re-introduction of private saving

as a major source of future retirement income. Extreme policies are unlikely to work: neither

can the public pension systems alone provide a sufficient retirement income at reasonable tax

and contribution rates, nor can private savings fully substitute for pay-as-you-go pensions.

Relying on public pay-as-you-go financed pensions alone is not possible because the resulting

tax and contribution rates from maintaining the current generosity (and thus costs, see Figure

6) will damage economic growth through the negative labor supply incentive effects described

earlier. Further increases of the tax and contribution rates are particularly damaging in those

EU countries that already have high total labor costs, in particular Germany, Austria, Denmark

and Sweden, see Figure 10.

In turn, transiting pensions entirely to private saving is also not a policy option. One fatal

reason against such an option is simply that it is too late. Saving requires time, and there will

not be sufficient time until 2030 for the baby boomers to accumulate funds in the order of

magnitude required to finance a full pension. Time and history is of the essence in pension

reform. The baby boom/baby bust transition dictates the time schedule and makes reforms

impossible which were possible 25 years ago – such as a complete transition to a fully funded

system.




                                                                                                  16
There are other reasons to advocate a more subtle but also more complex multipillar system

rather than a pure pay-as-you-go or a pure fully funded system. An important reason is

diversification. Pay-as-you-go systems carry large demographic and political risks, while fully

funded systems carry large capital market risks. Since these risks are not perfectly correlated,

diversification provides lower risk of poor outcomes than monolithity.

Hence, in order to achieve long-run fiscal balance, reforms typically need to include two

components: adapting the public system to demographic change under the restriction that taxes

and contributions cannot increase much further, and strengthening private savings under the

restriction that not much time is left until 2035. This first subsection addresses the first,

subsection (b) the second element. Subsection (c) discusses issues of targeting and poverty

alleviation.


(a) Adapting pay-as-you-go public pension systems
Stabilizing tax and contribution rates implies expenditure cuts if and when at the same time

demographic change reduces the number of contributors to, and increases the number of

beneficiaries from, the pay-as-you-go pension systems. Pension expenditures have two

dimensions: the level of benefits (via the replacement rate) and the duration of benefits (via the

retirement age). Expenditure cuts are easier to shoulder if they involve both dimensions.

Both dimensions are politically difficult. Fortunately, the demographic change, while dramatic,

is of a magnitude that is far from absorbing all available resources. Figure 15 shows a rough

approximation of the force of aging on economic growth, represented by the loss of productive

capacity due to a decline of the number of workers relative to the number of consumers. It is

measured as the percentage change of the old-age dependency ratio (from Figure 7). The



                                                                                               17
dependency ratio deteriorates at a rate of about 0.2-0.5 percent p.a., with a large variation in

timing across the selected countries. This is much less than the long-run averages of

productivity growth which is about 1.5 to 2.5 percent p.a. for most European countries. Hence,

population aging absorbs between a seventh and a third of future productivity growth leaving

the bulk for real income growth. Pension benefits can therefore rise in real terms in spite of

population aging, and all what is required is a growth rate of benefits that remains below the

growth rate of wages.


Figure 15: The force of aging in terms of the rate of economic growth


(a.1) Adapting the level of benefits: reducing the replacement rate

How much benefit increases have to be dampened depends on the speed and the extent of

demographic change in each country relative to its productivity growth. France and Sweden,

for example, will need less adaptation than Italy and Germany. Some countries have

formalized this link between demographics and benefit level. Sweden and Italy have

introduced notional defined contribution (NDC) systems which compute benefits on the basis

of the accumulated contributions plus some fictitious interest which depends on demographic

essentials such as life expectancy and dependency ratio and wage growth. In macroeconomic

abstraction, this interest rate should be the labor force growth rate plus productivity growth.

Since the labor force growth rate is declining as a population ages, a NDC system features a

declining replacement rate in the course of population aging. Moreover, longevity decreases

the value of the annuity emanating from the accumulated notional wealth.




                                                                                             18
Germany has taken an apparently very different approach, preserving the defined benefit

structure that has so much political acceptance in many countries. It augmented the

conventional benefit indexation formula which increases benefits at the rate of wage (in other

countries: price) increases by a new factor, the so-called “sustainability factor”.7 This factor

reflects the development of the relative number of contributors to pensioners, the system

dependency ratio, which is the most important long-term determinant of pension financing. The

annual benefit changes are then proportional to two factors: changes in gross earnings minus

contributions to the pension system (positively related), and changes in the system dependency

ratio (inversely related), weighted harmonically:8

                                          AGEt (1   t ) a SDRt 1 1 a
                       PVt  PVt 1  (                      ) (      )
                                          AGEt 1 (1   )        SDRt
                                                        t 1


                  where PV: pension value per earnings point
                        AGE: average gross earnings
                        τ: contribution rate to public and private pensions
                        SDR: system dependency ratio: pensioners/contributors


The weight has been set achieve a politically determined contribution rate target. Thise new

pension formula will lead to decreases in pension benefit levels vis-à-vis the path of wages.

Currently, gross benefits are about 48 percent of gross earnings. This corresponds to a net

pension level of about 70 percent of net earnings. In 2035, when the plafond of population

aging is reached, the gross pension level will be about 40 percent.

The Swedish and the German reform approaches look very different. However, as Börsch-

Supan and Wilke (2005) point out, the sustainability factor can almost perfectly mimic a


7
    Börsch-Supan, Reil-Held und Wilke (2003), Börsch-Supan (2004).
8
    The actual formula avoids exponentiation and features various lags due to data availability.



                                                                                                   19
national defined contribution system; it can thus be interpreted as a notional defined

contribution system “wrapped” as a defined benefit system. The different “selling approaches”

responded to the political economy differences between Sweden and Germany.

(a.2) Adapting the duration of benefits: increasing the retirement age

The other crucial dimension of pension expenditures is the duration of pension benefits,

determined by the difference between the age at which pension benefits are taken up and life

expectancy. As pointed out earlier, life expectancy is projected to increase by about 3 years

between now and 2030. This increase is expected to be about the same for all European

countries. Figure 4 has shown the international differences in both normal retirement age (the

statutory age to take up old-age pensions) and actual retirement age (the age in which workers

leave the labor force) which is in most European countries equal to the age in which some kind

of public pension is taken up. The two main policy instruments to reduce the duration of

benefits are increasing the statutory retirement age and reducing early retirement benefits. Both

instruments are extremely unpopular throughout Europe.

In Germany, the 1992 reform has succeeded in abolishing most early retirement pathways

without actuarial adjustments. This law became effective in 1997, but it has a transition period

until 2017, see Figure 16.


Figure 16: Projected Retirement Age, Germany, 1997-2035


In addition, Denmark, Germany, France and the UK have enacted increases of the statutory

normal retirement age (e.g. Denmark and Germany from 65 to 67 years, UK even to 68 years,

while in France only from 60 to 62 years). Most increases are slow and gradual. In Germany, it



                                                                                              20
has started in 2011 with monthly steps such that the retirement age of 67 will be reached in

2029. This increase corresponds to two-thirds of the projected change in life expectancy. This

approximately keeps the ratio of time spent in working life to time spent in retirement constant

and thus neutralizes, from an expenditure point of view, the effect of longevity increases on

pension expenditures.

In some countries, the statutory retirement age is not the primary determinant of actual

retirement age but the number of years worked. In Germany, 45 years of contributions will

generate a full pension even if these service years are reached before age 65. In some countries,

the number of required contribution years is much lower, notably in France, Greece and Italy,

and vary by profession, see the quite colorful Greek case described by Börsch-Supan and

Tinios (2002). With increasing life expectancy, such mechanisms create a very long and thus

costly duration of pension benefit recipiency. If one follows the above logic, the required

number of service years should also be adapted to the longer life span. This has been

particularly controversial in France and Italy


(b) Private saving and pre-funding
Reducing the first pillar of pay-as-you-go financed public pensions creates a gap in retirement

income relative to what workers have become accustomed to. There are only two mechanisms

to fill the gap: working longer and saving more.9 A reasonable approach is of course to exploit

both mechanisms, in spite of the unpopularity particularly of the first mechanism described in

the preceding subsection.


9
 Higher fertility is only a long-run solution and does not help to offset the fiscal strains generated by the baby-
boom generation. Higher migration would help but net immigration numbers need to be unrealistically large to
offset the domestic aging process, see United Nations Population Division (2001).



                                                                                                               21
Figure 17 shows how this can work, again using the recent German reform proposals as an

example. Taking account of the increase in the normal retirement age to 67, which increases

pension benefits according to the German benefit formula, and adding income from private

retirement savings, the reform proposal manages to deliver an income level for retirees that is

comparable to today’s income level, in spite of the reduction of public pillar pensions

according to the sustainability formula. This projection assumes a private retirement saving

rate of 4% of gross income from 2009 on. These 4% are the current limit of tax-subsidization,

if either occupational pensions (“second pillar”) or private savings (“third pillar”) are used to

finance additional retirement income. Under many circumstances, both subsidies can be

combined such that 8% of gross income can be tax-privileged.


Figure 17: Projected Retirement Income Components, Germany, 2002-2040

This is important for the early baby boomers. Figure 17 shows the crux of all transition

schemes to more funded pensions via private saving: the transition generation will have to pay

extra in order to maintain their total retirement income when the income from pay-as-you-go

pensions is reduced. For the younger generation, born after about 1980 and retiring after about

2040, 4% is sufficient to maintain or even to obtain higher retirement income levels than today,

but a saving rate of 8% is required for the cohort with the highest transition burden, the early

baby boomers born in the 1950s and early 1960s.

Such high saving rates are feasible, but they of course hurt consumption. They are the price for

reforming too late. Figure 2 has shown the weight of the three pillars in selected European

countries. Those countries, which have reformed their pension systems in the 1980s by

transiting to multipillar systems (Switzerland, the Netherlands, Great Britain), have succeeded


                                                                                              22
in lower contribution rates; they also need lower private saving rates because they have saved

for a longer time, accumulating more capital and enjoying higher compound interest. The

latecomers in this process (Spain, Germany, France and Italy) still have dominant first pillars

and need to save much more and much quicker, if they want to alleviate the tax and

contribution burden and at the same time maintain their accustomed retirement income levels.

Given the short time period until the baby boomers retire, this may only be an option for later

generations but not feasible for them.


(c) Targeting and redistribution
Cutting pay-as-you-go pensions to a sustainable share of GDP will particularly hurt those who

have earned very little and whose saving capacity is also low. The reform-driven reduction of

replacement rates will drive workers who have earned incomes only slightly above the poverty

line into old-age poverty after retirement.

This dilemma between sustainability and old-age poverty can only be solved by targeting

policies for those who are in danger of old-age poverty. One instrument are basic and/or

minimum pensions, see Table 2. Another instrument is a non-linear (concave from above)

schedule linking benefits to contributions (e.g. via the PIA/AIME conversion in the US Social

Security system).

Some countries have basic or minimum pensions which prevent old-age poverty virtually by

definition, as they set the minimum level of pension income just above the poverty level (e.g.

Denmark and Germany). In other countries, such basic or minimum pensions are not existent

or provide income below the poverty line (e.g. Greece and Ireland). Such countries need to

redistribute more from rich to poor pensioners if they want to prevent old-age poverty.



                                                                                            23
5. Implications for fiscal stability
Since pensions are a large part of entitlements which in turn take up a large share of public

expenditures, fiscal stability is closely linked to the path of future pension expenditures. The

Economic Policy Committee of the EU, together with the OECD, provide projections on future

public pension expenditures, see Figure 18.


Figure 18: Projected Public Pension Expenditures (% GDP), 2007-2050

Two countries stand out: Italy, because it has currently the highest public pension expenditures,

and Greece, because it features the most dramatic increase. While both countries have very

high pension expenditures today, their dynamics could not be more different: expenditures in

Italy are stable until 2030, rise only weakly until 2040 and then decline, while they rise in

proportion to the dependency rate in Greece.

The reason for this tale of two countries is quickly told. As Section 2 described, Greece has a

defined benefit system with a high replacement rate and very early retirement. So far, there is

no feedback of demography to this generosity. Italy features two pension systems. The old

system is similar to the current Greek system, while the new system is modeled after the

Swedish NDC system. Workers who started after 1993 are completely in the new NDC system,

while those who had more than 18 years contribution before 1996 are completely in the old

system. Those in between are under a "pro rata" system: benefits corresponding to

contributions before 1993 are paid according to the old system and the ones after 1993

according to the NDC.10 Hence, the Italian system has not yet deeply cut benefits. The new


10
     I am grateful to Agar Brugiavini for this description.



                                                                                              24
system, however, has a strongly stabilizing influence on pension expenditures, see Section 4, if

it is actually implemented. Some crucial parameters, such as the fictitious interest rate of the

NDC system and the conversion factor of the notional wealth into the pension annuity,

however, are politically much more vulnerable in the Italian copy than in the Swedish original;

the pension costs expected by financial markets may thus be higher than suggested by Figure

18. It is therefore no coincidence that Greece and Italy are currently most under pressure from

financial markets.

In order to understand how the projections in Figure 18 depend on demographic trends and

future policy actions, it is helpful to decompose the projected expenditure increases into four

potential causes (old-age dependency, employment rate, take-up ratio, and benefit ratio)

according to the following equation, see Carone et al. (2008):

PensExp    Pop  65      Pop(15  64) PensNo PensExp / PensNo
                      x             x          x
 GDP      Pop(15  64)     EmplNo      Pop  65   GDP / EmplNo

Results are displayed in Table 4:

Table 4: Decomposition of Projected Changes in Pension Expenditure, 2005-2050
         (gross public pension expenditures as percent of GDP)

The demographic pressure, measured as the dependency ratio effect, is positive in all countries,

especially the Mediterranean countries. Some countries have strong counterbalancing forces,

e.g. Sweden and Italy. This is the effect of the automatic stabilizers in the NDC systems,

somewhat weaker in Germany with its sustainability factor and the gradual increase of its

retirement age. These mechanisms reduce the benefit and take-up ratios and increase the

employment, mainly through later retirement. In other countries, such as Spain (Greece did not

provide figures for this EU exercise), demographic factors were not or only very little



                                                                                             25
dampened by countervailing policy measures. Table 4 shows that the demographic pressures

can effectively be counteracted by the policy mixes described in Section 4.

Moog, Müller and Raffelhüschen (2010) have provided estimates of the “implicit pension

debt” and its reduction through pension reform. He computes the present discounted value of

future pension entitlements and subtracts the present discounted value of future contributions.

In virtually all countries, entitlements exceed contributions in present discounted value, leaving

an implicit debt. Figure 19 shows the effect of selected recent reforms on this implicit pension

debt, expressed as percent of GDP. While these figures rest on many assumptions and are very

sensitive to the choice of a discount rate, the overall message is robust: the implicit pension

debt exceeds the explicit government debt in most European countries by several multiples.

Pension reform has improved this fiscal imbalance dramatically in some countries (e.g., France

and Austria), and significantly in others (e.g., Germany). There is, however, little change in the

US and even an increase in the UK.


Figure 19: Projected implicit pension debt before and after recent reforms (% GDP)

Werding (2007) provides a similar calculation for the effects of the various German reform

steps, see Figure 20.


Figure 20: Projected implicit pension debt before and after recent reforms (% GDP)

The gap between unfunded pension liabilities and future contributions corresponds to the

implicit pension debt of Figure 19. His estimate of the reform effects are larger. The 1992,

2001 and 2004 acts reduced the benefit ratio in several steps, while the last reform step

increased the statutory eligibility age from 65 to 67. The largest effect was the change from


                                                                                               26
gross to net wage indexation in 1992, and the introduction of the sustainability factor in 2004.

Figure 20 re-iterates our earlier message: the fiscal pressure of entitlement programs can and

have been reduced substantially by relatively mild parametric reforms.

An indicator of long-term fiscal balance which is less sensitive to assumptions about the

discount rate and thus timing of events is the sustainability gap. It departs from a projection of

pension expenditures, a projection of pension contributions, and a final level of debt (e.g., the

60% of GDP defined in the Maastricht treaty) to be achieved after a target date. The

sustainability gap then measures the additional income (primary balance as percent of GDP)

necessary to avoid ending up with a higher final level of debt at the target date. In Figure 21,

based on the latest report by the European Commission, S1 takes the year 2060 as the target

date, while S2 assumes an infinite horizon.


Figure 21: Sustainability gap in Europe (% GDP)

The Commission report shows that only Denmark features a fiscally sustainable pension

system according to these calculations; closely followed by Finland and Sweden, plus Bulgaria

and Estonia. In all other European countries, achieving fiscal sustainability requires further

reforms. Figure 21 shows the particularly precarious situation of Greece, but also the

unsustainability of the pension systems in Ireland and the UK. The results by the Commissions

depicted in Figure 21 only partly include the costs of the financial crisis. Since the calculations

were made, the debt taken on through stimulus and bank rescue packages have worsened the

debt situation considerably.




                                                                                                27
6. Conclusions
The major European pension systems (France, Germany, Italy, Spain) still have some ways to

go in order to become financially sustainable. This paper has shown that this goal is achievable

with a combination of reasonable policy steps. Italy, for example, has introduced a new

entrants system that will stabilize pension expenditures if it is implemented consistently also in

the future. Sweden with its NDC system has no sustainability gap. Germany has substantially

reduced its implicit pension debt through a set of politically accepted gradual steps: increasing

retirement age, indexing benefits to the system dependency ratio, and introducing individual-

accounts-type private pensions to fill the emerging pension gap.

The recent crisis makes pension reform even more urgent. It is no coincidence that Greece and

Italy are currently most under pressure. These countries have the highest pension expenditures

as share of GDP in Europe. In Italy, these high pension expenditures are at least stable; but

they will remain a fiscal challenge as they will not get lower for the foreseeable future and its

parameters face political risks. Pension expenditures are still dramatically increasing in Greece.

Without pension reform which cuts the high share of pension expenditures in GDP, no fiscal

consolidation appears possible.

There is no single “optimal pension policy” since the initial state (general welfare state design

emerged through culture, history, and political preferences) and problems (pressure through

demography, design flaws) differ so much among countries. Rather, the policy mix between

reducing pay-as-you-go benefit levels, increasing retirement age, introducing actuarial

adjustments, and establishing occupational and individual funded pensions has to be different

across countries.



                                                                                               28
Moreover, restrictions differ across countries. Building up funded pensions takes time. The

feasibility of a transition strategy depends on the time left until the “baby-boom bulge” will

enter retirement. This differs across countries. Moreover, it depends on the current size of the

pay-as-you-go pillars. The higher the pay-as-you-go share is currently, the harder is a transition

during the remaining years.

What has been emerged as the most effective reform? The introduction of NDC systems have

reduced fiscal strain when it was done early and consistently, like in Sweden. In Italy, not only

is the demographic pressure much higher, but the introduction was also effectively postponed

until after the baby boom generation will have retired, and there are many loopholes in the

actual implementation, e.g. in the definition of the conversion rate to an annuity which leave

room for political maneuvering. The “dressing” of the reform as a new NDC system did help in

the political economy situation in Sweden, to some extent also in Italy. It failed, however, in

Germany, where the taste of a funded system seems unpalatable. “Dressing” a similar reform in

terms of a complex defined benefit formula was politically much easier.

Automatic stabilizers, such as the NDC systems in Sweden, Italy and Poland, and the

indexation of pension benefits to the system dependency ratio in Germany, may help to put

pension systems on a long-run fiscally sustainable path since they are sheltered from day-to-

day political opportunism. One may want to introduce similar automatic rules for the

retirement age, such as a proportionality rule which keeps the ratio of time spent in retirement

to time spent working constant. The sheltering effect, of course, goes only so far. In Germany,

for example, the sustainability factor in the benefit formula has been set out of force through a

“pension benefit guarantee” which rules out any nominal benefit reduction, and parts of the

dynamic increase in the retirement age has been offset by the introduction of new duration-of-


                                                                                               29
service-rules. By and large, however, pension reforms introducing automatic stabilizers have

been more successful in achieving long-term fiscal balance than those without such

mechanisms.




                                                                                         30
References

Balassone, Fabrizio, Jorge Cunha, Geert Langenus, Bernhard Manzke, Jeanne Pavot, Doris

       Prammer and Pietro Tommasino (2009): Fiscal sustainability and policy implications

       for the euro area, European Central Bank, WORKING PAPER SERIES NO 994 /

       JANUARY 2009

Berkel, B., and Börsch-Supan, A. (2004): Pension Reform in Germany: The Impact on

       Retirement Decisions. Finanzarchiv, Vol 60, No. 3, 393-421.

Blanchard, O.J. (1990), „Suggestions for a New Set of Fiscal Indicators“, OECD Economics

       Department Working Paper No 79.

Blanchard O.J., J.C. Chouraqui, R.P. Hagemann und N. Sartor (1990), „The Sustainability of

       Fiscal Policy: New Answers to an Old Question“, OECD Economic Studies 15: 7–36.

Blondal, S., and S. Scarpetta (1998): The retirement decision in OECD countries, Working

       papers (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Economics Dept.);

       no. 202

Blundell, R., A. Duncan and C. Meghir (1998): Estimating Labor Supply Responses Using Tax

       Reforms, Econometrica 66(4), 827-862.

Börsch-Supan, A. und R. Schnabel, 1998, Social Security and Declining Labor-Force

       Participation in Germany. American Economic Review 88, 173-178.

Börsch-Supan, A., 2000, Incentive Effects of Social Security on Labor Force Participation:

       Evidence in Germany and Across Europe. Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 78, 25-49.




                                                                                             31
Börsch-Supan, A., und M. Miegel (Eds.), 2001, Pension Reform in Six Countries, Springer.

       Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo.

Börsch-Supan, A. und A. Reil-Held (2001): How much is Transfer and how much Insurance in

       a Pay-As-You-Go System? The German Case, Scandinavian Journal of Economics,

       Vol. 130, No.3, 505-524.

Börsch-Supan, A. und P. Tinios (2002): The Greek Pension System: Strategic Framework for

       Reform, In: R. C. Bryant, N. C. Garganas, G. S. Tavlas (Eds.), Greece’s Economic

       Performance and Prospects, Bank of Greece, 361-451.

Börsch-Supan, A., (2005): Suomen vuoden 2005 eläkeuudistus, Kansantaloudellinen

       aikakauskirja, The Finnish Economic Journal, Vol. 1/2005, 101.vsk, 52-71.

Börsch-Supan, A. und C. B. Wilke (2005): The German Public Pension System: How it will

       become an NDC System Look-Alike, In: Robert Holzmann and Edward Palmer (Eds.),

       Pension Reform – Issues and Prospects for Non-Financial Defined Contribution (NDC)

       Schemes, World Bank, Washington D.C., 573-610.

Börsch-Supan, A., 2007, Rational Pension Reform, Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance:

       Issues and Practice, Nr. 4, 430-446.

Börsch-Supan, A., Bucher-Koenen, T., Reil-Held, A. und C. Wilke (2008): Zum künftigen

       Stellenwert der ersten Säule im Gesamtsystem der Alterssicherung, DRV-Schriften,

       Band 80, 13-31.




                                                                                           32
Börsch-Supan, A. und R. Schnabel (2010): Early Retirement and Employment of the Young in

       Germany, In: Gruber, J. and D. A. Wise (Eds.), Social Security Programs and

       Retirement around the World, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 147-166.

Carone, Giuseppe, Declan Costello, Nuria Diez Guardia, Per Eckefeldt and Gilles Mourre

       (2008): Economic Growth and Fiscal Sustainability in the EU: The Impact of an Ageing

       Population, in: Daniele Franco (ed.), Fiscal Sustainability: Analytical Developments

       and Emerging Policy Issues, Banca d’Italia: Rome.

Dang, Thai-Thanh, Pablo Antolin, Howard Oxley (2001): Fiscal Implication of Ageing:

       Projections of Age-related Spending, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and

       Development (OECD) Working Paper No. 305

Economic Policy Committee (2003): „The Impact of Ageing Populations on Public Finances:

       Overview of Analysis Carried out at an EU Level and Proposals for a Future Work

       Programme“, Doc. No. EPC/ECFIN/435/03-EN final.

European Commission (2005): „The 2005 projections of age-related expenditure (2004–2050)

       for the EU-25 Member States: underlying assumptions and projection methodologies“,

       European Economy, Special Report No. 4/2005.

European Commission (2009): „Sustainability Report – 2009“, European Economy No.

       9/2009.

European Commission (2010): „Public Finances in EMU – 2010“, European Economy No.

       4/2010.




                                                                                              33
European Commission (2010): Joint Report by the Economic Policy Committee (Ageing

       Working Group), the Social Protection Committee (Indicators Sub-Group) and the

       Commission services (DG for Economic and Financial Affairs and DG Employment,

       Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities) on Pensions: Progress and key challenges in the

       delivery of adequate and sustainable pensions in Europe, EUROPEAN ECONOMY

       Occasional Papers 71

Gruber, J. und Wise, D. A. (eds., 1999), Social Security and Retirement Around the World.

       Chicago, London: University of Chicago Press.

Gruber, J., and D. A. Wise (eds., 2003), Incentive Effects of Public Pension Systems,

       University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 285-344.

Gruber, J. and D. A. Wise (eds., 2010), Social Security Programs and Retirement around the

       World, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Holzmann, Robert, and Richard Hinz (2005): Old-Age Income Support in the 21st Century: The

       World Bank’s Perspective on Pension Systems and Reform, The World Bank:

       Washington, DC.

Moog, Stefan, Christoph Müller, and Bernd Raffelhüschen (2010), Ehrbare Staaten? Die

       deutsche Generationenbilanz im internationalen Vergleich: Wie gut ist Deutschland auf

       die demografische Herausforderung vorbereitet? Diskussionspapier Forschungszentrum

       Generationenverträge, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg

OECD Social Expenditure database (SOCX, www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, Nov. 2011)

OECD (2011), Pensions at a Glance, OECD, Paris.




                                                                                             34
United Nations Population Division (2001): Replacement Migration: Is It a Solution to

       Declining and Ageing Populations? New York: United Nations.

Werding, M. (2007): „Implicit Pension Debt and Fiscal Sustainability: An Assessment for

       Germany“, in: Morten Balling, Ernest Gnan und Frank Lierman (Hrsg.), Money,

       Finance and Demography: The Consequences of Ageing, SUERF: Vienna, S. 147–174.

Werding, M. und H. Hofmann (2008): Projektionen zur langfristigen Tragfähigkeit der

       öffentlichen Finanzen, ifo Beiträge zur Wirtschaftsforschung, Bd. 30, ifo Institut:

       München.




                                                                                             35
                                                                                                            Sl
                                                                                                                 ov
                                                                                                                      ak




                                                                                                                                            0,0
                                                                                                                                                  5,0
                                                                                                                                                        10,0
                                                                                                                                                               15,0
                                                                                                                                                                      20,0
                                                                                                                                                                             25,0
                                                                                                                                                                                    30,0
                                                                                                                                                                                           35,0
                                                                                                                           Re
                                                                                                                          pu
                                                                                                                 Un      C ab l i c
                                                                                                                   ite n ad
                                                                                                                      d                 a
                                                                                                                  S w S ta
                                                                                                            C z it z e s        t
                                                                                                               ec er l
                                                                                                                  h R an
                                                                                                                        ep d
                                                                                                                            ub
                                                                                                                              J alic
                                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                                            I re a n
                                                                                                                                  lan
                                                                                                                           P            d
                                                                                                                  Ne           o  la n
                                                                                                                      th e              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (Percent of GDP, 2011)




                                                                                                                           rl a
                                                                                                            Un          H d     n
                                                                                                               ite u ng s
                                                                                                                  dK                ar
                                                                                                                 L u in g y
                                                                                                                     xe d o
                                                                                                                        mb m
                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                          G r u rg
                                                                                                                               ee
                                                                                                                                      c
                                                                                                                               Sp e
                                                                                                                        P o ain
                                                                                                                              rt u
                                                                                                                                    ga
                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                                   I ta
                                                                                                                       G e ly
                                                                                                                            rm
                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                          F in ny
                                                                                                                                 lan
                                                                                                                         Sw d
                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                       De d en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 1: Entitlement Programs in Europe and Other Selected Countries




                                                                                                                            nm
                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                           A u rk
                                                                                                                                 st r
                                                                                                                         B e ia
                                                                                                                              lgi
                                                                                                                                   u
                                                                                                                           Fr m
                                                                                                                                an
     Source: OECD Social Expenditure database (SOCX, www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, November 2011).




                                                                                                                          N o ce
                                                                                                                                 rw
                                                                                                                                      ay




36
Figure 2: Public, occupational and private pension income in selected countries
          (Percent of total retirement income)

   100%
    90%
    80%
    70%
    60%
    50%
    40%
    30%
    20%
    10%
     0%
                E           D           F             I    GB   NL        US      CH

                        Public Pillar           Occup. Pillar   Private Pillar

Source: Updated from Börsch-Supan and Miegel (2001)




                                                                                       37
Figure 3: Gross relative pension level
          (Average pension in percent of average earnings)




Source: OECD, Pensions at a Glance, 2011




                                                             38
Figure 4: Statutory and effective retirement age




Source: OECD, Pensions at a Glance (2011)




                                                   39
Figure 5: Pension Expenditures (Percent of GDP, 2011) by Old-Age Dependency (Percent)

                                  40,0




                                                                                               Japan
                                  35,0

                                                                                   Germany                Italy
   Old Age Dependency Ratio (%)




                                                                                       2
                                                                                      R = 0,2349
                                  30,0
                                                      Sweden




                                  25,0




                                  20,0
                                                                                              Poland

                                         Ireland                    Slovak Rep

                                  15,0
                                     15,0%    20,0%     25,0%     30,0%    35,0%     40,0%    45,0%    50,0%      55,0%
                                                                Pension Expenditures (%GDP)


Source: OECD Social Expenditure database (SOCX, www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, November 2011).




                                                                                                                          40
Figure 6: Change in Pension Expenditures (Percent, 2030 and 2050 versus 2010)

 180%
 160%
 140%
 120%
 100%
  80%                                                                           D2030
  60%                                                                           D2050
  40%
  20%
   0%
  -20%




             dS m
            Sl bli c

                Sp a
      N b ly




                EU s
              e p da




                       nd
              Fr n d




            H ece

              Ire ry




            h e rg

             N ds
            Be tria




     o v o nd
              Po ay




      U i ng d
     ze Ca m




             Fi i a




             G ny




     ni ze n




                      27
             en ic




              ep l




            Sw a in
             Es rk




             er ce




            R ga




                      te
                        i



          dK a n
   U wit de


           te do
          xe Ita




                   en
           D ub l




                   ga
                     n




         et o u
                    iu




                     a




                     n
                    a




                   la




                   w
                   la
                 an
        ch na




                    a




                  ta
         ak t u
                  to
                   s




                   u
                 m




                re




               rla
                m
                lg




                nl




       t e rl
                 e
                or




               ov
              Au




              un




                r
  -40%

             m




            P
            R




           G




        ni
      Lu




       S
   Sl
   C




Source: EPC projections in EU, OECD elsewhere. OECD Social Expenditure database (SOCX,
www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, November 2011).




                                                                                    41
Figure 7: The Old-Age Dependency Ratio in Europe and Selected Countries
     (Population 65+/population 20-64: 2010-2050)
                                                                                                                                Austria
 0.9
                                                                                                                                Belgium
                                                                                                                                Canada
 0.8                                                                                                                            Czech Republic
                                                                                                                                Denmark
                                                                                                                                Estonia
 0.7
                                                                                                                                Finland
                                                                                                                                France
 0.6                                                                                                                            Germany
                                                                                                                                Greece
                                                                                                                                Hungary
 0.5
                                                                                                                                Ireland
                                                                                                                                Italy
 0.4                                                                                                                            Japan
                                                                                                                                Luxembourg
 0.3                                                                                                                            Netherlands
                                                                                                                                Norway
                                                                                                                                Poland
 0.2                                                                                                                            Portugal
                                                                                                                                Slovakia
 0.1                                                                                                                            Slovenia
                                                                                                                                Spain
                                                                                                                                Sweden
  0                                                                                                                             Switzerland
                                                                                                                                United Kingdom
   10

         12

               14

                     16

                           18

                                 20

                                       22

                                             24

                                                   26

                                                         28

                                                               30

                                                                     32

                                                                           34

                                                                                 36

                                                                                       38

                                                                                             40

                                                                                                   42

                                                                                                         44

                                                                                                               46

                                                                                                                     48

                                                                                                                           50
 20

        20

              20

                    20

                          20

                                20

                                      20

                                            20

                                                  20

                                                        20

                                                              20

                                                                    20

                                                                          20

                                                                                20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                            20

                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                United States

Source: EPC projections in EU, OECD elsewhere. OECD Social Expenditure database (SOCX,
www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, November 2011).




                                                                                                                                                 42
Figure 8: Baby Boom to Baby Bust Transition in Europe

                   DE                                    NL                              AT                                 USCH
  100+                              100+                                  100+                               100+
    90                                90                                    90                                 90
    80                                80                                    80                                 80
    70                                70                                    70                                 70
    60                                60                                    60                                 60
    50                                50                                    50                                 50
    40                                40                                    40                                 40
    30                                30                                    30                                 30
    20                                20                                    20                                 20
    10                                10                                    10                                 10
     0                                   0                                   0                                  0

     -800   -400    0   400   800        -150     -75     0   75    150     -100   -50       0   50    100     -100   -50      0   50   100




                   IT                                    ES                              PT                                  GR

  100+                              10                                                                       100+
    90                              90                                                                         90
    80                              80                                                                         80
    70                              70                                                                         70
    60                              60                                                                         60
    50                              50                                                                         50
    40                              40                                                                         40
    30                              30                                                                         30
    20                              20                                                                         20
    10                              10                                                                         10
     0                                                                                                          0
                                     0
    -600    -300    0   300   600    -4 0 0     -2 0 0    0   200   400                                        -100   -50      0   50   100
                                                                           -100 -50      0       50    100



                   FR                                    SE                              DK                                 USA
  100+                              100+                                  100+
    90                                90                                    90
    80                                80                                    80
    70                                70                                    70
    60                                60                                    60
    50                                50                                    50
    40                                40                                    40
    30                                30                                    30
    20                                20                                    20
    10                                10                                    10
     0                                   0                                   0

     -500   -250    0   250   500        -100     -50     0   50    100      -60   -30       0    30    60




Source: Own depiction based on Eurostat and US Census IDB data




                                                                                                                                        43
Figure 9: Life Expectancy at Age 65, German Men and Women, 1970-2040

  26.0


  24.0


  22.0


  20.0

                                                                                                               female
  18.0
                                                                                                               male

  16.0


  14.0


  12.0


  10.0
      1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020   2025   2030   2035   2040




Source: 1970-2008: Statistisches Bundesamt; 2009-2040: MEA-Projection




                                                                                                                   44
Figure 10: Composition of total hourly labor compensation in Europe (percent, Eurostat)




Source: Eurostat (on line data codes: lc_an_struc and lc_an_struc_r2)




                                                                                      45
Figure 11: Tax force and early retirement

                                            70
    Share of 60-64 year old males retired




                                                                                                     Belgium
                                            60                                           France

                                            50                                                             Italy
                                                          Canada
                                                                                                  Netherlands
                                            40             Spain
                                                                         UK                         l d
                                                                        Germany
                                            30
                                                    USA
                                                              Sweden                  R2 = 0,8554
                                            20        Japan

                                            10
                                             0,00          2,00         4,00          6,00        8,00             10,00
                                                          Index of implicit tax rate on working longer


Source: Börsch-Supan (2000) adapted from Gruber and Wise (1999)




                                                                                                                      46
Figure                12:   Labor force participation among         men     aged    60-64,   1960-2008
                            (percent of male population 60 to 64)


                                      LFP trends for men 60 to 64
               0,9

               0,8

               0,7
                                                                                              Japan
               0,6                                                                            Sweden
  Proportion




                                                                                              US
               0,5                                                                            UK
                                                                                              Germany
               0,4                                                                            Belgium
                                                                                              France
               0,3

               0,2

               0,1
                     1960   1965   1970    1975   1980     1985   1990    1995     2000
                                                    Year


Source: Gruber and Wise (2010)




                                                                                                   47
Figure 13: Average Retirement Age in Germany, 1960-2008

                  Fig. IV-1: Average retirement ages - West German men

    63                                                              63                                            13


                                                                    62                                            11
                           Reform 1972
                                             1973                   61                                            9
    62
                               1966    1970
                                 19671969  1972
                                                                    60                                            7    Retirement Age

                             1965 1968   1971                                                                          Unemployment Rate
                                                                    59                                            5    Unempl.R.(50-55)
                           1964                 1975
    61                                                              58                                            3
                        1963                         1976
                                                                    57                                            1
                      1962                            1977
    60                                                              56                                            -1
                    1961                                1978
                                                                     1965   1970
                                                                                  19901992
                                                                                     1975
                                                                                       1980
                                                                                    1991
                                                                                             1985   1990   1995

                  1960                                                                      1995
                                                                                1989
                                                                              1988
    59                                                      1979            1987
                                                                          1986
                                                                      1984
                                                              1980 1983 1985
                                                                  1982
                                                                1981
    58
     1955      1960     1965      1970       1975          1980     1985           1990     1995    2000

                                                    Year

Source: Börsch-Supan and Schnabel (2010)




Get original and delete unemployment rates




                                                                                                                                 48
                                                    N
                                                 C eth
                                                   ze er




                                                                     0
                                                                         5
                                                                             10
                                                                                  15
                                                                                       20
                                                                                            25
                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                      35
                                                     ch la
                                                       R n
                                                    Lu ep ds
                                                      xe ub
                                                        m lic
                                                           bo
                                                       Hu urg
                                                           ng
                                                 Sl
                                                   ov P ary
                                                     ak ola
                                                                                                           (OECD, 2008)




                                                       R nd
                                                         ep
                                                            u
                                                        Sw blic
                                                            ed
                                                          Au en
                                                       G str
                                                        er ia




     Source: OECD, Pensions at a Glance (2011)
                                                           m
                                                              a
                                                         Fr n y
                                                            an
                                                                                                                          Figure 14: Old-Age Poverty Rates, 2010




                                                         N ce
                                                           o
                                                 U D rw
                                                  ni e ay
                                                    te nm
                                                      dK a
                                                        i n rk
                                                           gd
                                                        Fi om
                                                           nl
                                                        Be and
                                                           lg
                                                              iu
                                                                 m
                                                             Ita
                                                          O ly
                                                            E
                                                       P C
                                                    Sw ortu D
                                                               g
                                                   U itze al
                                                    ni rl
                                                      te an
                                                        dS d
                                                            ta
                                                               t
                                                        G es
                                                           re
                                                              ec
                                                           Sp e
                                                               a
                                                         Ire in
                                                             la
                                                                nd




49
Figure 15: The force of aging in terms of the rate of economic growth

  0.01


     0
      11

      13

      15

      17

      19

      21

      23

      25

      27

      29

      31

      33

      35

      37

      39

      41

      43

      45

      47

      49
    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20
                                                                                      France
  -0.01                                                                               Germany
                                                                                      Italy
                                                                                      Japan
  -0.02
                                                                                      Spain
                                                                                      Sweden
  -0.03                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                                                      United States

  -0.04


  -0.05




Source:   Own      calculations     based   on    OECD   Social   Expenditure   database     (SOCX,
www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, November 2011).




                                                                                                  50
Figure 16: Projected Retirement Age, Germany, 1997-2035

   68

   67                                                                                              langj. Versicherte
                                                                                                   (abschlagsfrei)
   66                                                                                              AL/ATZ (abschlagsfrei)

   65
                                                                                                   Frauen (abschlagsfrei)
   64
                                                                                                   Schw erbehinderte
   63                                                                                              (abschlagsfrei)

   62                                                                                              langj. Versicherte
                                                                                                   (vorzeitig mit Abschlägen)

   61                                                                                              AL/ATZ und Frauen
                                                                                                   (vorzeitig mit Abschlägen)
   60
                                                                                                   Schw erbehinderte
                                                                                                   (vorzeitig mit Abschlägen)
   59
        1997

               2000
                      2003

                             2006

                                    2009

                                           2012

                                                  2015

                                                         2018
                                                                2021

                                                                       2024

                                                                              2027

                                                                                     2030

                                                                                            2033
Source: Updated from Berkel and Börsch-Supan (2004).




                                                                                                                         51
Figure 17: Projected Retirement Income Components, Germany, 2002-2040


    as percent of average pretax wage   60%                                      Riester Pensions if real return = 4,5% p.a.

                                                     Riester Pensions if real return = 2,5% p.a.
                                        50%
         Average pretax pension




                                        40%

                                        30%

                                        20%
                                              Public pension (pay-as-you-go)
                                        10%

                                        0%
                                              2007

                                                         2010

                                                                 2013

                                                                          2016

                                                                                  2019

                                                                                           2022

                                                                                                   2025

                                                                                                           2028

                                                                                                                    2031

                                                                                                                               2034

                                                                                                                                      2037

                                                                                                                                             2040
Source: Börsch-Supan, Bucher-Koenen, Reil-Held and Wilke (2008).




                                                                                                                                                    52
Figure 18: Projected Public Pension Expenditures (% GDP), 2007-2050
                                                                             Austria
 30                                                                          Belgium
                                                                             Canada
                                                                             CzechRepublic
                                                                             Denmark
 25
                                                                             Estonia
                                                                             Finland
                                                                             France

 20                                                                          Germany
                                                                             Greece
                                                                             Hungary
                                                                             Ireland
 15                                                                          Italy
                                                                             Luxembourg
                                                                             Netherlands
                                                                             Norw ay
 10                                                                          Poland
                                                                             Portugal
                                                                             SlovakRepublic
                                                                             Slovenia
  5                                                                          Spain
                                                                             Sw eden
                                                                             Sw itzerland
                                                                             UnitedKingdom
  0
                                                                             UnitedStates
      2007   2010   2015   2020   2025   2030   2035   2040   2045   2050    EU27


Source: EPC projections in EU, OECD elsewhere. OECD Social Expenditure database (SOCX,
www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, November 2011).




                                                                                            53
Figure 19: Projected implicit pension debt before and after recent reforms (% GDP)




Source: Moog, Müller and Raffelhüschen (2010)




                                                                                     54
Figure 20: Projected implicit pension debt before and after recent reforms (% GDP)




Source: Werding (2007)




                                                                                     55
Figure 21: Sustainability gap in Europe (% GDP)




                   Adjustment required to primary fiscal balance (percent of GDP)


 Source: European Commission (2010): Joint Report by the Economic Policy Committee, the Social Protection
Committee and Commission services




                                                                                                            56
Table 1: Structure of Entitlement Programs, 2011
         Percent of Total Entitlement Programs

2011              pensions          health      working age children/other
Austria                 43,0%          24,5%           20,5%          12,1%
Belgium                 31,8%          25,7%           27,5%          15,1%
Canada                  23,9%          44,1%           14,5%          17,5%
Czech Repub             32,7%          29,2%           23,1%          15,1%
Denmark                 19,6%          22,3%           26,8%          31,3%
Estonia                 31,7%          22,1%           30,4%          15,8%
Finland                 31,6%          22,0%           25,1%          21,3%
France                  42,5%          25,0%           16,6%          15,9%
Germany                 39,4%          30,6%           15,6%          14,4%
Greece                  51,1%          25,8%           10,0%          13,1%
Hungary                 40,8%          22,8%           23,6%          12,8%
Ireland                 16,8%          27,0%           36,8%          19,3%
Italy                   51,9%          24,7%           11,5%          11,8%
Japan                   46,5%          33,5%            8,5%          11,5%
Luxembourg              27,8%          27,7%           28,1%          16,4%
Netherlands             21,3%          27,5%           27,3%          23,9%
Norway                  22,6%          25,4%           26,4%          25,6%
Poland                  45,2%          22,0%           17,2%          15,5%
Portugal                44,8%          26,9%           18,7%            9,7%
Slovak Repub            31,9%          30,7%           23,7%          13,7%
Slovenia                41,5%          24,3%           19,2%          15,0%
Spain                   33,0%          23,8%           25,5%          17,8%
Sweden                  26,4%          24,4%           20,8%          28,5%
Switzerland             33,2%          28,2%           24,7%          13,9%
United Kingdo           23,0%          29,3%           23,2%          24,6%
United States           32,9%          44,7%           15,1%            7,3%
Note: The countries with the two highest and two lowest values are marked in color.
Source: OECD Social Expenditure database (SOCX, www.oecd.org/els/social/expenditure, November 2011).




                                                                                                       57
Table 2: Structure of Pension Programs, 2010
                      Poverty prevention part ("Pillar 0")             Earnings-related part ("Pillar 1")
                      Ressource     Basic       Minimum                             Type
                        tested
 Austria                                                                                   DB
 Belgium                      x                             x                              DB
 Czech Rep.                                 x               x                              DB
 Denmark                      x             x
 Estoria                                    x                                            Points
 Finland                                                    x                              DB
 France                                                     x                          DB+points
 Germany                      x                                                          Points
 Greece                                                     x                              DB
 Hungary                                                                                   DB
 Ireland                                    x
 Italy                        x                                                           NDC
 Japan                                      x                                              DB
 Luxembourg                   x             x               x                              DB
 Netherlands                                x
 Norway                                                     x                             NDC
 Poland                                                     x                             NDC
 Portugal                                                   x                              DB
 Slovak Republik                                            x                            Points
 Slovenia                                                   x                              DB
 Spain                                                      x                              DB
 Sweden                                                     x                             NDC
 Switzerland                  x                             x                              DB
 United Kingdom               x             x               x                              DB
 United States                                                                             DB
Notes: Resource-tested plans pay a higher benefit to poorer pensioners. The value of benefits depends on income
from other sources and, in some countries, on assets.
Basic schemes pay flat benefits (in some countries, their value depends on years of work but not on past earnings.
Additional retirement income does not change the entitlement.
Minimum pensions are resource-tested plans in which the value of entitlements takes account only of pension
income but it is not affected by income from savings, etc. In some countries, benefits for workers with very low
earnings are calculated as if the worker had earned at a higher level.
Defined-benefit (DB) plans: Retirement income depends on the number of years of contributions and individual
earnings.
Point schemes: Workers earn pension points based on their earnings each year. At retirement, the sum of pension
points is multiplied by a pension-point value to convert them into a regular pension payment.
Defined-contribution (DC) plans: contributions flow into an individual account. The accumulation of
contributions and investment returns is converted into a pension-income stream at retirement.
Notional defined countribution (NDC) plans record contributions in an individual account and apply a rate of
return to the balances. The accounts are “notional” in that the balances exist only on the books of the managing
institution. At retirement, the accumulated notional capital is converted into a stream of pension payments using a
formula based on life expectancy.
Source: Adapted from OECD, Pensions at a Glance, 2011




                                                                                                               58
Table 3: Synopsis of pension reform elements in Europe, 1980-2010

                      Retirement age   Link of benefits to      Indexation
                                         contributions
Austria                 women  65              +
Germany                   all  67     (universal point sys)   Sustainability
France                    all  62     Basis of point system
Italy                                          NDC                  NDC
Spain
Greece                                       Partially
Denmark                 all  67 rev
Sweden                       DI                NDC                  NDC
Norway                                         point           life expectancy
Finland                  UI tunnel         scale factors
Netherlands               EEA, DI
UK                        all  68                             price  wage
US                        all  67




                                                                                 59
Table 4: Decomposition of Projected Changes in Pension Expenditure, 2005-2050
         (gross public pension expenditures as percent of GDP)
                   Level     Percent change Dependency Employment     Take up   Benefit     Residual
                    2005       2005-2050       ratio      rate         ratio     ratio    (interaction)
Austria             13.2          -1.0         11.3       -1.3          -5.8      -4.3         -0.8
Belgium             10.4           5.1          7.7       -1.5          -0.4      -0.6         -0.1
Denmark              9.5           3.2          7.2       -0.4          -2.8      -0.5         -0.3
Finland             10.4           3.3          8.8       -0.9          -3.1      -0.9         -0.6
France              12.9           2.0          9.7       -0.9          -1.9      -3.5         -0.5
Germany             11.1           1.9          7.5       -1.1          -0.6      -3.5         -0.4
Ireland              4.6           6.5          7.9       -0.5          -1.4       0.8         -0.2
Italy               14.3           0.4         11.5       -2.0          -3.2      -5.3         -0.7
Luxembourg          10.0           7.4          7.2       -4.4           2.5       2.1          0.0
Netherlands          7.4           3.8          6.3       -0.2          -1.6      -0.4         -0.3
Portugal            11.5           9.3         13.7       -0.2          -3.9      -3.0         -0.4
Spain                8.7           7.0         12.4       -1.8          -2.3      -0.8         -0.4
Sweden              10.4           0.9          4.8       -0.6           0.2      -2.8         -0.2
United Kingdom       6.7           1.9          4.7       -0.1           0.0       0.0         -2.6
Source: Carone, Costello, Diez Guardia, Eckefeldt and Mourre (2008)




                                                                                                    60
