                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      STATUS COMPETITION AND HOUSING PRICES

                                          Shang-Jin Wei
                                          Xiaobo Zhang
                                             Yin Liu

                                       Working Paper 18000
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18000


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2012




This research is supported by U.S. National Science Foundation grant SES-1024574, which we gratefully
acknowledge. The authors would like to thank Kyle Bagwell, V. Bhaskar, Qingyuan Du, Neng Wang
and seminar and conference participants at Columbia University, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, University of Hong Kong, University of
Southern California, and University of Virginia for helpful discussions, Joy Glazener and Jin Yang
for assistance. All errors are the authors’ responsibilities. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Shang-Jin Wei, Xiaobo Zhang, and Yin Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Status Competition and Housing Prices
Shang-Jin Wei, Xiaobo Zhang, and Yin Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 18000
April 2012
JEL No. G12,R2,R3

                                              ABSTRACT

While in standard housing economics housing is regarded as an asset and a consumption good, we
study in this paper the consequences for housing prices if housing is also a status good. More concretely,
if a family’s housing wealth relative to others is an important marker for relative status in the marriage
market, then competition for marriage partners might motivate people to pursue a bigger and more
expensive house/apartment beyond its direct consumption (and financial investment) value. To test
the empirical validity of the hypothesis, we have to overcome the usual difficulty of not being able
to observe the intensity of status competition. Our innovation is to explore regional variations in the
sex ratio for the pre-marital age cohort across China, which likely has triggered variations in the intensity
of competition in the marriage market. The empirical evidence appears to support this hypothesis.
We estimate that due to the status good feature of housing, a rise in the sex ratio accounts for 30-48%
of the rise in real urban housing prices in China during 2003-2009.


Shang-Jin Wei                                         Yin Liu
Graduate School of Business                           School of Economics and Management
Columbia University                                   Tsinghua University
Uris Hall 619                                         Beijing, China
3022 Broadway                                         reggieliu08@gmail.com
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

Xiaobo Zhang
International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006
x.zhang@cgiar.org
                                                          2


1. Introduction

         In standard housing economics, housing is regarded as an asset and as a
consumption good. However, housing is also sometimes referred to as a ―status good,‖
meaning that the owner derives utility from comparing its value with the values of the
houses owned by members of his comparison group. This paper studies the equilibrium
consequences for housing prices if housing has the status good feature.
         This notion of status goods (also known as positional goods) can trace its
intellectual heritage to a literature on the economics of social status (Veblen, 1898;
Hirsch, 1977; and Frank, 1985). This possibility that housing represents a positional
good has been invoked as an explanation for why Americans have chosen to live in ever
larger and ever more expensive homes over the last five decades, even though the
average household size also has declined over the same period (Robert Frank, 2007;
Marsh, 2011)1 . While this hypothesis is intriguing, we are not aware of any rigorous
empirical studies confirming or rejecting it. A conceptual challenge is that if housing is a
normal good (without being a ―status‖ good), the demand naturally rises as a household‘s
income rises. This presumably can be controlled for. A more important empirical
challenge is that average housing prices in a region tend to be correlated with other
regional attributes, such as better schools and lower crime. In the United States, a rise in
housing prices translates into more property tax revenue, and therefore more funding for
local public schools and local police force. This makes it difficult to disentangle the
pursuit of expensive housing purely because it enhances status from the pursuit of
expensive housing in order to obtain other functionally useful attributes that happen to be
correlated with housing prices.
         The status good feature of housing can be especially important in the marriage
market. That is, the value of a home belonging to the family of a young man may be a
key determinant of how attractive he is considered to be relative to his competitors in the
eyes of women (and vice versa). For example, in a survey of Chinese mothers with young
daughters by Shanghai Daily in March 2010, 80% of the mothers indicate that they
1
 For media accounts about the phenomenon of ever larger houses in the United States, see ―Living ever larger; how
wretched excess became a way of life in Southern California,‖ Los Angeles Times, June 9, 2002; ―In land of giants,
smallest houses larger than ever,‖ Washington Post, July 9, 2006; ―Parade of homes; houses in Madison are larger than
ever,‖ The Daily (Wisconsin), June 14, 2007.
                                                           3


would object to their daughters marrying a man who does not own a home. In other
words, those young men with home ownership are considered more attractive than those
without. Presumably even among those owning an apartment, those with a more
expensive unit are also considered relatively more attractive. The underlying reason could
be that wealth improves one‘s perceived attractiveness, other things equal, and housing is
a very visible form of wealth and can be observed with more precision than a bank
deposit, a stock trading account, and many other forms of wealth.
          This implies that the intensity of competition in the marriage market can have
consequences for housing value and housing size. The stronger the biological desire to
have a marriage partner, the stronger the impact of the mating competition for housing
market equilibrium. We note, however, that this notion is not universally accepted as part
of the standard economics of the housing market. One important reason is that status
competition is not easily quantifiable, which makes it difficult to formally confirm or
reject such a hypothesis.
          In this paper, we empirically investigate this hypothesis by exploring regional
variations in the ratio of marrying age men to women in China. This is made possible by
the high and varying sex ratios across different parts of the country in recent years. Left
to nature, the sex ratio at birth should be in the neighborhood of 106 boys per 100 girls.
Starting from the mid-1980s, however, increasing availability of ultrasound B machines
and a strict family planning policy have led to aggressive sex selective abortions in China,
which in turn have generated progressively more skewed sex ratios. The national average
sex ratio at birth rose to about 115 boys/girls in 2000 and about 120 in 2005 (Li, 2007;
Zhu, Lu, and Hesketh, 2009). This implies that, when the cohort born in 2005 grows up,
roughly one out of every six men may not be able to find a bride 2. The excess males at
the age of 25 and below are estimated to be on the order of 30 million, which is almost
double the entire female population in Canada. There are regional variations in the sex



2
 The ratio of men to women in the marriage market may differ from the sex ratio at birth. On one hand, because boys
and young men have a slightly higher mortality rate than girls and young women, the sex ratio at age 20 would be
somewhat better than the ratio at birth. On the other hand, because the cohort size tends to be progressively smaller
over time as a result of the strict family planning policy and because husbands tend to be a few years older than their
wives, the ratio of young men to young women in the marriage market is more skewed than the sex ratio at the age of
20. These two factors offset each other to some extent. In any case, mathematically speaking, the rising sex ratio at
birth over time must imply increasing difficulty for young men to find a wife.
                                              4


ratio, partly due to uneven enforcement of the family planning policy. The most skewed
sex ratios at the province level are on the order of 130 boys per 100 girls.
       It is useful to note that China does not have property taxes (at least not until 2011),
and higher housing prices are not mechanically associated with better school quality.
Similarly, if demand for expensive homes is found to be correlated with higher local sex
ratios, it is unlikely because both are correlated with lower crime rates. If anything,
higher sex ratios may be correlated with higher crime rates (Edlund, Li, Yi, Zhang, 2007).
       The combined forces of housing ownership as a status good for marriage purposes
and an intensification of competition in the marriage market can logically produce the
outcome of rising housing prices. As the sex ratio for the marriage-age cohort varies
across regions, this gives us an opportunity to check if housing market characteristics
(housing value and housing size) also vary across regions in a way that is consistent with
the hypothesis.
       To preview the results, we find clear evidence that the average home tends to be
more expensive in regions with a more skewed sex ratio, beyond what can be explained
by the local average household income and other characteristics of the local population.
The increased home value in regions with a strong sex ratio imbalance comes from a
combination of people buying larger houses on average and people paying a higher price
per square meter.
       The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. In Section 2, we connect
the hypothesis to related literatures. In Section 3, we present a simple model that links the
housing price to the sex ratio. In Section 4, we provide statistical evidence. Finally, in
Section 5, we conclude and discuss possible future research.


2. The connection between the hypothesis and the existing literature
       The hypothesis that a higher sex ratio can be an important driver for housing
market characteristics has not been established in the existing literature. It is indirectly
related to four sets of literature: (a) status goods, (b) economics of family, (c) economics
of housing market, and (d) causes and consequences of sex ratio imbalance. Each is too
vast to be referenced comprehensively here. Instead, we selectively discuss some of them,
with a view to highlight some insight most relevant for our empirical investigation.
                                                           5


            Several theoretical papers have pointed out a connection between concerns for
status (one‘s relative position in a society), the savings rate, and the economic growth rate
(Cole, Mailath and Postlewaite, 1992; Cornero and Jeanne, 1999; and Hopkins and
Kornienko, 2009). When wealth defines one‘s status in the marriage market, a greater
concern for status may lead to an increase in the growth rate. In principle, concerns for
status could also produce the opposite effect on savings and growth. In particular, if
status is enhanced by conspicuous consumption, then a greater concern for status can
translate into a reduction in savings (Frank, 1985 and 2005). It is interesting to note that,
while many papers on the topic of status use competition in the marriage market to
illustrate the idea, the sex ratio is always assumed to be balanced. In other words, no
explicit comparative statistics are derived in terms of a rise in the sex ratio imbalance.3
            Du and Wei (2010) develop a model that explores the effect of a higher sex ratio
on the household savings rate and a country‘s current account. By incorporating matching
in the marriage market, they endogenously generate the result that savings is a sorting
variable in the marriage market. Moreover, they show under general conditions that a rise
in the sex ratio not only leads to more savings by men but also a rise in aggregate savings.
            Wei and Zhang (2011a) provide the first systematic empirical evidence from
China that higher sex ratios lead to higher savings rates. They estimate that about half of
the increase in household savings from 1990 to 2007 can be attributed to a rise in the sex
ratio. In other words, the effect of the sex ratio imbalance is economically significant.
The desire to enhance one‘s relative standing in the marriage market can also induce
people to be more entrepreneurial and to work longer and harder. Wei and Zhang (2011b)
provide evidence supporting this hypothesis. They estimate that the rise in the Chinese
sex ratio has contributed 20% to overall growth rates in recent years.
            Frank (1985 and 2004) points out that people tend to over-spend on positional
goods (such as housing) and consequently under-spend on non-positional goods. The
arms race in the consumption of positional goods in general equilibrium would bid up the
price of positional goods, potentially causing large and preventable welfare losses.
            There is an extensive literature in demography that documents the phenomenon of
unbalanced sex ratios in Asia (for example, Gu and Roy, 1995; Guilmoto, 2007; and Li,

3
    Edlund (1996) showed that a higher sex ratio may have a nonlinear impact on women‘s status and dowry price.
                                               6


2007). Several papers have examined the determinants of sex ratio imbalance (including
Das Gupta, 2005; Ebenstein, 2009; Edlund, 2009; Li and Zheng, 2009; and Bulte,
Heerink and Zhang, 2011). In an influential paper, Oster (2005) proposes that the
prevalence of Hepatitis B is a significant cause of the sex ratio imbalance in Asia. But
this conclusion is later shown to be incorrect, including by Lin and Luoh (2008) and
Oster, Chen, Yu and Lin (2008). In a paper with a clever instrumental variable approach,
Qian (2008) shows that an improvement in the economic status of women tends to reduce
the sex ratio imbalance. Her instrument for the economic status of women is the world
price of tea, whose production is apparently particularly suitable for women laborers.


3. A Model
    While this is primarily an empirical paper, we construct a model to illustrate the
underlying logic for how status competition in the marriage market affects housing prices.
We aim to demonstrate two points. First, even with a balanced sex ratio, equilibrium
housing prices are higher when status competition is present than when it is not. Second,
when the sex ratio is unbalanced, a higher sex ratio can lead to a rise in both the housing
price and the ratio of housing price to rent. While the first point is likely to be relevant for
all countries in the world, it is hard to test empirically since we do not observe the
counterfactual – a world in which people do not care about status. In comparison, the
second point can be put to the test if we can find a country with varying sex ratios across
regions. Since both points come from a common model, evidence in favor of the second
point also lends some credibility to the first point.

    We consider an overlapping generation small open-economy model with two genders
(men and women) and two goods (a tradable good and non-tradable housing). Both men
and women live two periods. Each person is endowed with an initial wealth y . In the
first period, agents could purchase a certain quantity of house (which is a non-negative
continuous variable) and a certain amount of a composite perishable good, and save the
rest of their endowment for the second period. The small open economy assumption
means that both the price of the tradable good and the interest rate are set exogenously.
We set the price of the tradable good at one. Because housing is non-tradable, its price is
determined endogenously.
                                            7


    Each person can enter the marriage market at the beginning of his/her second period.
A marriage can take place only between a man and woman in the same cohort. There are
two benefits associated with a marriage. First, some of the within-marriage consumption
has a public good feature, meaning that a household member‘s consumption does not
exclude the consumption by other household members. We let housing service assume
this public good feature. Second, a married person derives additional utility from his/her
spouse, which we follow Du and Wei (2010) and label as ―emotional utility,‖ but can also
be called ―love.‖ Everyone is endowed with an exogenous ability to generate some
emotional utility to her/his spouse. The exact value of emotional utility is unknown in the
first period (although its distribution is common and known across all agents), and is
realized and becomes public information when agents enter the marriage market.

    For simplicity, we assume zero population growth, and each generation is
characterized by an exogenous ratio of men to women  ( 1) . All men are identical ex
ante, and all women are also identical ex ante. Men and women are symmetric in all
respects except that the sex ratio may be unbalanced.

    Due to zoning requirements, restrictions on building height, and a fixed land supply
in a given location, housing supply tends to be much less elastic than say, the supply of
electronic appliances or automobiles. Trading houses across space is also very costly,
making housing an arch type of a non-tradable good. To capture these features, we make
an extreme assumption that the housing supply is completely inelastic.

    Agents purchase a continuous amount of house in the first period, and sell it in the
second period as there is no reason (within the model) for them to leave a non-zero
bequest. The amount of house one buys can be interpreted as physical size. In equilibrium,
each young generation obtains housing as owner-occupiers, and rents out a fraction of the
house to the old cohort. In standard housing economics, housing plays a dual role, as a
consumption good and a means for financial investment. Both functions are present in
our model. However, we wish to capture a third feature that is not usually present in
standard housing economics. In particular, housing is a status variable in the marriage
market. To be more concrete, with competition for mating partners, relative wealth
becomes a sorting variable in the marriage market. While both housing wealth and non-
                                                   8


housing wealth (say, regular savings) are components of wealth, housing wealth has a
distinct advantage, namely, that it can be observed with less noise. To capture this idea,
we assume that the value of a person‘s house can be observed perfectly, whereas the
value of his/her non-housing wealth can only be observed with a noise.

    Note that we do not directly assume that utility is a function of relative wealth or
relative housing value. Instead, through competition in the marriage market, relative
wealth will emerge endogenously as an important status variable in equilibrium, and a
typical person‘s indirect utility will turn out to be a function of his/her relative wealth in
the same gender-cohort.

    We describe our model in five steps. First, we start with the representative agent‘s
optimization problem. Second, we describe how the marriage market works. Third, we
derive the equilibrium conditions. Fourth, we solve the model analytically under some
special assumptions. Finally, we calibrate the model for a more general setting.



The Agents‘ Optimization Problems

    The representative man and woman make the saving and housing decision in the first
period, taking as given the house price and rent, which will be determined endogenously
through market clearing conditions. A representative woman chooses the amount of
saving and house purchase to maximize her life time value function
                          max u(c1w )   w E u (c2 w )  m    (1   w )u(c2 ws )
                          sw , H w


where E is the expectation operator,  m is the emotional utility from her husband,

and  w is the probability that she will be married. Her second period utility is a weighted
average of her utility if she is married and her utility if she is single. The key thing to note
is that her probability of marriage,  w , is an endogenous variable that depends not only
on her house purchase and savings decisions, but also on those of her competitors in the
same gender-cohort and those of members of the opposite sex.
    She is subject to a set of budget constraints. Her first period budget constraint is
                  z1w  r1h1w  y  sw  p1H w  r1H w                                     (3.1)
                                                           9


Where z1w is her consumption of a composite non-housing consumption good, y is her
endowment at the beginning of the first period, sw is her savings in the first period, h1w

and H w are the physical quantity of housing service she consumes and the physical

quantity of house she purchases, respectively, and p1 , r1 denote the house price and rent
in the first period, respectively. The left hand side (LHS) of (3.1) is her expenditure
(where we normalize the price of numeraire goods to 1), and the right hand side (RHS) of
(3.1) is her disposable wealth. By this formulation, we allow her to consume a fraction of
the house that she owns and rents out the rest. Home ownership would cost her an
expenditure outlay of p1H w but give her a total rental revenue of r1H w .
     Her second period constraint depends on whether she is single or married.
               single:        z2 ws  r2 h2 ws  Rsw  p2 (1  d ) H w                 (3.2)

                married: z2 w  z2m  r2 h2  R(sw  sm )  p2 (1  d )( H w  H m )   (3.3)

where d is the house depreciation rate (which is set to zero in the benchmark model),
R is the (exogenous) gross interest rate, and p2 , r2 are the house price, house rent in the

second period respectively. In the second period, the representative household sells its
house and obtains housing consumption as a tenant. The LHS of (3.3) is the total
household consumption expenditure, while the RHS is the household‘s combined
disposable wealth.
     Even with these simplifying assumptions, the optimization problem is nontrivial as
the representative woman needs to take into account how her savings and house purchase
decisions affect her probability of being married in the second period; she has to think
through what her life would be like if she remains single versus if she is married; and she
has to anticipate what men would do as a function of the economic environment.
     To make the analysis tractable, we make two additional simplifying assumptions.
First, her period utility function takes the log form u  c   log  c  . Second, her

consumption in each period c1w , c2 w is a composite of a numerical good z and housing

service h in a Cobb-Douglas form

                             zt, w ht1,w
               ct , w                        , t  1, 2
                            (1   )1
                                                       10


          A representative man‘s optimization problem is identical to the representative
woman‘s problem in terms of the structure, except that we would swap the subscripts ―m‖
(denoting man) and ―w‖ (denoting woman). In other words, we intentionally make men
and women completely symmetric. Men and women do not have intrinsic reasons to have
different demands for housing.


The Marriage Market4

         When men and women enter the marriage market at the beginning of the second
period, the values of their respective emotional utility are realized. In the marriage market,
every woman ranks all men by a combination of men‘s wealth (with housing wealth
being its most visible and significant component) and emotional utility. The weights are
determined by her utility function. To be precise, woman i prefers a higher ranked man

to a lower ranked one, where the rank on man j is given by u c2,w ,i ( j )   m , j

( c2,w,i ( j ) denotes woman i ' s consumption in the second period if married to man j ).

Symmetrically, man j assigns a rank to woman i based on the sum of utility

    u c2,m, j (i)  w,i .

         As stated earlier, we assume that housing wealth H can be observed perfectly but
non-housing wealth can only be observed with a noise. That is, saving s is observed as a
noisy signal s . This turns out to make a big difference for how the two variables enter the
first-order conditions. Note that the choice of housing investment and savings decisions
made in the first period are meant to demonstrate one‘s relative attractiveness to potential
marriage partners at the beginning of the second period (in addition to consumption
smoothing). One is playing a Stackelberg game vis-à-vis potential marriage partners
(while playing a Nash game vis-à-vis everyone else in the first period). An important
(and somewhat surprising) insight from Bagwell (1995) is that, in a Stackelberg game
with imperfect observability of the action of the players, a player‘s best response to a
noisy signal, if we restrict attention to only pure strategies, is to ignore the actual signal
value and simply calculate what the opponent would have done if the variable (i.e.,

4
 We use the term ―marriage market‖ informally. Since matching of men and women is not done through prices,
marriage is, strictly speaking, a non-market outcome in the model.
                                                        11


savings here) is not observed at all. A similar reasoning works in our model. Namely, an
agent will pay attention to the value of housing investment by potential marriage partners
(since it can be observed perfectly), but ignores the noisy signal about savings. So in
deciding the optimal amount of savings，agents will assume it has no impact on the
probability of marriage and simply choose a value that is optimal for his/her consumption
smoothing purpose. Any deviations from that would not produce any advantage for him
or her in the marriage market. [Since this is primarily an empirical paper, we choose
simplicity and focus only on pure strategies.] In comparison, in deciding on the optimal
amount of housing investment in the first period, the agent would take into account its
effect on his/her probability of marriage in the second period (as well as the standard
consumption smoothing considerations.)
     We assume that the pairing of men and women follows the Gale-Shapley algorithm,
which generates a unique and stable equilibrium of matching (Gale and Shapley, 1962;
and Roth and Sotomayor, 1990)5. Since all men (women) in the marriage market have
identical problems, they make the same savings and house owning decisions in their first
period. Following Du and Wei (2011), this implies that there exists a mapping
M from  w to  m in equilibrium such that

                                                                                 F (w )   1 
                           1  F (w )   1  F ( M (w ))   M (w )  F 1         
                                                                                          

     We assume that the lowest possible values of emotional utilities of both man and
woman are sufficiently small, so they cannot get married unless their realized emotional
utilities are above certain threshold values, denoted by  w and  m , which make the
opposite sex indifferent between being married and being single.
         w  max u(c2ms )  u(c2m ), M 1 (m ) and m  max u(c2 ws )  u(c2 w ), M (w )                 (3.4)


The Equilibrium Conditions

     In equilibrium, woman i ‘s total utility in the second period, given all her rivals‘ and
men‘s strategies, is


5
 One could also model the matching process using search with frictions. This would appear to add considerable
complexities with no obvious benefits.
                                                                        12


             w,i u(c2 w,i )   M (w,i )dF (w,i )  (1   w,i )u(c2 ws ,i )
                                     w



where w,i  u c2m (i)  u(c2m )  w and the probability that she will be married is:

         w,i  Prob(u c2m (i)  u(c2m )  w,i  w sw , sm , w , w )  1  F w  u c2m (i)  u(c2m )                                     (3.5)

    In the steady state we have p1  p2 , r1  r2 . With a bit of algebra (available upon
request), we can work out the first order conditions of her optimization problem as:

                                                      1            1                   1                                                            (3.6)
                                                          R w    R(1   w )        0
                                                     y1w           y2                 y2 ws

      pr
       y1w
               M (w )
                             f  M 1 ( x)  dx  f (w )[M (w )  u (c2 w )  u (c2 ws )]   w      
                                                                                                            p(1  d )
                                                                                                               y2
                                                                                                                        (1   w )
                                                                                                                                     p(1  d )
                                                                                                                                       y2 ws
                                                                                                                                               0   (3.7)


where we use y1w to denote the representative woman‘s disposable wealth in the first

period, y2ws , her disposable wealth if she is single in the second period, and y2 , her
family‘s disposable wealth if she is married in the second period. That is:
                                  y1w  y  sw  pH w  rH w , y2 ws  Rsw  p(1  d ) H w

                                  y2  R( sw  sm )  p(1  d )( H w  H m )

    When it comes to the representative man j , his probability of getting married is:

                                        m, j  1  F  M (w )  u c2 w ( j )  u(c2 w ) 

    The same process of obtaining (3.6), (3.7) gives the first order conditions for the
representative man:
                                                      1            1                   1                                                            (3.8)
                                                          R m    R(1   m )        0
                                                     y1m           y2                 y2 ms

      pr
       y1m
               w
                        f  M ( y)  dy  f (M (w ))[w  u (c2 m )  u (c2 ms )]   m           
                                                                                                            p(1  d )
                                                                                                               y2
                                                                                                                        (1   m )
                                                                                                                                     p(1  d )
                                                                                                                                       y2 ms
                                                                                                                                               0   (3.9)


where we define y1m , y2 ms and y2 similarly to the corresponding variables for the
representative woman.

     As stated earlier, in each period, the young cohort buys houses from the old cohort.
The young consumes a portion of their owned house and rents out the rest to the old. In
each period, the total demand for house ownership must sum up to the house stock:
                                                13


                                         1         
                                             Hw       Hm  H                               (3.10)
                                        1       1 
And the total housing consumption demand equals to the house stock in each period:
                       1                            1 w           m       
                            h1w       h1m    w h2        h2 ws         h2 ms   H   (3.11)
                       1        1        1      1            1         
The equilibrium is determined by a non-linear system of six equations, (3.6) - (3.11). We
are not able to solve this system analytically.


The Analytical Solution of a Special Case

    It is useful to inspect the analytical solution to a special case in which the savings
rates are exogenously set to be zero and house purchase is the only means for a cohort to
transfer a portion of the first period income to the second period. With the assumption of
no savings, the first order conditions (Equations (3.6)-(3.9)) are reduced to

                    1       1                                            1        
                        w  (1  F ( w ))  f ( w )m   (1   w )            
          pr       y
                    2                                                 y                (3.12)
                p
                                                                            2 ws
                                                                                     0
           y1w      1                                                               
                    y f ( w )[u (c2 w )  u (c2 ws )]                             
                      2                                                             

                   1         1                                             1      
                         m  (1  F ( m ))  f ( m ) w   (1   m )          
         pr      y                                                    y              (3.13)
               p
                      2                                                       2 ms
                                                                                     0
          y1m      1                                                                
                    y f ( m )[u (c2 m )  u (c2 ms )]                             
                       2                                                            

    If we further assume that the emotional utility is uniformly distributed,
w ,m ~ [ min , max ] and the average value of emotional utility, E ( ) , is large enough
(which causes agents to have a strong ex ante desire for marriage), then we obtain the
following proposition:


Proposition     With the assumptions stated above, as the sex ratio rises, up to a
threshold, both the house price and the price/rent ratio increase.


Proof: See the appendix.
                                            14


    While the zero savings assumption is imposed in this case, it could be rationalized.
Because housing wealth is more useful as a competitive weapon than non-housing
wealth in the mating market (due to the better observability and verifiability of the
housing wealth), agents generally find it optimal to borrow money (i.e., having a
negative savings rate) in order to finance the purchase of a larger house. (If everyone
borrows up to the maximum amount allowed by the law, then one can still rank different
agents‘ relative wealth based on the relative values of the houses.) In this context, if we
introduce a no-borrowing constraint, which is a way to capture financial under-
development in developing economies, then zero savings would be an optimal outcome
anyway. [In a survey of 10,043 urban households across 19 provinces and province-
level municipalities in China in 2009, Wei (2011) found that the average amount of
equity in owned housing dominates any other form of savings and financial investment.
For example, the average household savings is about 13% of the equity value of the
house. Another way to see it is through relative prevalence of various investment
vehicles. 20% of the households invest in the stock market (buying individual stocks),
and no more than 10% invest in mutual funds and/or bonds. In comparison, 85% of the
households in the sample own a home. In other words, housing appears to be the
overwhelming choice of financial investment vehicle for most urban households.]

    A few other remarks are in order that explain the intuition behind the proposition
and some extensions. First, as the sex ratio goes up, a representative man‘s demand for
housing (as a given house price) goes up. If a representative man has a strong ex ante
desire to be married, as the exogenous prospect of not being able to be married rises
(due to a higher sex ratio), he is willing to compete harder by accumulating more
housing asset that is valued by potential marriage partners.

    Second, as the sex ratio goes up, the change in a representative woman‘s housing
demand in the first period is ambiguous. On the one hand, since her future husband is
likely to own a larger house, she could free ride by buying a smaller house (and
consuming more in the first period). On the other hand, precisely because men have
accumulated more housing wealth, their cutoff point in the type of women they are
willing to marry (based on a combination of a woman‘s housing wealth and emotional
utility) also goes up. This means that the probability that a given low-type woman
                                               15


would not be married also goes up. Since a representative woman does not know her
precise type in the first period, this gives her an incentive to increase her demand for
housing. The net effect of a higher sex ratio on a woman‘s housing demand depends on
the relative importance of these two forces.

    Third, the aggregate demand for housing (at a given house price) goes up
unambiguously in response to a higher sex ratio. If the optimal response of the
representative woman is to raise her demand for housing, it is not surprising that the
aggregate demand for housing would rise unambiguously. Interestingly, even if the
optimal response of the representative woman is to reduce her demand for housing, the
incremental housing demand by men always dominates. This happens for two reasons.
First, from a representative man‘s point of view, in addition to trying to improve his
relative standing in the marriage market, he raises his desired level of housing wealth in
the first period to compensate for any reduction in housing wealth of his future wife.
The more his wife is expected to cut down the housing wealth, the more he would have
to make it up for. This ensures that, if the conditions are such that a representative
woman chooses to decrease her demand for housing, a representative man always raises
his demand for housing sufficiently to offset the reduction in housing demand by his
future wife. Second, as the sex ratio goes up, the share of men in the population also
rises. Since men have a higher demand for housing whenever the sex ratio exceeds one,
this change in the composition of the population also contributes to a higher aggregate
demand for housing. Therefore, in spite of an ambiguous effect of a higher sex ratio on a
representative woman‘s housing demand, the sum of all men‘s and all women‘s housing
demand goes up unambiguously.

       Fourth, we have considered an extension in which the bargaining power within a
marriage depends on the relative wealth that a husband and a wife bring into the
marriage. The smaller the share of a wife, the smaller claim she could have over their
joint marital wealth. In this setting, a representative woman‘s housing wealth
accumulation in the first period may rise in response to a higher sex ratio. This of course
makes it even easier for the aggregate demand for housing to go up. (The extension is
available upon request.)
                                               16


        Fifth, since the aggregate housing stock is assumed to be fixed, an increase in the
aggregate demand for houses translates into a rise in the house price. In general, if the
housing stock is not fixed, but with low supply elasticity, we conjecture that a rise in the
sex ratio would generate a simultaneous increase in the house price and in the average
size of a house. In other words, pressure from an increase in the aggregate demand for
houses would be spread between house size and house price.

        Sixth, because to be able to rent a large home is not the same thing as to be able
to own a large home in the mating market, this model naturally generates a rise in the
ratio of housing price to rent as the sex ratio rises.

        Finally, the comparative statistics in the proposition are valid for a rise in the sex
ratio up to a threshold. The intuition behind the existence of a threshold is this. When
the sex ratio is sufficiently high, any further increase in the sex ratio may not motivate a
representative man to increase his already very high housing wealth both because the
chance of getting married is very low anyway and because the additional sacrifice in the
form of a lower first-period consumption is too painful. In the extreme case in which the
sex ratio is close to infinity, the probability for a man to be married in the second period
is essentially zero. In this case, the desire to cut down first period consumption in order
to improve a very slim chance of being married is weak. In other words, for high enough
sex ratios, any additional increase in the sex ratio may cause men to give up. While the
threshold exists in theory, we find that, in calibrations, such a threshold never emerges
for reasonable values of other parameters in the model. This suggests that the theoretical
threshold must be higher than any realistic sex ratios one observes in the data.



Numerical Examples

        We start with the benchmark model which imposes a borrowing constraint on
the agents: sm , sw  0 . This is meant to capture the idea that people face a limit on the
amount of mortgage they can borrow to finance their house purchase, due to the under-
development of the financial market. Such constraints are binding for Chinese
households, the subject of the empirical part of this paper. In the open economy, we
                                               17


fix R   1 , where β is set to 0.9720  0.54 , since we take 20 years as one period in our
calibration and pick an annual discount factor of 0.97. For most parameters, we follow
the existing literature as much as possible (see Du and Wei, 2011, for more discussion).
In the calibration of the benchmark model, we set the house depreciation to zero.

       Perhaps the most unusual variable in the model is emotional utility  , which is
assumed to follow a normal distribution, with the mean   2 and the standard

deviation of   0.05 . These values are inferred from Blanchflower and Oswald

(2004), who have estimated that, on average, a lasting marriage is equivalent to
augmenting one‘s income by $100,000 (in 1990 dollars) per year in the United States
during 1972-1998. Since the average income per working person was about $48,000
during that period, a sustained marriage is roughly worth twice the average income (on a
permanent basis). They have also found that, controlling for other variables such as
income, age, and education, the t statistics of the coefficient on the dummy variable for
―never married‖ is around -20. Then the implied standard deviation of emotional
utility   can be pinned down at 0.05.

                           Table 1: Parameter Values in the Simulations

    Parameters                                           Benchmark Values
    Discount factor                                        0.54

    Initial endowment                                    y 1

    House stock                                          H 1
    Emotional utility, mean                                2

    Emotional utility, standard deviation                  0.05

    Depreciation rate                                    d 0

    Sensitivity of bargaining power to relative wealth    1
    Share of consumption on numeraire goods                0.5


       We simulate the benchmark model with the borrowing constraint. Note that if the
world interest rate is at a moderate level, agents, in the absence of the borrowing
constraint, would optimally borrow money to finance an even greater demand for housing.
Thus, the borrowing constraint effectively induces a zero savings rate to emerge
                                             18


endogenously. If one thinks that credit constraints are an important feature for some
economies (e.g., China in the empirical section of this paper), one might regard the
borrowing constraint as a realistic condition.
       We let the sex ratio vary from 1 (balanced) to 1.5 (very unbalanced). Table 2
traces out the size of house purchase by the representative man and representative women
(Columns 2 and 3), and house price and rent (Columns 4 and 5), respectively. As the sex
ratio rises, housing demand by the representative man rises, while that by the
representative woman declines. Because the aggregate demand for (owned) housing rises,
the equilibrium housing price increases.
       In Figure 1a, the solid dark line and broken dark line trace out the house price and
rent as a function of the sex ratio, respectively. In Figure 1b, the dark line traces out the
house price/rent ratio. It is clear that as the sex ratio rises, both the house price and the
price/rent ratio go up. The relationship is monotonic at least for sex ratios up to 1.5
(which is higher than any actual country-level sex ratio in the data).

       To see how concerns for mating competition affects the house price, it is useful to
consider a counter-factual in which agents do not regard housing wealth as something
that would affect their probability of marriage in the second period. (In the aggregate, this
belief is correct since every man will end up having the same housing purchase decision,
and the total number of unmarried men is not affected by the size of houses men buy.)
We implement this counter-factual by assuming that the probability of marriage for a
man is equal to the ratio of the number of women to the number of men (while the
probability of marriage for a woman is 1). Table 3 traces out the housing price and the
rent under this counter-factual. Compared to Table 2, it is clear that the house price
would have been substantially lower had there not been a desire to use housing wealth to
gain competitive advantage in the mating market.
       It is interesting to note that, even when the sex ratio is balanced (φ=1), the
housing price is higher when mating market competition is considered than when it is not.
In that case, if agents believe that a higher level of housing wealth helps to be matched
with a more attractive mate (someone of the opposite sex with a higher value of the
emotional utility), they would raise their demand for housing. In equilibrium, this would
result in a higher housing price than would otherwise be the case.
                                                19


        Back in Figure 1a, the light solid line and light broken line trace out the house
price and rent under the counter-factual case of no concerns for mating market
competition. (Note that the line for rent is the same whether or not people regard owned
housing as a competitive weapon in the mating market.) The figure makes it clear that
concerns for mating competition not only have raised the house price, the gap between
the two price lines also widens as the sex ratio rises. This pattern is easy to understand.
When there were no concerns for mating competition, a higher sex ratio would raise the
house price mildly. This reflects a hedging motive – a decline in the objective probability
of marriage means a decline in the probability of pooling housing resources with a spouse
in the second period, which would motivate people to accumulate a somewhat larger
housing wealth than would otherwise be the case. Once concerns for mating competition
are present, men aggressively increase the demand for a house because a larger house is
also regarded as a weapon in the war for mating partners. This leads to a more rapid
increase in the house price as the sex ratio goes up.
        Some additional remarks are in order. First, we have varied the parameter values
in the neighborhood of the benchmark model (not reported to save space). The qualitative
results always stay the same.
        Second, we have also considered an extension in which the bargaining power
within a marriage depends on the relative wealth that a husband and a wife bring into the
marriage (not reported). The smaller the share of a wife in the initial wealth, the smaller
claim she would have over their joint marital wealth. In this setting, a representative
woman‘s housing wealth in the first period may rise (or decline less) in response to a
higher sex ratio. This of course enhances the positive response of the equilibrium house
price to a rise in the sex ratio.
        To summarize, our theory suggests that the equilibrium house price is higher in a
world in which agents treat housing as an instrument for mating competition (in addition
to being a consumption good and financial investment) than in a world in which agents
do not link housing to mating competition. Our theory also suggests that the housing
price tends to be higher when the mating competition becomes fiercer (or when the sex
ratio rises). The first result in principle applies to all countries in the world, but is difficult
to test empirically since we do not observe a world in which concerns for mating
                                              20


competition is absent. The second result can be tested in countries where the sex ratio in
the pre-marital age cohort is seriously unbalanced. Because the two results come from a
common model, evidence in support of the second prediction also lends some credence to
the first prediction.
        We now turn to testing how variations in the sex ratio are linked to variations in
housing market characteristics. We dissect the Chinese experience for this purpose.


4. Background on the Chinese housing market and the marriage market
        Before presenting formal statistical tests, we briefly introduce some institutional
background for both the housing market and the marriage market in China.


The Chinese housing market
        In the three decades before 1988, there was no housing market in the People‘s
Republic of China. In urban areas, every working person worked for either the
government, a state-owned entity, or a collectively owned entity. A typical household
lived in an apartment assigned to them by the work unit of one of the household members.
They paid a nominal rent and could keep the place virtually forever. There was no market
for them to sell the existing home or to buy a new one. In rural areas, a typical household
lived in a house built by them or their extended family.
        An amendment to China‘s constitution in 1988 formally laid the legal foundation
for private housing development. The restructuring of state-owned firms (including
closures or contractions) was one of the impetuses for housing reform. Some companies
started to hire employees without providing an apartment. New homes (apartments)
started to be built and sold on the market. While the state always retains the ownership of
the land, home buyers automatically acquire the right of land use, bundled together with
the apartment, for 70 years. It is not clear what will happen when the 70-year term
expires. In rural areas, a majority of households build their own homes. Because private
housing development was in a nascent stage, the secondary market for housing in rural
areas was not very liquid in the first ten years of the reform.
        The Chinese State Council‘s 23rd Degree of 1998 formally mandated work units
(employers broadly defined to include companies, non-profit organizations, and
                                           21


government agencies) to monetize all housing benefits (i.e., making them a part of wages
and salaries) rather than to provide employees with an apartment for life-time usage. The
existing stock of housing units that were assigned to employees was asked to be sold to
their current occupants within some time frame. These measures were designed to
promote the commercial development of the private housing market (called ―the
commodity housing market‖), which in turn was expected to provide a key source of
economic growth. As a result, 1998 marked the beginning of the modern Chinese housing
market. See Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2011) for additional information on China‘s urban
housing market.
       A housing construction boom ensued. In 1998, 1,178 million square meters of
residential housing space was constructed, a majority of which took place in rural areas,
mostly because that was where most people lived (773 million square meters in rural
areas versus 406 million square meters in urban areas). Construction of new houses
continued afterwards. In 2008, 1,546 million square meters of new residential housing
space was built. With the faster rise in urban income, the pace of urban housing
construction has almost caught up with that of rural construction in spite of the former‘s
smaller population, with 760 million square meters of new housing space in urban areas
versus 786 million square meters of new housing in the rural areas (Chinese Statistical
Yearbook, 2010). With the rapid annual additions to the housing stock, a striking feature
of the Chinese urban housing market is that most housing transactions (about 70%)
involve newly built homes, even though the secondary market for housing has also begun
to be active and liquid.


The marriage market
       The marriage market is ―local‖ for most Chinese. First, according to the China
population census of 2000, 92% of rural residents live in their county of birth, and 62%
of urban residents live in their city of birth. Second, in rural China, 89 % of marriages
take place between husbands and wives from the same county. Since a county is a smaller
geographic unit (a typical province may have more than 100 counties), the percentage is
surely higher for marriages between men and women from the same province. Third, the
China household and income project (CHIP) migrant workers survey in 2000 shows that
                                                             22


82% of the migrant worker families in cities report that the husbands and wives come
from the same province. This suggests that migrant workers often get married before
leaving their hometowns to look for a job. To sum up, there appears to be limited
mobility for marriage reasons.
          A recently developed social norm is that the family of a groom is supposed to
supply an apartment for the young couple before the marriage. A survey of mothers with
a daughter in eight major cities by China Economic Daily in March 2010 reported that
80% of the respondents would object to their daughter marrying a young man who can
only rent rather than own a home. This prompts the headline that ―it is fundamentally true
that mothers-in-law (mothers of wives) are pushing up the housing prices.‖ 6 Many
mothers with a daughter express a willingness to help their future sons in law in the
purchase of a home (although the majority of the funding has to come from the groom‘s
family).
          According to the 2010 Marriage Market Survey in China, 71% of unmarried
women prefer that their future husbands own a home. This is consistent with the pattern
reported above. Interestingly, 48% of unmarried men express a preference for their future
wives to own a home as well. In other words, a home-owning woman is considered more
desirable in the eyes of about half of the men.
          In rural areas, a young couple after the marriage often lives in the same house
built by the parents of the groom. In contrast, in urban areas, while it is possible for the
young couple to live with the groom‘s parents, a more common arrangement would be
for the parents of the groom to buy a home for the couple, or at least to pay for the down
payment portion of the cost of the new home.


5. Statistical Evidence
          We examine two types of evidence. First, at the household level, we show that the
demand for housing varies in a way that is consistent with our hypothesis. In particular, a
combination of having an unmarried son at home and living in a region with a skewed


6
 China Economic Daily (中国经济时报), ―It is fundamentally true that mothers in law are pushing up the housing
prices; less than 20% accept sons in law who can only rent,‖ March 8, 2010, http://msn.china.ynet.com/view.jsp?oid=63869864,
accessed on March 15, 2010.
                                             23


sex ratio raises a household‘s demand for owned housing. Second, at a regional level, we
turn to local general equilibrium and investigate whether the average value of a house is
higher in regions with a higher sex ratio, holding constant local income level and other
characteristics.


Data
        We combine data from two principal sources: data on housing are from the 1%
survey of the population in China in 2005 (of which we were given access to a 20%
random sample); local sex ratios are constructed from the 2000 population census. The
survey asks respondents to report the purchase or construction cost and construction area
of a house, as well as the year of construction if a household owns a house/apartment.
Unfortunately, it does not ask when the household bought the home. If a household does
not own a house, the survey asked for monthly rent. To ensure that the year of
construction and the year of purchase are the same (or very close), we compute the
average values of residential homes that were constructed in 2004 and transacted on
residential markets. (We ignore houses older than 2004 for this purpose.)
        The summary statistics for the key variables are reported in Table 4. The sex ratio
for the age cohort of 5-19 was 107 males per 100 females in 1985, which was moderately
unbalanced, but reached a more skewed ratio of 112 males per 100 females in 2005.
Ignoring differential mortality rates between the two sexes and the age difference
between husbands and wives, the sex ratio in 2005 implies that one out of every nine
young men cannot get married, mathematically speaking. In other societies when the
cohort size grows over time, the fact that husbands are a few years older than their wives
would imply that the prospect for men to find a wife is slightly better than the raw same-
age sex ratio. However, since China‘s young cohort is shrinking over time due to its strict
family planning policy, the reverse is true. (Even though men may wish to marry an even
younger wife, it is an entirely different matter as to whether younger women would want
to marry the surplus old men.) In any case, with a rise in the sex ratio, it must be the case
that the collective prospect for young men to find a wife declines.
        Sex ratios vary across regions. The standard deviation for the sex ratio in 2005 is
0.070 in rural areas (compared to a mean of 1.122), and it is 0.073 in urban areas
                                             24


(compared to a mean of 1.117). Due to both policy restrictions on internal migration
(through the household registration system) and language and culture barriers, marriages
by and large are local affairs. This means that the competition among men for marriage
partners is more intense in regions with a more skewed sex ratio.


Who wants a bigger home?
       We investigate whether and how the value of a home owned by parents depends
jointly on the gender (and the number) of their children and the local sex ratio. We
implement a series of Tobit estimation where the dependent variable is the value of the
home. The variable is left-censored as the value of owned home is zero for those families
that rent a house/apartment. To maximize comparability across households, we restrict
the sample to three-person nuclear families whose head of household is younger than 45
(inclusive) and whose child is between 5 and 19 (inclusive).
       The key regressor is an interaction term between a dummy for having a son in the
family and the local sex ratio. Control variables include family income and size, the
household head‘s age, educational level, gender and ethnicity, presence of severe health
problems by some members of the family, the number of children by gender, and age
brackets of the children. We include location (city or prefecture) fixed effects. It is well-
known that adding fixed effects to non-linear panel models could make the estimates
biased and inconsistent. However, Greene (2003) shows through Monte Carlo
simulations that slope coefficients in a Tobit model, unlike those in probit and logit
models, are unaffected by the ‗incidental parameters problem.‘ (In Appendix Table A, we
also report a set of almost identical Tobit regressions without the fixed effects, and obtain
the same qualitative results.)
       Under the hypothesis that a family with a son has a greater need to own an
expensive home, we expect to see a positive coefficient on the interaction term. Note that
if the gender of a child makes a difference for the type of home a family needs but the
local sex ratio plays no additional role, this would be captured by the coefficients on the
number of sons and the number of daughters in a family, and the coefficient on the
interaction between the sex ratio and the dummy for having a son would be zero.
                                             25


       The regression results are reported in the first columns of Table 5. The coefficient
on the interaction term is positive and statistically significant for both the rural and the
urban sample. This is consistent with our hypothesis. Interestingly, the coefficient on the
number of sons is negative for the rural sample and indifferent from zero for the urban
sample. This means that having sons per se does not lead a family to buy a more
expensive home. Rather, it takes a combination of having sons and living in a region with
a skewed boy/girl ratio for a family to go after a more expensive home.
       Other regressors have sensible coefficients. For example, a family with a higher
income or with more members tends to own a more expensive home.
       In columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, we examine the role of the sex ratio in determining
the physical size of a home (in square meters). The qualitative results are similar to the
previous columns. In particular, it is not surprising that richer and larger families tend to
own a larger home. It is also interesting that, holding constant family size, having more
sons per se is not associated with a larger home. Most noteworthy for us, a combination
of having sons and living in a region with a more skewed sex ratio does lead to owning a
larger home.
       In the last two columns of Table 5, we look at the level of rent as a placebo test. If
a combination of sons and local sex ratio reflects a need for more space unrelated to
mating competition, one would expect to see the same sign pattern on the coefficients. In
fact, the estimated coefficient on the interaction term is essentially zero for the rural
sample and even negative for the urban sample. In sum, a higher sex ratio induces
families with an unmarried son to want to buy a bigger and more expensive home.
Consistent with our hypothesis, there is no comparable pattern for rental units.
       The regressions described above pool together families with a son and families
with a daughter. The specification requires that the coefficients on all variables be the
same for these two types of families. We can relax this requirement by running separate
regressions for son-families and daughter-families without imposing the equality
restriction on other regressors between the two subsamples. To further strengthen the
comparability of the two subsamples, we choose to focus on three-person families with
two living parents and an unmarried son or daughter. This rules out families with
multiple siblings.
                                             26


       The regression results for urban nuclear families are reported in Table 6. For both
son-families and daughter-families, a higher household income is associated with a more
expensive home and a larger home. The positive coefficient on the local sex ratio in the
first column means that son-families tend to own a more expensive home if they happen
to live in a region with a higher sex ratio. For daughter-families, their home value is
uncorrelated with the local sex ratio. In Columns 3 and 4 where the dependent variable is
the size of a home, the same patterns are observed. In particular, son-families in a region
with a higher sex ratio imbalance appear to want to own a larger home. For daughter
families, their home sizes are uncorrelated with the local sex ratio.. This suggests that, for
daughter families, the incentive to free ride and the incentive to catch the richest men
roughly balance each other out.
       In Columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the rent (for those families that do
not own a home). This could be viewed as a placebo test. If a higher sex ratio or having a
son represents extra need for housing services, one would have observed a positive
coefficient on the sex ratio for the renter sample. But we don‘t. This is consistent with the
notion that being able to rent an apartment is not the same thing as being able to own an
apartment as far as mating competition is concerned.
       We perform similar regressions for separate son-families and daughter-families in
rural areas. The results are reported in Table 7 and are broadly similar to the rural sample.
One interesting difference is that the housing value for daughter families is also
positively related to the local sex ratio. One possible explanation is that the ―tournament
effect‖ dominates the free-ride incentive. Since a higher local sex ratio makes all families
with a son to accumulate more housing wealth, the reward for a daughter-family to be
matched with the richest son-family also rises with the local sex ratio. If a rich son-family
also prefers a rich daughter-family, then a typical daughter family may choose to
accumulate more housing wealth in response to a higher sex ratio. Another possible
explanation is that the desire to protect a daughter‘s bargaining power within her
marriage outweighs the desire to free ride on the higher wealth of one‘s future son-in-law.
                                             27


Extension: Interactions between the sex ratio and household income
       So far we have focused on how a typical family with a son versus that with a
daughter would react to higher sex ratios. We suggest that the response by a daughter-
family depends on the net effect of several opposing forces: a combination of the
tournament effect and a desire to protect the daughter‘s bargaining power within a
marriage versus a desire to free ride on the higher wealth of their future son-in-law.
       To allow for more richness in the family‘s response as a function of both the
family income and the local sex ratio, we trace out the relationship between the (log)
house value and (log) family income both by the local sex ratio and by the gender of the
children. More precisely, we first define a high sex ratio region as the agglomeration of
ten cities (or rural prefectures) with the highest sex ratios in the sample. Their sex ratios
all turn out to be greater than 115. Similarly, we define a low sex ratio as the
agglomeration of ten cities (or rural prefectures) with the lowest sex ratios in the sample.
Their sex ratios all turn out to be less than 107. There are four cases of regions: (a) a
high sex ratio rural region, (b) a low sex ratio rural region, (c) a high sex ratio urban
region, and (d) a low sex ratio urban region. Within each region, we choose two types of
families: (a) families with a single son between 5 and 19, and (b) families with a single
daughter between 5 and 19.
       For each type of households in each region, we use a locally weighted polynomial
regression (LOWESS), originally developed by Cleveland (1979) and Cleveland and
Devlin (1988), to trace out a non-parametric relationship between the local value of a
home and the log household income.
       The four non-parametric curves for the rural regions are plotted in Figure 2A. As
one would expect, the house value generally rises with the family income (richer
households own a larger home). A number of other interesting features are noteworthy.
First, a family with a son, at a given level of family income, tends to own a more
expensive home if it is located in a high sex ratio region. This is true over the entire range
of income, but the gap becomes smaller at higher incomes. One possible interpretation is
that once a family is rich enough, there is very low probability that their son will not be
able to find a bride. As a result, the need to use housing to signal attractiveness in the
marriage market also declines.
                                              28


       Second, a similar pattern is observed for families with a daughter. That is, while
the home value rises with the family income, a daughter family also tends to own a more
expensive home at a given income level, if it lives in a high sex ratio region. The latter
pattern is consistent with the interpretation that a desire to protect the daughter‘s
bargaining power within her marriage, or a desire to use own housing wealth to increase
the chance that the daughter can be matched with a young man from a rich household,
dominates a desire to free ride on the future son-in-law‘s wealth.
       Third, when we compare the two types of families, we see that the curve for
families with a son tends to be higher than families with a daughter, and the difference
tends to be wider in the high sex ratio region than in the low sex ratio region. (A formal
test is captured by the regression coefficients in the first row of Table 5.)
       Similarly, four curves on home value and family income for the urban regions are
plotted in Figure 2B. The patterns are somewhat more nuanced. First, while the overall
relationship between the two is positive, we see some non-monotonicity on the far left of
the curves: the poorest home owners appear to own slighter more expensive homes than
the moderately less poor home owners. Second, on the other hand, the richest families in
the low sex ratio region tend to own homes as expensive as (or more expensive than)
their counterparts in the high sex ratio region. We do not have a rigorous explanation for
the differences in the patterns between the rural and urban regions. One conjecture is that
at the high levels of income, households no longer consider the need for the marriage
market competition in their choice of home purchase since the probability of involuntary
singlehood by their children is low. Notice that the highest household incomes in the
urban region are much higher than their counterparts in the rural region. In other words,
we do not observe similarly rich households in the rural region.
       In Figures 3A and 3B, we trace out the relationship between house size and
household income, separating son-families versus daughter-families, high sex-ratio
regions versus low sex-ratio regions, and urban versus rural areas, in a fashion similar to
Figures 2A and 2B. The broad patterns are also similar. Generally speaking, richer
families own a larger home. At a given income level, son-families in a high sex-ratio
region own a larger home than their counterparts in a low sex-ratio region. An exception
to this rule is for families at the high end of the income distribution – the size of their
                                             29


homes is basically unrelated to the local sex ratio. This seems sensible. For a rich family
with a son, it is very unlikely that their son cannot get married even if they live in a high
sex-ratio region, and therefore their home size is not affected by the local sex ratio.
Interestingly, the same is true for daughter families. There is something funny going on at
the lowest end of the income distribution especially for families in the cities. We do not
have a good explanation for this particular feature.


The general equilibrium effect
       We now turn to the general equilibrium effects of higher sex ratios on housing
market characteristics. In principle, the net effect could be ambiguous. If parents with
daughters or women do the opposite things from parents with sons or men (e.g., reduce
home ownership or buy a smaller home when the sex ratio goes up), the net effect could
be zero. However, the net effect could also be stronger than the partial equilibrium effect
from the behavior of men or their parents alone, if mating competition among men
induces women to do the same thing on the housing market. Separately, families with no
unmarried children have their own demand for housing. Because of these possibilities,
the general equilibrium effect of higher sex ratios on housing market characteristics can
only be settled empirically.
       Using the 1% population survey in 2005, we examine the relationship between the
characteristics of houses bought in 2004 or 2005 by prefecture or city and the local sex
ratio. For a given location (a city or a rural prefecture), we compute the average value of
a home (among the newly constructed homes in a rural area or newly transacted homes in
a city) in 2005 and the average household income for that location.


Basic Patterns in Pictures
       In Figure 4, we plot the average ratio of the local home value to the local
household income against the local sex ratio across rural areas (the left graph) and across
urban areas (the right graph) in 2004. More precisely, for every location, we compute the
sex ratio for the age cohort of 5-19 years old. We also compute the average house value
for those homes whose construction was completed in 2004 and whose purchases
occurred in 2004 or 2005. For every basis point of the sex ratio (which may correspond to
                                                         30


multiple rural prefectures or cities), we compute the average of the ratio of home value to
household income. It is clear that across both rural prefectures and urban areas, there is a
strong positive association between the local sex ratio and the ratio of home value to
household income. In other words, in regions with a higher sex ratio, the ratio of home
value to household income tends to be higher too.
         Similarly, in Figure 5, we plot the average ratio of home value to rental rate
against the sex ratio across rural prefectures (the left graph) and across cities (the right
graph). There is a strong positive association between these two variables: in regions with
a higher sex ratio, the ratio of home value to rent also tends to be higher.


Regression results
         While Figures 4 and 5 suggest the existence of a positive relationship that is not
driven by one or two outliers, they do not adjust for house size and do not control for
other local characteristics. We now turn to regressions with the following specification:


         House(k) = β sexratio(k) + X(k) Γ + e(k)


where house(k) refers to the average value (or the average physical size in square meters,
or the average price per square meter) of houses newly constructed in 20047 in location k,
sexratio(k) is the sex ratio for the age cohort of 5-19 in location k (inferred from the 2000
population census), and X(k) is a vector of control variables including the average local
household income, and the size and the age structure of local population. β and Γ are
parameters to be estimated.
         We implement the regressions separately for the rural sample (331 prefectures)
and the urban sample (259 cities). Table 8 reports the regression results. Not surprisingly,
regions with a higher household income tend to have more expensive homes. More
interestingly, the first column indicates that, on average, higher sex ratios are associated
with more expensive homes. This is true in both rural and urban areas. The elasticity of



7
  Since the survey was conducted in October 2005, the number of houses built in 2005 is far less than that in 2004. We
focus on value of houses built in 2004. We do not include houses built before 2004 because we do not have information
on the year of purchase.
                                                31


home value to the sex ratio is greater in rural areas, although the difference between the
two samples is not statistically significant.
       The second column looks at the physical space of homes. The coefficient on the
sex ratio is positive and significant for both rural and urban samples. This implies that the
average house (apartment) size tends to be bigger in locations with a more skewed sex
ratio. The elasticity is bigger in cities than in rural areas. The third column examines the
home price per square meter. The results indicate that a higher sex ratio is associated with
a higher price in rural areas but not in the urban area.
       One could consider the three columns together, and regard column 1 as the sum of
columns 2 and 3. (Since house price per unit of space = house value/size, in terms of the
dependent variable, log(house value) = log(house space) + log(price per square meter).)
Collectively, the results suggest that in rural areas, a higher sex ratio is simultaneously
associated with a bigger house and a higher price per square meter. This gives rise to a
more expensive home in a region with a higher sex ratio. Bigger space and higher price
contribute roughly equally to higher overall house value.
       In urban areas, a higher sex ratio is associated with a bigger physical space but not
necessarily a higher price per square meter. So the association between more expensive
homes and higher sex ratios in 2004 comes almost entirely from the association between
home sizes and sex ratios.


Instrumental variable regressions
       For our research question, endogeneity of sex ratios might not be a serious
problem since we are comparing the values of homes in 2004 with sex ratios of the age
cohort born many years earlier. Nonetheless, sex ratios may be measured with errors. For
example, in spite of the household registration system, a small amount of migration for
marriage purpose adds noise to the local sex ratios as a gauge of the tightness of the local
marriage market.
       In any case, a strategy to address both the measurement error and the endogeneity
problems is to employ an instrumental variable approach. A key determinant of the sex
                                                           32


ratio is a strict family planning policy introduced at the beginning of the 1980s8. We
explore three determinants of local sex ratios for which we can get data. First, while the
goals of family planning are national, the enforcement is local. Ebenstein (2009) proposes
to use regional variations in the monetary penalties for violating the birth quotas,
originally collected by Scharping (2003), as instruments for the local sex ratio. The idea
is that, in regions with stiff penalties, parents may engage in more sex-selective abortions,
rather than paying a penalty and having more children. In addition, Ebenstein (2008)
coded a dummy for the existence of extra fines for violations at higher-order births. For
example, an additional penalty may kick in on a family for having the 3rd or 4th child in a
one-child zone, or the 4th or 5th child in a two-child zone. Such a non-linear financial
penalty scheme was introduced by different local governments in different years,
generating variations across regions and over time. These two monetary penalty variables
constitute the first two candidates for our instrumental variables.9
          The third instrumental variable explores the legal exemptions in the family
planning policy. While the policy imposes a strict birth quota on the Han ethnic group
(the main ethnic group in the country), the rest of the population (i.e., some 50 ethnic
minority groups) do not face or face much less stringent quotas. (The government
allowed the exemption, possibly to avoid criticism for using the family planning policy to
marginalize the minority groups.) As a result, the share of non-Han Chinese in the total
population has risen from 6.7% in 1982 to 8.5% in 2000 (Bulte, Heerink, and Zhang,
2011). Non-Han Chinese are not uniformly distributed across space. In regions with
relatively more ethnic minorities, marriages between Han and non-Han peoples are not
uncommon, reducing the competitive pressure for men in the marriage market (Wei and
Zhang, 2011a). Therefore, the share of non-Han Chinese in the local population offers
another possible instrument.10

8
  China‘s family planning policy, commonly known as the ―one-child policy,‖ has many nuances. Since 1979, the
central government has stipulated that Han families in urban areas should normally have only one child (with some
exceptions). Ethnic Han families in rural areas can have a second child if the first one is a daughter (this is referred to
as the ―1.5 children policy‖ by Ebenstein, 2008). Ethnic minority (i.e., non-Han) groups are generally exempted from
birth quotas. Non-Han groups account for a relatively significant share of local populations in Xinjiang, Yunnan,
Ganshu, Guizhou, Inner Mongolia, and Tibet.
9
  Edlund et al. (2007) conduct some diagnostic checks and conclude that the level of financial penalties is uncorrelated
with a region‘s current economic status. We will perform and report a formal test on whether the proposed instruments
and the error term in the second stage regressions are correlated.
10
   In principle, variations in the cost of sex screening technology especially the use of ultrasound B machines (as
documented by Li and Zheng, 2009), and the economic status of women (such as that documented in Qian, 2008) could
                                                          33


          The first stage regressions for the urban and rural samples are reported in
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 9, respectively. The coefficients on the share of the local
population not subject to birth quotas are negative and statistically significant in both
regressions. This is consistent with the notion that sex selective abortions are less
prevalent when birth quotas apply to less people.
          The financial penalties for violating birth quotas generate a positive and
significant coefficient in both regressions. The dummy for the existence of extra penalties
for violations at higher-order births also produces a positive coefficient in both
regressions (and significant for the rural sample). These results imply that a more severe
penalty for violating legal birth quotas tends to induce parents to more aggressively abort
girls, resulting in a higher sex ratio imbalance. In other words, when the penalties are
light, many couples with daughters may opt to keep the daughter, pay the penalties, and
have another child, rather than abort the female fetus.
          The adjusted R2‘s are 0.27 and 0.15, respectively. The Kleibergen-Paap Wald F
statistics (for the null that all slope parameters are jointly zeros) ranges from 14.2 to 15.0.
The Stock-Yogo critical values for the Kleibergen-Paap statistics (for weak instruments)
are 13.9 at the 5% level and 9.08 at the 10% level, respectively. This means that the three
variables are not weak instruments.
          The second stage regressions are reported in Table 10. The Durbin-Wu-Hausman
test rejects the null that the 2SLS and OLS estimates are the same in eight out of twelve
regressions. Interestingly, in most cases in which the 2SLS and OLS estimates are not
the same, the Hansen‘s J statistics do not reject the null that the instruments and the error
term are uncorrelated. In other words, in most cases in which IV estimation is needed, the
instruments are valid in a statistical sense (as they pass the over-identification test). (IV
estimation is not needed in a few cases in which the IVs do not pass the over-
identification test.) The point estimates in Table 10 are generally much larger than their
OLS counterparts in Table 8. This suggests that the downward bias in Table 8 generated
either by missing regressors or by measurement errors is substantial.



also be candidates for instrumental variables. Unfortunately, we do not have the relevant data. Note, however, for the
validity of the instrumental variable regressions, we do not need a complete list of the determinants of the local sex
ratio in the first stage.
                                              34


        In any case, the IV results suggest that the data patterns from the OLS estimate
carry over. In particular, higher sex ratios tend to generate systematically larger and more
expensive homes. Both the ratio of average home value to average income and the ratio
of average home value to average rent tend to rise with the local sex ratio.


Urban housing prices during 2003-2009
        China‘s urban housing prices have increased dramatically in recently years,
prompting street protests and repeated government announcements to do something about
them. Our data from the 1% population survey do not allow us to examine house prices
after 2005. Fortunately, the Chinese Statistical Yearbooks report average house prices in
35 major cities (including all provincial capitals) since 2003. We now examine if the
local sex ratio imbalance has any predictive power over the evolution of local housing
prices beyond the growth of local income and local population.
        We pursue the following specification:


        LogPrice (k, t) = β sexratio(k, t) + ∑ δ(j)City(j) + ∑ θ(s)Year(s) + X(k, t) Γ + e(k)


where LogPrice(k, t) refers to the log average price per square meters in city k and year t,
sexratio(k) is the sex ratio for the age cohort of 5-19 in city k and year t (inferred from
the 2000 population census), City(j) is a fixed effect for city j, Year(s) is a fixed effect for
year s, and X(k, t) is a vector of control variables including the average local household
income. β, δ, θ and Γ are parameters to be estimated.
        The city fixed effects are meant to capture local regulations on migrant workers,
local industrial structures, taxes and other time-invariant (or slow-moving) features that
may affect a city‘s house price. The year fixed effects are meant to control for nationwide
common shocks to housing prices such as movements in the interest rate and inflation
rate. While it is unclear if the average housing price data adjust for house size and other
amenities, we expect that location and year fixed effects would control for (most of the)
systematic differences in housing qualities across locations and over time.
        Table 11 presents the summary statistics on variables used in the panel
regressions. While (unweighted) average house price was 2426 yuans per square meters
                                              35


in 2003, it grew to 5706 yuans in nominal terms by 2009. The rate of housing price
appreciation is much higher than the rate of CPI inflation. The average sex ratio during
the period rose from 1.07 to 1.13 across all provinces.
        Table 12 reports the first-stage regression on the sex ratio variables by three
instrument variables — share of minority population, penalty for violating family
planning policy, and a dummy variable for extra penalty for higher order births. The three
instrument variables all have the expected signs and are mostly significant. The large F-
statistic shown in columns 2-4 indicates these instrument variables are not weak
instruments when fixed effects are included.
       The panel regressions with fixed effects are reported in the top panel of Table 13.
Without any fixed effects (Column 1), there is a strong positive association between local
housing prices and local sex ratios. This is beyond the effects that richer and more
populous cities tend to have more expensive homes. When we add just city fixed effects
(Column 2), we see the same strong positive association between sex ratios and home
prices. When we add both city and year fixed effects (Column 3), the coefficient on the
sex ratio continues to be positive and statistically significant, although the point estimate
becomes smaller. As a robustness check, in the last column, we drop three big cities,
Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen, where non-local (including foreign nationals) are said
to be active speculators in the local housing market. The coefficient on the sex ratio
variable remains significant, and the point estimate becomes larger (1.34 instead of 0.89).
This means that the connection between the local sex ratio and local housing prices is
stronger in China outside the three largest cities. To be conservative, using the coefficient
in the third column of Table 13 (0.89), an increase in the sex ratio by 6 basis points
(about the actual increase from 2003 to 2009) is associated with a cumulative increase in
the (real) home price by five percentage points over this period, accounting for 30% of
the real home price increase in the period.
       In the lower panel of Table 13, we instrument the sex ratio by the three variables
in Table 12. The strong positive relationship between the sex ratio and the home price
survive. In fact, the IV estimates are bigger than the corresponding OLS estimates,
consistent with the notion that there may be measurement errors associated with the sex
ratio in the OLS estimates. Using the point estimate (1.39) in the third regression with
                                              36


both year and city fixed effects, an increase in the sex ratio by 6 basis points contributes
to a 48% increase in home price over 2003-2009 (= 6*1.39/(0.371-0.198)).


6. Concluding Remarks
       House prices in China and some other economies appear to rise too fast relative to
the growth of income. Rising need for housing due to urbanization or other factors does
not seem to be a complete explanation by itself since the same factors should also push
up rental rates, yet the ratio of house price to rent also tends to rise substantially. One
possibility is that the increasing competition in the marriage market since the turn of this
century, triggered by a rise in the ratio of men to women in the pre-marital age cohort, is
another fundamental source of the increases in housing value. Since ownership of a house
is a more visible form of wealth than alternative components of wealth, it may be a
positional (or status) good in the marriage market.
       That mating competition induces people to pursue ever bigger and more
expensive homes can be true in all societies even without a sex ratio imbalance. But such
a hypothesis is hard to test as it is difficult to measure variations in the intensity of mating
competition. In this paper, we explore regional variations in the sex ratio in China and
link them to regional variations in housing characteristics (average size, price per square
meter, and value). We find robust evidence that housing values vary systematically with
local sex ratios. As a placebo test, we find no such pattern for rental rates. Based on the
more conservative OLS regression, a rise in the sex ratio from 1.05 to 1.12 from 2000 to
2005 (corresponding to the actual rise in the national sex ratio for the age cohort of 5-19)
would contribute to 36 % of the observed rise in the average home value in Chinese cities
in the same period. A higher sex ratio imbalance accounts for between 30-48% of the
increase in real housing prices in 35 major cities during 2003-2009.
       The hypothesis that a significant fraction of the observed rise in home prices is
due to mating competition has important policy implications. In particular, the hypothesis
suggests that some of the increases in home size and home cost are socially inefficient.
People pursue larger and more costly homes and suppress their consumption of non-
positional goods with the hope of improving their status in the marriage market. But in
the aggregate, the number of men who cannot be married is not altered. If there is social
                                            37


coordination so that every household can cut down demand for housing proportionally,
all households could consume more non-positional goods and the marriage market
outcome is not affected.
       Optimal property tax and stamp tax on house transactions should in principle take
into account local sex ratios. Since sex ratio imbalance is also a problem in several other
economies (e.g., Singapore, Hong Kong, India, and Vietnam), it would be interesting to
investigate its role in other housing markets. We leave a thorough investigation of these
issues to future research.


References:

      Angrist, Joshua, 2002, ―How Do Sex Ratios Affect Marriage and Labor Markets?
Evidence from America‘s Second Generation,‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (3):
997-1038.
      Bagwell, Kyle, 1995, ―Commitment and Observability in Games,‖ Games and
Economic Behavior, 8(2): 271-80.
      Bhaskar, V, 2011, ―Parental Sex Selection and Gender Balance,‖ American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(1): 214-44.
       Bulte, Erwin, Nico Heerink, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011, ―China‘s One-Child Policy
and ‗the Mystery of Missing Women: Ethnic Minorities and Male-Biased Sex Ratios,‖
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 73 (1): 21-39.
      Cleveland, William S., 1979. ―Robust Locally Weighted Regression and
Smoothing Scatterplots,‖ Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74 (368): 829-
836.
        Cleveland, William S. and Susan J. Devlin, 1988. ―Locally Weighted Regression:
An Approach to Regression Analysis by Local Fitting,‖ Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 83 (403): 596-610.
      Cole, Harold L., George J. Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1992, ―Social
Norms, Savings Behavior, and Growth,‖ Journal of Political Economy, 100(6): 1092-
1125.
      Corneo, Giacomo and Olivier Jeanne, 1999, ―Social Organization in an
Endogenous Growth Model,‖ International Economic Review, 40(3): 711-25.
      Den Boer, Andrea, and Valerie M. Hudson, 2004, ―The Security Threat of Asia‘s
Sex Ratios,‖ SAIA Review 24(2): 27-43.
       Deng, Yongheng, Randall Morck, Jing Wu, and Bernard Yeung, 2011, ―Monetary
and Fiscal Stimuli, Ownership Structure, and China‘s Housing Market,‖ NBER Working
Paper 16871.
                                                    38


       Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, ―A Sexually Unbalanced Model of
Current Account Imbalances,‖ NBER working paper 16000.
      Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011, ―A Darwinian Perspective on
‗Exchange Rate Undervaluation‘,‖ working paper, Columbia University.
       Gu, Baochang and Krishna Roy, 1995, ―Sex Ratio at Birth in China, with
Reference to Other Areas in East Asia: What We Know,‖ Asia-Pacific Population
Journal, 10(3): 17-42.
       Ebenstein, Avraham, 2009, ―Estimating a Dynamic Model of Sex Selection in
China,‖ Harvard University. Available from pluto.huji.ac.il/~ebenstein/Ebenstein_Sex_Selection_March_09.pdf.
       Edlund, Lena, 1996, ―Dear Son – Expensive Daughter: Do Scarce Women Pay to
Marry?‖ Essay Two in The Marriage Market: How Do You Compare. Dissertation,
Stockholm School of Economics.
       Edlund, Lena, and Chulhee Lee, 2009. "Son Preference, Sex Selection and
Economic Development: Theory and Evidence from South Korea," Discussion Papers
0910-04, Columbia University, Department of Economics.
       Edlund, Lena, Hongbin Li, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang, 2007, ―Sex Ratios and
Crime: Evidence from China's One-Child Policy,‖ IZA DP no. 3214.
       Frank, Robert H., 1985, “ The Demand for Unobservable and Other
Nonpositional Goods,‖ American Economic Review, 75 (1): 101-116.
       Frank, Robert H., 2004. ―Positional Externalities Cause Large and Preventable
Welfare Losses,‖ American Economic Review, 95 (2): 137-141.
       Frank, Robert H., 2007, Falling Behind: How Rising Inequality Hurts the Middle
Class? University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
       Gale, D., and L. S. Shapley, 1962, "College Admissions and the Stability of
Marriage", American Mathematical Monthly, 69: 9-14.
       Guilmoto, Christophe Z. 2007, ―Sex-ratio imbalance in Asia: Trends,
consequences and policy responses.‖ Available from: www.unfpa.org/gender/
docs/studies/summaries/regional_analysis.pdf.
       Harding, John P., Stuart S. Rosenthal, and C.F. Sirmans, 2007, ―Depreciation of
Housing Capital, Maintenance, and House Price Inflation: Estimates from a Repeat Sales
Model‖, Journal of Urban Economics, 61: 193-217.
       Hirsch, 1977, The Social Limits of Growth. London: Rougledge & Kegan Paul
Ltd.
       Hopkins, Ed, and Tatiana Kornienko, 2004, ―Running to Keep in the Same Place:
Consumer Choice as a Game of Status,‖ American Economic Review 94(4): 1085-1107.
       Hopkins, Ed, and Tatiana Kornienko, 2009, ―Which Inequality? The Inequality of
Endowments versus the Inequality of Rewards,‖ University of Edinburgh working paper.
       Li, Hongbin, Zheyu Yang, Xianguo Yao, Junsen Zhang, 2009, "Entrepreneurship
and Growth: Evidence from China," Discussion Papers 00022, Chinese University of
Hong Kong.
       Li, Hongbin, and Hui Zheng, 2009, "Ultrasonography and Sex Ratios in China,"
Asian Economic Policy Review, 4(1): 121-137.
       Li, Shuzhuo, 2007, ―Imbalanced Sex Ratio at Birth and Comprehensive
Interventions in China,‖ paper presented at the 4th Asia Pacific Conference on
Reproductive and Sex Health and Rights, Hyderabad, India, October 29-31.
                                           39


        Lin, Ming-Jen and Ming-Ching Luoh, 2008, ―Can Hepatitis B Mothers Account
for the Number of Missing Women? Evidence from Three Million Newborns in Taiwan,"
American Economic Review, 98(5): 2259–73.
        Marsh, Alex, 2011, ―Social Status and the Demand for Housing,‖ working paper,
University of Bristol.
        Mu, Ren and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011, ―Why Does the Great Chinese Famine Affect
the Male and Female Survivors Differently? Mortality Selection versus Son Preference,‖
Economics and Human Biology, 9: 92–105.
        National Bureau of Statistics, 1988, China Population Statistical Material
Compilation 1949-1985. Beijing: China Finance and Economic Press.
        Qian, Nancy, 2008, ―Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of
Sex-specific Earnings on Sex Imbalance,‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3):
1251-1285.
        Scharping, Thomas, 2003, Birth Control in China 1949-2000, New York, NY:
Routledge Curzon.
        Wei, Shang-Jin and Roy Allen, 2010, Beyond the Crisis: Growth Prospects and
Critical Challenges for Major Economies over the Next Ten Years, Chazen Institute of
International Business, Columbia Business School. http://www4.gsb.columbia.edu/
null?&exclusive=filemgr.download&file_id=737315.
        Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011a, ―The Competitive Saving Motive:
Evidence from Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,‖ Journal of Political
Economy, 119 (3): 511-564.
        Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011b, ―Sex Ratios, Entrepreneurship and
Economic Growth in the People‘s Republic of China,‖ NBER working paper 16800,
February.
        Wei, Xiangdong, 2011, ―A Household Survey on Financial Services Demand in
China,‖ working paper, Lingnan University.
        Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng, 2011, ―Evaluating Conditions in
Major Chinese Housing Market,‖ forthcoming, Regional Science and Urban Economics.
        Xu, Xianchuan, 2003, ―Research on Accounting for Value Added in the Service
Sector in China and Potential Problems,‖ unpublished working paper (in Chinese), China
National Bureau of Statistics.
        Zhu, Wei Xing, Li Lu, and Therese Hesketh, 2009, ―China‘s excess males, sex
selective abortion, and one child policy: analysis of data from 2005 national intercensus
survey,‖ British Medical Journal, 2009 (338):b1211.
                                                        40


Table 1 (in the text) is the table on parameter values in the calibrations of the model


Table 2: House Price and Rent in the Special Case, with borrowing constraint
(Calibration Results)


                           Housing demand by    Housing demand by
            Sex Ratio 𝜙                                                House Price     Rent
                           representative man   representative woman
            1              1.000                1.000                  1.351           1.000
            1.01           1.332                0.665                  1.393           1.000
            1.02           1.459                0.532                  1.412           1.000
            1.03           1.532                0.452                  1.424           1.000
            1.04           1.581                0.396                  1.433           1.000
            1.05           1.616                0.353                  1.440           1.000
            1.1            1.699                0.231                  1.461           1.000
            1.15           1.724                0.168                  1.474           1.000
            1.2            1.728                0.127                  1.485           1.000
            1.25           1.754                0.057                  1.494           1.000
            1.3            1.712                0.075                  1.503           1.000
            1.35           1.736                0.007                  1.511           1.000
            1.4            1.684                0.043                  1.518           1.000
            1.45           1.658                0.047                  1.525           1.000
            1.5            1.653                0.020                  1.532           1.000




Table 3: Assuming No Concerns for Marriage Market Competition
with borrowing constraint (Calibration Results)
Sex Ratio
                   Housing demand by            Housing demand by
                                                                         House Price           Rent
                  representative man           representative woman


1                  1.000                        1.000                    1.213                 1.000
1.01               1.017                        0.982                    1.213                 1.000
1.02               1.033                        0.966                    1.214                 1.000
1.03               1.047                        0.952                    1.215                 1.000
1.04               1.060                        0.938                    1.216                 1.000
1.05               1.071                        0.925                    1.216                 1.000
1.1                1.116                        0.872                    1.220                 1.000
1.15               1.147                        0.831                    1.223                 1.000
1.2                1.169                        0.797                    1.225                 1.000
1.25               1.185                        0.769                    1.228                 1.000
1.3                1.196                        0.745                    1.230                 1.000
1.35               1.205                        0.724                    1.233                 1.000
1.4                1.211                        0.705                    1.235                 1.000
1.45               1.215                        0.688                    1.237                 1.000
1.5                1.218                        0.673                    1.240                 1.000
                                                              41


Table 4: Summary Statistics on Sex Ratios, Housing and Other Variables
Variables                                         China                Rural                            Urban
                                                  Mean         Mean    Median   Std      N     Mean     Median   Std     N

Sex ratio for age cohort 5-19 in 2005             1.120        1.122   1.110    0.070    331   1.117    1.092    0.073   259
Sex ratio for age cohort 5-19 in 2000             1.079        1.102   1.093    0.065    331   1.052    1.051    0.077   259
Sex ratio for age cohort 5-19 in 1985             1.068        1.077   1.077    0.091    331   1.041    1.049    0.099   259
Housing value per unit (1,000RMB) in 2004         77           53      46       46       331   107      86       81      259
Housing size (square meters) in 2004              125          116     113      33       331   137      121      63      259
Housing price per square meter (RMB) in 2004      628          450     398      270      331   856      667      713     259
Household monthly income (RMB) in 2005            871          721     661      267      331   1061     999      372     259
Monthly rent (RMB) per house in 2005              248          206     183      109      331   302      259      171     259
Housing value to monthly income ratio             84           73      70       35       331   98       89       57      259
Housing value to monthly rent ratio               348          308     262      219      331   399      355      247     259
Share of primary age population (20-59) in 2000   0.593        0.570   0.570    0.048    331   0.622    0.628    0.053   259
Note: The sex ratio variable at the prefecture/city level is inferred from China Population Census 2000. All other variables are
calculated by authors based on a 20 percent random sample of the China Population 1% Sampling Survey 2005. CPI is from
China Statistical Yearbooks.
                                                                             42


Table 5: Who Wants a Bigger Home? (Tobit regressions with locational fixed effects)
                                                               Housing value (Tobit)          Housing space (OLS)                Rent (Tobit)
                                                               Rural           Urban          Rural             Urban            Rural           Urban
Sex ratio * having a son aged 5-19                             0.06**          0.12**         0.02**            0.02**           0.00            -0.09**
                                                               (0.01)          (0.05)         (0.00)            (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.03)
Household income (log)                                         0.14**          0.14           0.07**            0.12**           0.09**          -0.03
                                                               (0.01)          (0.11)         (0.00)            (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.03)
Household size                                                 0.09**          0.50**         0.04**            0.07**           -0.03**         -0.01
                                                               (0.01)          (0.05)         (0.00)            (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.01)
Household head age                                             -0.01**         -0.01**        -0.00**           -0.01**          -0.00**         0.01**
                                                               (0.00)          (0.01)         (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.00)
Household head year of schooling                               0.00            -0.02          0.00**            0.02**           0.01**          -0.05**
                                                               (0.00)          (0.02)         (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.01)
Female household head                                          -0.18**         -0.17**        -0.05**           -0.05**          0.16**          0.15**
                                                               (0.02)          (0.07)         (0.01)            (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.02)
Minority household head                                        -0.10**         -0.08          -0.03**           -0.03*           -0.04**         0.00
                                                               (0.03)          (0.12)         (0.01)            (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.04)
Poor health among at least one family member                   -0.03**         0.08           0.05**            0.09**           -0.02**         -0.27**
                                                               (0.01)          (0.09)         (0.01)            (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.05)
Having a child 10-14                                           0.06**          0.24**         0.02**            0.09**           -0.03**         -0.19**
                                                               (0.01)          (0.06)         0.00              (0.01)           0.00            (0.03)
Having a child 15-19                                           0.25**          0.34**         0.12**            0.20**           -0.08**         -0.37**
                                                               (0.01)          (0.06)         (0.00)            (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.05)
Number of sons                                                 -0.02**         0.00           -0.02**           -0.02*           0.02**          0.16**
                                                               (0.01)          (0.05)         (0.00)            (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.04)
City/prefecture fixed effects                                  Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes
R square (Pseudo R square for Tobit)                           0.03            0.03           0.14              0.16             0.03            0.02
N                                                              229567          74012          229342            73964            229567          74012
Notes: The dependent variable is the purchased housing price or construction cost (log) of a house which is owned by the household who live there, the
construction area of a house (log), and monthly rent (log) for those who rent a house. The sample is restricted to those with a child aged 5-19. The sex
ratio for the age cohort 5-19 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000 population census at either the city or the prefecture level. Other data are
from a 20 percent random sample of the China 1% Population Survey in 2005. Standard errors are clustered at the city (or prefecture) level. * and **
denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                            43


Table 6: Who Wants an Expensive and Bigger Home and Who Wants to Rent? Urban Nuclear Families
                                                                    Housing value (Tobit)          Housing space (OLS)            Rent (Tobit)
                                                                    Son            Daughter        Son             Daughter       Son           Daughter
Local sex ratio for the cohort 5-19 in 2005                         2.51*          -0.36           0.50*           0.34           0.88          0.97
                                                                    (1.48)         (1.56)          (0.27)          (0.25)         (0.86)        (0.72)
Household income (log)                                              0.50**         0.69**          0.08**          0.11**         0.16**        0.08**
                                                                    (0.14)         (0.18)          (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.05)        (0.04)
Household head age                                                  -0.04**        -0.04**         -0.01**         -0.01**        0.02**        0.02**
                                                                    (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)
Household head year of schooling                                    -0.07          -0.11**         0.03**          0.03**         -0.10**       -0.09**
                                                                    (0.05)         (0.04)          (0.01)          (0.00)         (0.01)        (0.01)
Female household head                                               -0.10          -0.03           -0.01           -0.02*         0.03          0.04
                                                                    (0.15)         (0.14)          (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.03)        (0.03)
Minority household head                                             -0.27          -0.53**         -0.03           -0.04          -0.06         0.08
                                                                    (0.23)         (0.26)          (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.06)        (0.07)
Poor health among at least one family member                        0.13           0.34            0.09**          0.12**         -0.12         -0.16
                                                                    (0.31)         (0.36)          (0.05)          (0.05)         (0.13)        (0.11)
Having a child 10-14                                                0.45**         0.03            0.17**          0.13**         -0.36**       -0.29**
                                                                    (0.12)         (0.11)          (0.02)          (0.01)         (0.04)        (0.04)
Having a child 15-19                                                0.44**         -0.10           0.27**          0.21**         -0.50**       -0.41**
                                                                    (0.15)         (0.12)          (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.05)        (0.06)
Share of primary age population (20-59) in 2000 at the city level -0.11*           -0.10*          0.04**          0.05**         -0.09**       -0.11**
                                                                    (0.06)         (0.05)          (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.02)        (0.01)
Pseudo R square                                                     0.00           0.01            0.06            0.07           0.01          0.01
N                                                                   15298          12650           15292           12647          15298         12650
Notes: The sample is limited to nuclear three-person families with household head‘s age younger than 45 and child age between 5 and 19. The dependent
variable is the purchased housing price or construction cost (log) of a house which is owned by the household who live there, the construction area of a
house (log), and monthly rent (log) for those who rent a house. The sample is restricted to those with a child aged 5-19. The sex ratio for the age cohort
5-19 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000 population census at either the city or the prefecture level. Other data are from a 20 percent random
sample of the China 1% Population Survey in 2005. Standard errors are clustered at the city (or prefecture) level. * and ** denote statistically significant
at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                            44


Table 7: Who Wants an Expensive and Bigger Home and Who Wants to Rent? Nuclear Families in Rural Areas
                                                                    Housing value (Tobit)          Housing space (OLS)           Rent (Tobit)
                                                                    Son            Daughter        Son            Daughter       Son            Daughter
Local sex ratio for the cohort 5-19 in 2005                         1.59**         1.27**          0.42**         0.30           0.03           -0.16
                                                                    (0.46)         (0.50)          (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.22)         (0.18)
Household income (log)                                              0.14**         0.17**          0.07**         0.07**         0.15**         0.14**
                                                                    (0.02)         (0.03)          (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
Household head age                                                  0.00           0.00            -0.01**        -0.00**        -0.00**        0.00
                                                                    (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)
Household head year of schooling                                    -0.03**        -0.05**         0.00**         0.00           0.01**         0.01**
                                                                    (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)
Female household head                                               -0.33**        -0.31**         -0.05**        -0.06**        0.14**         0.17**
                                                                    (0.07)         (0.09)          (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.04)
Minority household head                                             -0.31**        -0.24**         -0.03          -0.03          -0.04**        -0.04**
                                                                    (0.06)         (0.06)          (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)
Poor health among at least one family member                        -0.01          0.03            0.09**         0.09**         0.01           -0.03*
                                                                    (0.05)         (0.07)          (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.01)
Having a child 10-14                                                0.26**         0.15**          0.12**         0.09**         -0.12**        -0.10**
                                                                    (0.03)         (0.04)          (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)
Having a child 15-19                                                0.47**         0.43**          0.21**         0.19**         -0.20**        -0.18**
                                                                    (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)
Share of primary age population (20-59) in 2000 at the city level 1.62**           0.70            0.15           0.02           -0.05          0.01
                                                                    (0.41)         (0.45)          (0.15)         (0.15)         (0.24)         (0.20)
Pseudo R square                                                     0.01           0.01            0.03           0.03           0.01           0.01
N                                                                   29043          20128           29005          20102          29043          20128
Notes: The sample is limited to nuclear three-person families with household head‘s age younger than 45 and child‘s age between 5 and 19. The
dependent variable is the purchased housing price or construction cost (log) of a house which is owned by the household who live there, the construction
area of a house (log), and monthly rent (log) for those who rent a house. The sample is restricted to those with a child aged 5-19. The sex ratio for the age
cohort 5-19 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000 population census at either the city or the prefecture level. Other data are from a 20 percent
random sample of the China 1% Population Survey in 2005. Standard errors are clustered at the city (or prefecture) level. * and ** denote statistically
significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                              45


Table 8: Sex Ratios and Housing Market in 2004
                                                    House         value   House space     House price    House value    /   House value /   Rent
                                                    (1,000RMB per unit)   (m2 per unit)   (RMB per m2)   monthly rent       income          (RMB)
Rural areas
Local sex ratio for age cohort 5-19 in 2005         1.60**                0.82**          0.78**         2.50**             1.60**          -0.89
  (prefecture level)                                (0.38)                (0.26)          (0.28)         (0.72)             (0.38)          (0.55)
Household monthly income (log)                      0.91**                0.24**          0.67**         0.53**             -0.09           0.37**
                                                    (0.09)                (0.06)          (0.07)         (0.12)             (0.09)          (0.09)
Total population (log)                              0.13**                0.08**          0.05**         0.09*              0.13**          0.03
                                                    (0.03)                (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.06)             (0.03)          (0.04)
Share of primary age population (20-59 years old)   0.92**                -0.05           0.97**         2.50**             0.92**          -1.58**
  in 2000 (log)                                     (0.33)                (0.18)          (0.26)         (0.43)             (0.33)          (0.30)
Adj. R-squared                                      0.42                  0.16            0.37           0.23               0.19            0.08
N                                                   327                   327             327            327                327             327

Cities
Local sex ratio for age cohort 5-19 in 2005         1.28**                1.21**          0.07           1.37**             1.28**          -0.09
  (city level)                                      (0.51)                (0.39)          (0.50)         (0.54)             (0.51)          (0.39)
Household monthly income (log)                      1.03**                0.33**          0.70**         0.38**             0.03            0.65**
                                                    (0.12)                (0.09)          (0.13)         (0.15)             (0.12)          (0.10)
Total population (log)                              0.06                  -0.02           0.08*          0.08*              0.06            -0.02
                                                    (0.04)                (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.05)             (0.04)          (0.04)
Share of primary age population (20-59 years old)   -0.22**               -0.03           -0.20**        -0.14**            -0.22**         -0.09**
  in 2000 (log)                                     (0.04)                (0.03)          (0.06)         (0.03)             (0.04)          (0.03)
Adj. R-squared                                      0.28                  0.09            0.15           0.06               0.04            0.14
N                                                   259                   259             259            259                259             259
Note: The sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 2005 is inferred from the China Population Census 2000. The total population
and share of primary age population are from China Population Census 2000. The average housing sale values (or construction
costs) and construction areas are computed based on those houses/apartments built in 2004 from a 20 percent random sample of
the China Population 1% Sampling Survey 2005. All the dependent variables are in logarithmic form. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                               46


Table 9: First Stage Regressions – Instrumenting for Local Sex Ratios
Dependent variable = local sex ratio                                                           Rural             Cities
                                                                                               Areas
Share of minority population in 2000 (log)                                                     -0.81**           -1.56**
                                                                                               (0.17)            (0.29)
Penalty for violating family planning policy                                                   2.12**            2.41**
                                                                                               (0.57)            (0.68)
Dummy for extra penalty for higher order births                                                3.74**            1.88
                                                                                               (1.46)            (1.91)
Household monthly income in 2005 (log)                                                         -1.25             2.25
                                                                                               (1.29)            (1.63)
Total population in 2000 (log)                                                                 1.38**            -1.28**
                                                                                               (0.52)            (0.49)
Share of primary age population (20-59 years old) in 2000                                      -22.27**          -0.84
                                                                                               (4.30)            (1.44)
Adj. R-squared                                                                                 0.27              0.15
Kleibergen-Paap rank Wald F statistic                                                          14.23             14.98
N                                                                                              331               259
Notes: (a) The dependent variable is the local sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 2005 expressed in percentage term, inferred
from the 2000 Population Census. (b) The two family planning variables are averaged over the corresponding years of birth for
the age cohort 5-19 in 2005. (c) Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values: 13.91 for 5% maximal IV relative bias and 9.08 for
10% maximal IV relative bias. (d) Robust standard errors are in parentheses. (e) * and ** denote statistically significant at the
10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                               47


Table 10: Instrumental Variable Regressions for Housing Characteristics and Sex Ratios (2SLS)
                                                         House value           House space     House price    House value /   House value /   Rent
                                                         (1,000RMB per unit)   (m2 per unit)   (RMB per m2)   monthly rent    income          (RMB)
Rural areas
Local sex ratio for age cohort 5-19 in 2005              8.57**                3.91**          4.66**         9.56**          8.57**          -0.99
  (prefecture level)                                     (1.55)                (0.89)          (1.03)         (1.92)          (1.55)          (1.15)
Household monthly income (log)                           0.85**                0.19**          0.65**         0.46**          -0.15           0.39**
                                                         (0.11)                (0.07)          (0.07)         (0.14)          (0.11)          (0.09)
Total population (log)                                   -0.04                 0.00            -0.04          -0.08           -0.04           0.03
                                                         (0.06)                (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.08)          (0.06)          (0.04)
Share of primary age population (20-59 years old)        2.70**                0.73**          1.97**         4.27**          2.70**          -1.57**
  in 2000 (log)                                          (0.59)                (0.33)          (0.37)         (0.76)          (0.59)          (0.41)
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test for endogeneity (p-value)         0.00                  0.00            0.00           0.00            0.00            0.87
Hansen's J statistic for over-identification (p-value)   0.08                  0.01            0.75           0.00            0.08            0.02
N                                                        327                   327             327            327             327             327

Cities
Local sex ratio for age cohort 5-19 in 2005              2.44*                 2.81**          -0.36          5.23**          2.44*           -2.79**
  (city level)                                           (1.29)                (0.96)          (1.28)         (1.71)          (1.29)          (1.18)
Household monthly income (log)                           0.99**                0.27**          0.72**         0.24            -0.01           0.75**
                                                         (0.13)                (0.11)          (0.14)         (0.17)          (0.13)          (0.13)
Total population (log)                                   0.07                  -0.01           0.08*          0.10**          0.07            -0.03
                                                         (0.04)                (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.05)          (0.04)          (0.04)
Share of primary age population (20-59 years old)        -0.22**               -0.02           -0.20**        -0.12           -0.22**         -0.10**
  in 2000 (log)                                          (0.06)                (0.03)          (0.05)         (0.09)          (0.06)          (0.04)
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test for endogeneity (p-value)         0.64                  0.16            0.59           0.08            0.64            0.04
Hansen's J statistic for over-identification (p-value)   0.38                  0.90            0.30           0.79            0.38            0.03
N                                                        259                   259             259            259             259             259
Note: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                   48


Table 11: Summary Statistics on Sex Ratios, Housing Price and Other Variables in 35 Big Cities
                                                                                                  Mean         Median        Std
Housing price per square meter (RMB) for 35 big cities in 2003                                    2426         2131          1019
Housing price per square meter (RMB) for 35 big cities in 2009                                    5706         4463          3055
Change in housing price from 2003 to 2009 (log)                                                   0.371
Change in urban consumer price index from 2003 to 2009                                            0.198

Urban sex ratio aged 9-24 at the provincial level in 2003                                         1.071        1.068         0.032
Urban sex ratio aged 9-24 at the provincial level in 2009                                         1.132        1.116         0.061

Per capita GDP (RMB) in 2003                                                                      22100        13231         31735
Per capita GDP (RMB) in 2009                                                                      44644        43161         18103

Population in 2003 (million)                                                                     650            602           526
Population in 2009 (million)                                                                     773            717           565
Note: The housing price, GDP and population data are from various issues of China Statistical Yearbooks. The sex ratio refers to average
urban sex ratio at the provincial level from the 2000 Population Census. The age cohort is chosen so that the data are available from the
2000 population census (anyone younger than 9 in 2009 was not born in 2000 yet). The cohort aged 9-23 in 2009 was aged 0-14 in 2000.
                                                                 49


Table 12: First Stage Regressions – Instrumenting for Provincial-Level Sex Ratios
                                                                            Full         Full          Full        Excluding
                                                                            Sample       Sample        Sample      three cities

Share of minority population (log)                                          -0.45**      -15.06**      -14.46**    -11.51**
                                                                            (0.23)       (1.17)        (1.24)      (1.91)
Penalty for violating family planning policy                                1.98**       3.01**        1.18        2.42**
                                                                            (0.51)       (1.06)        (1.08)      (1.03)
Dummy for extra penalty for higher order births                             3.93**       10.22**       6.25**      4.74*
                                                                            (0.99)       (2.73)        (2.79)      (2.58)
Per capita GDP (log)                                                        -0.62        -0.37         -1.11*      -0.93*
                                                                            (0.45)       (0.45)        (0.59)      (0.54)
Population (log)                                                            -0.55        1.37          -0.16       13.55**
                                                                            (0.56)       (1.37)        (1.27)      (3.79)
City effects                                                                No           Yes           Yes         Yes
Year effects                                                                No           No            Yes         Yes
Adj. R-squared                                                              0.10         0.76          0.31        0.79
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic (weak identification test)              9.13         72.55         50.77       26.88
N                                                                           245          245           245         224

Notes: The sex ratio, which is in percentage, refers to average urban sex ratio at the provincial level from the 2000 Population
Census. The age cohort is chosen so that the data are available from the 2000 population census (anyone younger than 9 in 2009
was not born in 2000 yet). The cohort aged 9-23 in 2009 was aged 0-14 in 2000. ). In the last column, Beijing, Shanghai and
Shenzhen are excluded from the sample. The share of minority population and two family planning variables are averaged over
the years of the age cohort 9-23. Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values: 19.93 for 10% maximal IV size and 7.25 for 25%
maximal IV size. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels,
respectively.
                                                                          50


Table 13: Sex Ratios and Housing Prices in 35 Major Cities (2003-2009)
                                                                                           Full            Full            Full           Excluding
                                                                                           Sample          Sample          Sample         three cities
   Panel A: OLS
Sex ratio for age cohort 9-23                                                              3.02**          2.98**          0.89**         1.34**
                                                                                           (0.28)          (0.46)          (0.25)         (0.32)
Per capita GDP (log)                                                                       0.51**          0.38**          0.00           0.01
                                                                                           (0.04)          (0.06)          (0.03)         (0.04)
Population (log)                                                                           0.19**          0.51**          0.03           -0.17
                                                                                           (0.02)          (0.08)          (0.05)         (0.18)
City fixed effects                                                                         No              Yes             Yes            Yes
Year fixed effects                                                                         No              No              Yes            Yes
Adj. R-squared                                                                             0.77            0.90            0.96           0.96

   Panel B: 2SLS
Sex ratio for age cohort 9-23                                                              8.99**          4.39**          1.39**         1.77**
                                                                                           (1.54)          (0.88)          (0.36)         (0.61)
Per capita GDP (log)                                                                       0.47**          0.34**          0.01           0.01
                                                                                           (0.04)          (0.06)          (0.03)         (0.03)
Population (log)                                                                           0.21**          0.40**          0.03           -0.24
                                                                                           (0.04)          (0.10)          (0.05)         (0.18)
City fixed effects                                                                         No              Yes             Yes            Yes
Year fixed effects                                                                         No              No              Yes            Yes
Adj. R-squared                                                                             0.44            0.89            0.96           0.95
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test for endogeneity (p-value)                                           0.00            0.00            0.06           0.30
Hansen's J statistic for over-identification (p-value)                                     0.33            0.00            0.81           0.21

N                                                                                          245             245             245            224

Note: The dependent variable is log(average housing sale price per square meter). In the last column, Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen are excluded from
the sample. The housing price, GDP and population data are from various issues of China Statistical Yearbooks. The sex ratio refers to average urban sex
ratio at the provincial level from the 2000 Population Census. The age cohort is chosen so that the data are available from the 2000 population census
(anyone younger than 9 in 2009 was not born in 2000 yet). The cohort aged 9-23 in 2009 was aged 0-14 in 2000. In the 2SLS regressions in Panel B,
three instrument variables, share of minority population (log), penalty for violating family planning policy (% of local yearly income) and a dummy for
extra penalty for higher order births, are included as instrument variables. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * and ** denote statistically
significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                                    51


Appendix Table A: Housing Characteristics and Family Characteristics (Tobit Without Location Fixed Effects)
                                                                  Housing value (Tobit)               Housing space (OLS)              Rent (Tobit)
                                                                  Rural          Urban                Rural        Urban               Rural            Urban
Local sex ratio for the cohort 5-19 in 2005                             0.77**            1.27*           0.45**          0.39                 -0.11               0.54
                                                                         (0.33)           (0.73)            (0.19)      (0.29)                (0.12)             (0.75)
Sex ratio * having a son aged 5-19                                      0.03**           0.08**           0.02**       0.03**                  -0.01           -0.09**
                                                                         (0.01)           (0.04)            (0.00)      (0.01)                (0.00)             (0.03)
Household income (log)                                                  0.32**           0.48**           0.07**       0.08**                0.11**             0.15**
                                                                         (0.01)           (0.08)            (0.01)      (0.02)                (0.01)             (0.03)
Household size                                                          0.02**           0.25**           0.04**       0.09**               -0.04**            -0.08**
                                                                         (0.01)           (0.03)            (0.00)      (0.01)                (0.00)             (0.01)
Household head age                                                     -0.01**          -0.01**          -0.00**      -0.01**               -0.00**             0.01**
                                                                         (0.00)           (0.00)            (0.00)      (0.00)                (0.00)             (0.00)
Household head year of schooling                                        0.03**              0.00          0.00**       0.01**                0.01**            -0.05**
                                                                         (0.00)           (0.01)            (0.00)      (0.00)                (0.00)             (0.01)
Female household head                                                   0.09**              0.04         -0.03**      -0.04**                0.17**             0.18**
                                                                         (0.02)           (0.05)            (0.01)      (0.01)                (0.01)             (0.02)
Minority household head                                                -0.29**          -0.25**              -0.02       -0.03              -0.02**                0.00
                                                                         (0.04)           (0.11)            (0.02)      (0.03)                (0.01)             (0.04)
Poor health among at least one family member                              -0.02             0.01          0.07**       0.09**               -0.03**            -0.19**
                                                                         (0.02)           (0.06)            (0.01)      (0.02)                (0.01)             (0.04)
Having a child 10-14                                                    0.07**           0.15**           0.03**       0.09**               -0.02**            -0.20**
                                                                         (0.01)           (0.04)            (0.00)      (0.01)                (0.00)             (0.03)
Having a child 15-19                                                    0.22**           0.21**           0.12**       0.19**               -0.09**            -0.38**
                                                                         (0.01)           (0.04)            (0.01)      (0.01)                (0.01)             (0.05)
Number of sons                                                             0.00             0.00         -0.02**      -0.03**                0.02**             0.14**
                                                                         (0.01)           (0.04)            (0.00)      (0.01)                (0.00)             (0.04)
Share of primary age population (20-59) in 2000 at the                     0.24         -0.05**           0.32**       0.05**                   0.01           -0.10**
city level
                                                                         (0.32)             (0.03)          (0.14)           (0.01)           (0.12)             (0.02)
R square (Pseudo R square for Tobit)                                       0.03               0.02            0.03             0.06             0.01               0.01
N                                                                       229567              74012          229342            73964           229567              74012
Notes: The dependent variable is the purchased housing price or construction cost (log) of a house which is owned by the household who live there, the construction area
of a house (log), and monthly rent (log) for those who rent a house. The sample is restricted to those with a child aged 5-19. The sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 is
inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000 population census at either the city or the prefecture level. Other data are from a 20 percent random sample of the China 1%
Population Survey in 2005. Standard errors are clustered at the city (or prefecture) level. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                               52




Figure 1a: House price and rent, with borrowing constraint, with and without concerns for
marriage




Figure 1b: Price/rent Ratio, with borrowing constraint, with and without concerns for marriage
                                                                                          53



                                                       With a son                                                           With a daughter


                              1




                                                                                                       1
                                        .5




                                                                                                                 .5
                      Housing value (log)




                                                                                               Housing value (log)
                      0




                                                                                               0
                              -.5




                                                                                                       -.5
                                             4    5        6         7            8                                   4    5         6         7            8
                                                      Household income                                                          Household income

                                                 Low sex ratio           High sex ratio                                   Low sex ratio            High sex ratio




Figure 2A: Log housing value versus log household income in rural areas

                                                       With a son                                                              With a daughter
                            2.5




                                                                                                       2.5
                            2




                                                                                                       2
                    Housing value (log)




                                                                                               Housing value (log)
                                  1.5




                                                                                                             1.5
                       1




                                                                                                  1
                            .5




                                                                                                       .5
                            0




                                                                                                       0




                                             5    6         7         8            9                                  5    6          7         8               9
                                                      Household income                                                          Household income

                                                 Low sex ratio           High sex ratio                                   Low sex ratio            High sex ratio




Figure 2B: Log housing value versus log household income in urban areas

Source: Plotted by the authors based on a 20 percent random sample of China 1% Population Survey in
2005. The low sex ratio region is a collection of locations with the lowest sex ratios for age cohort 5-19 in
2005 (below 107); while the high sex ratio region is a collection of regions with the highest sex ratio for
age cohort 5-19 in 2005 (greater than 115). On the horizontal axis is log household income in 2005. On
the vertical axis is log housing value in 2005.
                                                                                         54


                                                      With a son                                                          With a daughter


                              4.6




                                                                                                      4.6
                              4.5




                                                                                                      4.5
                      Housing space (log)




                                                                                              Housing space (log)
                                  4.4




                                                                                                          4.4
                       4.3




                                                                                               4.3
                              4.2




                                                                                                      4.2
                              4.1




                                                                                                      4.1
                                            4    5        6         7            8                                  4    5         6         7            8
                                                     Household income                                                         Household income

                                                Low sex ratio           High sex ratio                                  Low sex ratio            High sex ratio




          Figure 3A: Log housing space versus log household income in rural areas

                                                      With a son                                                             With a daughter
                          4.8




                                                                                                      4.8
                          4.6




                                                                                                      4.6
                  Housing space (log)




                                                                                              Housing space (log)
                         4.4




                                                                                                     4.4
                          4.2




                                                                                                      4.2
                          4




                                                                                                      4




                                            5    6         7         8            9                                 5    6          7         8               9
                                                     Household income                                                         Household income

                                                Low sex ratio           High sex ratio                                  Low sex ratio            High sex ratio




              Figure 3B: Log housing space versus log household income in cities

Source: Plotted by the authors based on a 20 percent random sample of China 1% Population Survey in
2005. The low sex ratio region is a collection of locations with the lowest sex ratios for age cohort 5-19 in
2005 (below 107); while the high sex ratio region is a collection of regions with the highest sex ratio for
age cohort 5-19 in 2005 (greater than 115). On the horizontal axis is log household income in 2005. On
the vertical axis is log housing space in 2005.
                                                                                                                                                 55



                                                                                                                             Rural area                       Urban area




                                                                                                   2.5
Housing value-to-ncome ratio (log)




                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                               100         110           120      130 100   110            120     130
                                                                                                                                                sex ratio
                                                                                                    Graphs by city



                                                                                                Figure 4: Sex Ratios and House Price-to-Income Ratios
                                                                         Note: On the horizontal axis is the sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 inferred from the China Population Census 2000.
                                                                         On the vertical axis is the ratio of housing value to household income in 2004, averaged over all cities that had the
                                                                         same value of sex ratio (up to a basis point). The housing value refers to either sale price or construction cost
                                                                         computed from a 20 percent random sample of China 1% Population Survey in 2005.



                                                                                                                                 Rural area                   Urban area
                                                                                                               4
                                     Housing value-to-rent ratio (log)




                                                                                                         3.5
                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                   100      110           120     130 100   110        120       130
                                                                                                                                                sex ratio
                                                                                                          Graphs by city



                                                                                                 Figure 5: Sex Ratios and House Value-to-Rent Ratios
                                                                         Note: On the horizontal axis is the sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 inferred from the China Population Census 2000.
                                                                         On the vertical axis is the ratio of housing value in 2004 to annual rent in 2005, averaged over all cities that had the
                                                                         same value of sex ratio (up to a basis point). Both housing value and rent are computed from a 20 percent random
                                                                         sample of China 1% Population Survey in 2005.
                                                                 56

Appendix A: Proof of Proposition (For online posting, not for publication in print)
           The proof is somewhat involved, and can be broken down into two broad parts. Part 1 shows that the
aggregate demand for housing (at a given price) goes up as the sex ratio rises (up to a threshold value). Part 2 shows
that this translates into a rise in the house price and a rise in the price/rent ratio.
           Part 1 itself is broken down into several pieces. The first order conditions for representative women and
men in section 2.4 are:

                                         1       1                                        1 
                                            w  (1  F (w ))  f (w )m   (1   w )       
                                pr      y2                                            y2 ws 
                                      p                                                        0
                                                                                                                     (A.1)
                                 y1w      1                                                      
                                          y f ( w )[ Eu (c2 w )  u (c2 ws )]                  
                                          2                                                      

                                         1       1                                         1 
                                            m  (1  F (m ))  f (m ) w   (1   m )       
                                pr      y2                                             y2 ms 
                                      p                                                         0
                                                                                                                     (A.2)
                                 y1m      1                                                       
                                          y f (m )[ Eu (c2 m )  u (c2 ms )]                    
                                          2                                                       
where
                        y1w  y  ( p  r ) H w , y2 ws  pH w

                        y1m  y  ( p  r ) H m , y2 ms  pH m

                        y2  p ( H w  H m )

1)          We first show by contradiction that w  u(c2 ms )  Eu(c2 m ) and m  M (w ) . Suppose not, then

m  M (w )  w

where the first inequality holds because m :  max u(c2 ws )  Eu(c2 w ), M (w ) and we have supposed
that m  M (w ) . The second inequality holds because   1 .

            Then we have
                                   m  u(c2 ws )  Eu(c2 w )  w  u(c2ms )  Eu(c2m )  u(c2 ws )  u(c2ms )          (A.3)

and hence, H w  H m . From (A.1) we know


 pr   p             1   1  p1                                   p
             w p               (1  F ( w ))  f ( w ) m      f ( w )[ Eu (c2 w )  u (c2 ws )]
 y1w   y2 ws          y2 y2 ws   y2                                 y2

            p               1   1  p1                                   p
                    m p               (1  F ( w ))  f ( w ) m      f ( w )[ Eu (c2 w )  u (c2 ws )]
            y2 ws            y2 y2 ws   y2                                 y2

            p             1     1  p                                         p
                  m p                  (1  F (m ))  f ( w ) w      f ( m )[ Eu (c2 w )  u (c2 ms )]
            y2 ms          2
                            y   y 2 ms   y 2                                    y2

            pr
        
            y1m
                                                                       57


which means y1w  y1m , and hence, H w  H m , contradiction. The first inequality is due to  w   m . The second
inequality holds because:
       i.    1
                 (1  F (w ))  f (w )m   (1  F (m ))  f ( w ) w by using the assumption that                 is uniformly
          
distributed.

                 p     1   1  p                1   1  by using (A.3), which implies                               H w  H m and
      ii.       m p                 m p          
         y2 ws          y2 y2 ws  y2 ms          y2 y2 ms 
hence 1  1 .
      y2 ws    y2 ms

     iii.    Eu(c2 w )  u(c2 ws )  Eu(c2 w )  u(c2ms ) by using (A.3).
2)      Totally differentiating (A.1) and (A.2) gives that:
                                                                      dH  Z
where

                           12           dH w       0 
           11                  , dH        , Z   
                                                         A
             21            22 
                                            dH m        

                                             1      1                                1        
                                            2 (1  )(1  F ( w ))  (1   w ) 2            
                ( p  r) 2                    y                                    y
                                 2                                                            
                                                2                                     2 ws
        11                p
                                    f ( )                                                    
                   y12w                                                           1 1      1 
                                        w
                                            (m  E (u2 w )  u2 ws )  2 f ( w ) (        )
                                     y22
                                                                                  y2 y2 y2 ws 

                     1       1                 f (w )                                     1             1    1   1    1 
        12   p 2   2 (1  )(1  F (w ))          (m  E (u2 w )  u2 ws )  f (w ) 2  f (w )(       )(      )
                     y2                         y22
                                                                                           y2            y2 ws y2 y2 ms y2 

                     1       1                        1     1 1    1 
        21   p 2   2 (1  )(1  F (m ))  f (w )  (1  )          
                     y2                              y2     y2  y2 ms  

                         ( p  r )2          1                                      1    f (w ) 1   1          1 1    1 
        22                         p 2   2 (1   )(1  F (m ))  (1   m ) 2          (       )  (1  )          
                              2
                            y1m              y2                                    y2 ms   y22
                                                                                                  y2 y2 ms        y2  y2 ms  

                 1                        1   1
            A           (1  F (w ))(           )
                    2
                                          y2 y2 ms
        Note that:
                                                                             1   1         1   1
             y2  p(1  d ) H w  p(1  d ) H m  y2 ms , y2 ws                      0,         0
                                                                             y2 y2 ws      y2 y2 ms

             m  u2 ws  E(u2w )  m  E(u2 w )  u2 ws  0
                                                  1 1    1
             (1   ) y2 ms  y2 ms  y2 ws  (1  )          0
                                                   y2  y2 ms
                                                                            58

     Thus it is easy to see that: 11  0, 22  0, 11  21 , A  0

                                                       ( p  r )4                        1   1   1
                  det()  positive terms                         2  2 p 4 max m min 2   (     )
                                                        y12w y12m               y2 ms y2 y2 ws y2

                                       w     1   1    1       1 1    1 
                            2 p4              (      )  (1  )          
                                        y2 ws y2 ms y2 
                                         max
                                          min 2
                                                                 y2  y2 ms 

                                              1           1       1 1    1           1           1     1 1     2 
                            2 p4                            (1  )                        (           )  
                                       ( max   min ) 2 y2       y2  y2 ms   y2 ws y2 ms    y2 ms y2 ms y2 y22 

      We can notice that all terms, except the last one, are positive, and we can give a sufficient condition to ensure
that det()  0 is E ( )  c , where c is some constant. This can be interpreted as that the emotional utility should
be large enough to make people willing to compete in the marriage market. We prove det()  0 by
contradiction:
        i. Suppose not, det()  0 , then we must have:

                 m            1         1       1                   1       1        1     1 1       1        
            2 max                    (         )  max w min 2 (                   )  (1  )                 
                   min
                            y 2
                                  y
                              2 ms 2    y 2 ws    y 2            y  2 ws  y 2 ms    y 2      y 2   y 2 ms   
                                                                                                                  0
                          1            1         1 1    1           1            1       1 1      2           
                max                        (1  )                        (             )  2              
                  (   ) y2 min 2
                                                    y2  y2 ms  y2 ws y2 ms      y2 ms y2 ms y2 y2             
  Let     denote the expression in the brace, and let 1 ,  2 , 3 denote the three terms in the brace respectively:
                                               m         1      1    1
                            1  2                             (      )
                                        max
                                                 min  2
                                                       y2 ms y2 y2 ws y2

                                            w       1     1    1       1 1    1 
                            2                          (      )  (1  )          
                                      max
                                              min  2
                                                    y2 ws y2 ms y2       y2  y2 ms 

                                                   1        1      1 1    1           1           1     1    1  2 
                            3                               (1  )                        (           )  2
                                       (    max
                                                     ) y2 
                                                      min 2
                                                                     y2  y2 ms   y2 ws y2 ms    y2 ms y2 ms y2 y2 

Note that 1 , 2  0, 3  0 . If the sex ratio is not too high, the probability of being married is not too low, so it is
reasonable to say that:
                                                                        1                           1
                                                       max   min         and  max   min 
                                                                        w                         2 m

     Since   1  2  3  0 , and 1 , 2  0, 3  0 ,  would be greater than

                                1   2   3  0 
                                                       
                              1 ,  2  0,  3  0    
                                                       
                                                               1         1
                               max   min  1                 1       2  ( max   min ) 3
                                                             2  m       w

                                               1    1  
                               max   min      ,    
                                               w 2 m 
                                                       
                                                                                59


                                                  ( max   min )3 is greater than 0, which contradicts   0 .
     ii. Next we show that          1         1
                                        1 
                                   2 m      w 2
     First we sum up the last two terms:
                                                                                         y2      1      1       1 1       1 
                                                                                         2 (          )  (1  )            
          1                                           1        1      1 1    1         y2 ws y2 ms y2          y2  y2 ms  
               2  ( max   min ) 3                          (1  )                                                     
         w                                  max   min y2           y2  y2 ms          1           1      1    1    2 
                                                                                                     (           )       
                                                                                          y2 ws y2 ms    y2 ms y2 ms y2 y22  

                                                      1        1      1 1    1  y2 ws  y2 ms
                                                                 (1  )          
                                             max   min y2           y2  y2 ms  y2 ws y22

     Then we have:
                                1         1
                                    1       ( max   min ) 3
                               2 m      w 2

                                                  1      1  1          1    1   (1   ) y2 ms  y2  y2 ws  y2 ms 
                                                                    (      )                                    
                                           max
                                                   min
                                                         y2  y2 ms y2 y2 ws y2       y2 y2 ms                 2
                                                                                                       y2 ws y2 

                                                  1      1  1 y2  y2 ws       1 y2 ws  y2 ms 
                                                                                             
                                           max
                                                   min                   2
                                                         y2  y2 ms y2 ws y2   y2 ms y2 ws y22 

                                                  1        1            y2 ws
                                                               
                                         max   min y2            y2 ms y2 ws y22

                                    0

     Thus we have shown   0 , contradiction.
3)       Now we can proceed to investigate how the demand for house ownership reacts to a rise in the sex ratio.
                                                      dH m    A11       dH w     A21
                                                                    0,      
                                                       d    det()       d     det()

          The sign of dH w is ambiguous since the sign of 21 is ambiguous. One additional result we can obtain
                       d
here is that H m  H w because 11  21 . The aggregate demand for house ownership is:

                                                                        1         
                                                          H agg            Hw       Hm
                                                                       1       1 
         The response of the aggregate demand for house is:
       dH agg       H m  H w   1 dH m   1 dH w dH m
                                          (        )
        d          (1   ) 2 1   d 1   d   d
                    H m  H w   1 dH m    1 A(11  21 )
                                       
                    (1   ) 2
                                 1   d 1   det()
                    H m  H w   1 dH m           A
                                       +                 
                    (1   ) 2 1   d    (1   ) det()

                               1    f ( w )                                       1 1       1                1     1 1     1        
                 (1   w ) 2             (m  E (u2 w )  u2 ws )  2 f ( w ) (            )  f ( w )  (1  )               
                             y 2 ws   y 2
                                         2                                          y 2 y 2 y 2 ws             y 2    y 2  y 2 ms   
                                                             60


It is easy to see that the first two terms on the RHS are positive. Since A  0 and all terms in the bracket are less
than zero, the third term is also positive. Therefore, the aggregate demand for house increases as the sex ratio rises.
         We now come to the task of showing that the house price and the ratio of price to rent go up as the sex ratio
increases. The house market clears if
                                                     1           
                                                         Hw        Hm  H                                 (A.4)
                                                   1         1 

         The rental market clears if
                                 1                               1 w              m                  (A.5)
                                      h1, w       h1,m    w h2        h2, w, s         h2, m, s   H
                                 1          1         1      1               1            

         Totally differentiating (A.4) with respect to sex ratio      yields
                                           1                  H agg p H agg r H agg                         (A.6)
                                                 (Hm  Hw )                           0
                                       (1   )2                     p      r

where the aggregate demand for house is: H               1         
                                                            Hw       Hm
                                                        1       1 
                                              agg


                                                                                 H agg
         A higher price means a lower return for housing investment, so                    0 . On the other hand, a higher
                                                                                  p
rent means a higher dividend from housing investment, so H agg  0 . Moreover, we have already proved that
                                                                       r
 H m  H w  0 and H agg  0 Now we turn to equation (A.5). The demand for housing service is always a certain
                              .
fraction 1   of the total disposable wealth divided by rental rate. Summing up all terms on the LHS gives:
                                        1 
                                              y  ( p  r ) H  p(1  d ) H   H
                                         r
                                                        1 
                                                             ( y  dpH  rH )  H
                                                         r
                                                    (1   )( y  pdH )   rH                               (A.7)
where y  ( p  r ) H is the wealth of the young cohort (note that we have set the savings to zero), and p(1  d ) is
the wealth of old cohort. The rental rate can be set so that the demand to obtain living space by the old cohort equals
the supply of living space by young cohort. Or equivalently, the total demand for living space by the two generations
equals the fixed house supply. Differentiating with respect to  :
                                                  r               p                                            (A.8)
                                                     d (1   )
                                                                 
So if there is no depreciation, the house rent should be a constant. Since d  0,0    1 , we have r  p  0 .
                                                                                                      
Substituting (A.8) into (A.6) gives:
                                                                            p   p
                                       positive terms  positive terms            0
                                                                               
         Therefore, the price to rent ratio goes up as the sex ratio goes up.
