                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   COMPARING REAL WAGES

                                         Orley C. Ashenfelter

                                         Working Paper 18006
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18006


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




I am deeply grateful to Stepan Jurajda of the Center for Economic Research and Graduate Education
of the Charles University and the Economics Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences; without
his collaboration over the last decade this project would not have been possible. Martin Baily, then
at the McKinsey Global institute, was invaluable in the start of the data collection for this project,
while the staff at Pisacane GmbH have been invaluable since then. Ming Gu and Nicholas Lawson
(at Princeton) and Peter Ondko (Prague) provided efficient assistance in the subsequent processing
of the data. Financial support was provided initially with the assistance of the McKinsey Global Institute
and subsequently by the Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Orley C. Ashenfelter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Comparing Real Wages
Orley C. Ashenfelter
NBER Working Paper No. 18006
April 2012
JEL No. J3,O40,O57

                                               ABSTRACT

A real wage rate is a nominal wage rate divided by the price of a good and is a transparent measure
of how much of the good an hour of work buys. It provides an important indicator of the living standards
of workers, and also of the productivity of workers. In this paper I set out the conceptual basis for
such measures, provide some historical examples, and then provide my own preliminary analysis of
a decade long project designed to measure the wages of workers doing the same job in over 60 countries—workers
at McDonald’s restaurants. The results demonstrate that the wage rates of workers using the same
skills and doing the same jobs differ by as much as 10 to 1, and that these gaps declined over the period
2000-2007, but with much less progress since the Great Recession.


Orley C. Ashenfelter
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
c6789@princeton.edu
                                                          2




                                                I. Introduction

       There is a long history of measuring, recording, and comparing real wage
rates, dating at least from the Price Edicts of Diocletian in 301 AD.1 A nominal
wage rate ($/hour) divided by the price of a good ($/good), is a transparent
measure of how much of the good an hour of work buys (good/hour). As such, a
real wage rate provides an important indicator of the living standards of workers.
At the same time, the nominal wage rate is a also a measure of the price of labor,
and when it is divided by the price of a good the worker produces it is a measure
of how much of the good an hour of work produces. Thus, real wage rates are
also connected to measures of labor productivity. This connection between wage
rates, wellbeing, and productivity is at the heart of the modern economic analysis
of labor markets.

       In principle, properly constructed measures of the real wage would provide
comparisons across places and over time, and their differences and movements
would provide the opportunity to measure the effects of public policies and to
test many types of economic models. Analyses that make use of real wages range
from studies of economic growth and output accounting (Edward C. Prescott
1998, and Robert E. Hall and Charles I. Jones 1999), to international trade and
finance (Jonathan Eaton and Samuel Kortum 2002, Daniel Trefler 1993, Kenneth
Rogoff 1996), to the study of migration (Lutz Hendricks 2002, and Mark R.
Rosenzweig 2010) and inequality (Angus Deaton 2010), and to problems of
political economy (Dani Rodrik 1999).

       Despite their obvious usefulness there is general agreement that the
absence of comprehensive measures of real wage rates is one of the most serious
gaps in our evolving system of economic measurement. One of the few efforts to
remedy this situation was Richard B. Freeman and Remo H. Oostendorp’s (2000)

1
 Both Robert Allen (2007), who is a pioneer in such measurements, and Walter Scheidel (2009) have provided
computations of Roman real wage rates and compared them with wage rates in other ancient times and places.
Diocletian’s efforts to stabilize wages and prices by edict in the 1st century apparently worked no better in the long
run than similar attempts by others in the 20th century.
                                         3


attempt to standardize the data collected by the International Labor Organization
(ILO). These October Inquiry data, collected since 1924, are provided by
individual countries, but without any serious effort at standardization. As
Freeman and Oostendorp (2000, p. 5) observe, “Recorded wages are not directly
comparable across countries, in the same country over time, or even among
occupations in a country at a point in time, in part because countries report data
from differing national sources rather than conducting special surveys to answer
the ILO request.” Their conclusion? “…the Inquiry data has so many problems
that the survey is one of the least widely used sources of cross‐country data in the
world.”

       This situation stands in sharp contrast with the progress that has been
made in comparing international prices through the International Comparison
Project (ICP). The ICP was initially started by the United Nations Statistical
Division with the University of Pennsylvania, but it is now housed in the World
Bank. It seems apparent that it is far past the time when similar progress should
be made in the measurement of wage data.

       In this paper I provide some preliminary analysis of my own attempt to
measure wage rates for comparable workers doing the same tasks in different
places and at different times. My goal is to show just how useful a credible,
transparent measure of the wage rate can be for economic analysis. The data I
use come from an organization that is famous for producing the same product in
different places and it has done so for many decades using a known production
technology. The workers are thus using identical skills, using identical technology,
and producing the same product. I am, of course speaking of workers at
McDonald’s restaurants, and their famous product the Big Mac.

      I begin by using some historical examples to show how important the
measurement of real wages is for our understanding of economic progress. I then
provide the basic economic analysis that underlies the conceptual apparatus for
the measurement of real wages. This leads me to a summary exploration of the
data on crew member wage rates at McDonalds (McWages) that I have collected
over the last decade. The discussion proceeds in three parts. First, I provide
                                         4


some detail on how the data are collected and how they compare to the data for
a more limited set of countries that we have available from the ILO and the US
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Second, I provide summary measures by broad
economic regions of the level of wage rates worldwide in 2007, a year I take to be
normal by comparison with the period since. Finally, I explore the path that wage
rates have taken in the normal period 2000‐2007 and compare that with the path
they have taken since then in the aftermath of the world’s recent financial crisis,
2007‐2011.



                      II. Historical Measures of Real Wages



       Our long run conception of economic progress is based in our
understanding of worker wages and welfare over long periods. For example,
measuring worker welfare before, during, and after the industrial revolution sets
the background for our understanding of the massive change in economic welfare
that resulted. That, in turn, provides some perspective on how today’s
developing countries may evolve in the future. In the last decade a lively set of
analyses by economic historians has shed some new light on these old questions.



                         A. Before the Industrial Revolution

      Table 1 provides an example of the problems of constructing real wage
measures and also some perspective on an early period prior to the industrial
revolution. Comparing wage rates between Canton Province in China and London
in England in 1704 provides a benchmark for more modern comparisons.

       The data for the calculations in the table are from the records of a member
of the East India Company in the 18th century, and have been assembled by
Robert Allen (2004). Wages and prices are measured using the East India
Company exchange rates, which apparently closely mirror exchange rates
                                                         5


measured in units of silver, a common currency in 1700. The results in Table 1
may come as a surprise to some.

      First, as the first column of the table indicates, the nominal wage rate in
London was between 3 and 4 times higher than in Canton. Second, it is also
apparent from the table that nominal prices were generally, but not universally,
higher in London than in Canton. This, of course, suggests that real wage rates
may not have been so different in the two places in 1704.

       The second and third columns of Table 1 provide estimates of the budget
shares for expenditures on various goods for both London and Canton,
respectively. Using the English budget shares suggests that nominal prices were
about 3 times higher in London than in Canton, while using the Chinese budget
shares suggests that nominal prices were nearly 5 times higher in London than in
Canton. This is an example of the classic index number problem, which in this
case results from different budget shares in the two countries. From the point of
view of a Cantonese, real wages are higher in Canton than in London because the
work it would take to purchase a Cantonese lifestyle would be more in London
than in Canton. Of course, precisely the opposite is the case from the point of
view of a Londoner. An average of these two real wage measures, which is one
version of an “ideal” index, implies that real wage rates were about the same in
Canton and London before the industrial revolution in England.2

       It is my impression that this finding about the broad uniformity of real
wage rates across space in the period before the industrial revolution is slowly
being confirmed as a key fact in the history of economic development. Perhaps
this accounts for the broad pessimism of the classical economists about the
prospect for long run growth in real wage rates.




2
  This differs somewhat from Angus Maddison’s (1998) “guesstimate” that European gross national product per
capita may have been about 50% higher than in China in 1700. Nevertheless all the evidence suggests that
Chinese/European differences before the industrial revolution were not nearly as large as in the period after the
industrial revolution, as in shown below in Table 2.
                                         6


              B. Wage Rates During and After the Industrial Revolution

       Paul Douglas (1930) painstakingly constructed estimates of real wage rates
in manufacturing in the US from 1890‐1914. Douglas’s results had the surprising
implication that, even though output per man hour increased in this period of
industrial growth, real wage rates did not. The Douglas series for nominal wage
rates is displayed in Figure 1 along with an alternative series constructed many
years later by Albert Rees (1961) when he revisited this puzzle. Douglas’s real
wage index is displayed in Figure 3 and shows remarkable stability.

       Rees speculated that (a) an increased labor supply, caused either by the
closing of the American frontier and an increase in immigration, or (b) an increase
in the return to capital might explain the puzzle. But the evidence from the
growth in real wage rates in the period after 1914 seemed inconsistent with
either explanation. An alternative possibility was that either the nominal wage or
the price series had missed some change in the key facts.

      Rees expanded his nominal wage series to provide increased coverage of
non‐union wage rates, which Douglas had used less extensively. The two series
on nominal wage rates are shown in Figure 1 and differ in an expected direction,
but their trend turned out to be no different.

       With respect to his new price index, Rees undertook a serious attempt to
include data on the prices of manufactured consumer products, which had been
difficult for Douglas to capture. Rees’s main innovation was the use of detailed
prices and product descriptions from Sears and Roebuck and Montgomery Ward
catalogs—these were something like the internet purchasing guides of their day.

       Figure 2 compares Douglas’s and Rees’s nominal price series, and Figure 3
compares the resulting real wage indexes. It is apparent that, unlike Douglas’s
series, Rees’s price index remains stable in the face of increasing nominal wage
rates. Rees’s price series thus implies an increase in real wage rates that
Douglas’s series did not. An important puzzle about real wage rates in the US
during the industrial revolution was not much of a puzzle at all. The lesson from
                                                        7


this analysis is that an investment in careful data appraisal can generate a large
return in economic measurement.

       Finally, Table 2 provides some evidence comparing real wage rates in
various parts of the world in 1914, the period when Rees concluded his
measurement. In contrast with the data in Table 1, the data in Table 2 tell a
remarkable story of a dramatic widening in the gap between wage rates in much
of Europe and the US compared to wage rates in most of the rest of the world.
Real wage rates in London and Canton, which two centuries earlier had been
nearly the same, had diverged dramatically. As Table 2 shows, over a period of a
century or two economic growth had been so uneven that enormous gaps had
opened up between what we now consider the rich and the poor countries,
resulting in real wage rates that were 4 to 5 times higher in the rich countries.
This raises the natural question of whether these gaps are likely to persist and, if
they do not, how best to measure them as they close.

                               III. Conceptual Real Wage Measures

       As Figure 3 indicates, sizeable changes in real wage rates have historically
been accompanied by declines in normal hours of work. Indeed, the normal work
week in US manufacturing in 1890 was based on a 10 hour day, six days a week
for a total of 60 hours a week. By 1914 weekly hours had declined by about 7% in
the face of a real wage rate increase of about 40%, implying that real earnings
(the wage rate times hours of work) had increased by only one‐third, considerably
less than the 40% they would have increased if work hours had remained
constant. Over longer periods of more dramatic real wage growth the contrast is
even more striking. By 2007, for example, before the recent recession, weekly
hours worked in US manufacturing were around 40. At current wage rates,
weekly earnings would be 50% higher today than they actually are if work hours
had not declined so dramatically since 1890. Clearly, a considerable part of the
increase in the real hourly wage was used to reduce hours at work.3


3
 An early analysis of long run labor supply, emphasizing this point, is H. Gregg Lewis (1957). There is also
considerable evidence, at least since Gordon Winston (1966), that high wage countries have far shorter work
                                                       8


      As John Pencavel (1977) noted, the implication of a negatively sloped long
run labor supply function is that observed earnings or income differences may be
a misleading measure of welfare differences when wages rates differ
dramatically. It follows that an appropriate measure of the real wage rate that is
intended to measure welfare should be based on a model in which labor supply
and commodity consumption are selected jointly by a consumer‐worker.

                             A. Constant‐Utility indexes of Real Wages

       In the conventional set up a consumer‐worker maximizes utility u(l,c)
subject to the budget constraint pc=wh+y, where c indicates consumption goods,
w is the nominal wage rate, p is a set of prices of consumption goods, h=T‐l is
hours worked, l is non‐work time, T is the total time endowment, and y is income
unrelated to work. The usual first order conditions lead to a labor supply function
h(w,p,y) and commodity demand functions ci = ci (w, p, y) and, after substitution,
to the indirect utility function u(T‐h(w,p,y),c(w,p,y))= v(w,p,y).

      The solution of v(w,p,y) for w*=w*(p,y,v*) is the lowest wage rate that
permits a consumer with non‐work income, y, facing prices, p, to reach the
reference utility level v*. The function w* provides the basis for a constant‐utility
index number of real wages. A comparison of the observed w with w* indicates
whether the worker’s real wage has increased. w/w* is thus a real wage index
from the worker’s point of view.

        It is easy to show that w* is increasing in prices, p, as would be expected.
But it is also easy to show that w* is decreasing in non‐work income, y. In other
words, the lowest wage rate that permits a worker to reach the reference utility
level, v*, increases when prices increase, but it decreases when non‐labor income
increases. Approximating the effect of prices on w* raises all the usual problems
of index number base levels (Deaton 2010) and purchasing power parity
measurement.



weeks than low wage countries. This implies that comparisons of average earnings in rich and poor countries may
also understate welfare differences.
                                                       9


       An interesting insight from this formulation is that comparisons of real
wage rates for economies where non‐work income differs substantially may be
seriously misleading. Wage rates in economies that provide economic safety
nets, for example, may result in lower work effort, but real wage rates in such
economies are higher than a simple price adjustment applied to the nominal
wage would imply.

       In most applications it is not possible to measure non‐work income.
Pencavel (1977) suggests simply assuming that non‐work income does not differ
in the different places or times where wage rates are being compared. Using this
assumption, and estimates of the necessary parameters from Michael Abbott and
Orley Ashenfelter (1976), Pencavel shows that the conventional measure of the
real wage index provides a workable approximation to the constant‐utility real
wage rate even when wage rates change substantially.

      Another interesting feature of a constant‐utility real wage index is that it
provides a way to measure welfare differences that does not depend on any
assumption about competition in product or labor markets, or about the absence
of minimum or maximum wage regulations. Although product market monopoly
or labor market monopsony reduces real wage rates, this is fully reflected in a
lower real wage rate and a lower level of worker welfare. Likewise, a wage
regulation that increases the real wage results in a higher level of worker welfare.
On the other hand, the existence of quantity restrictions on work effort, such as
unemployment, implies that the real wage alone is not a sufficient indicator of
welfare differences.4

                            B. Real Wage as Marginal Product of Labor

       At the same time as the real wage rate determines labor supply, it also
plays a key role in the demand for labor. A profit maximizing firm treats the wage
rate as the price of labor and hires workers to the point where the value of an
additional worker’s marginal product is equal to it. The familiar relation Pmp=w,
where P is output price and mp is the marginal product of labor, implies that w/P
4
 See Ashenfelter (1980) and Ham (1982) for an analysis when workers face quantity restrictions on the amount
they may work at a given wage rate.
                                                           10


is a measure of the physical marginal product of labor when firms are maximizing
profits and there are competitive labor and product markets. If follows that real
wage rate differences can also be used to measure productivity differences under
some circumstance.

       To see how this can be done consider the typical Cobb‐Douglas5 production
function of growth accounting, written conveniently as Hall and Jones(1999) do to
isolate total factor productivity (TFP), as

               (1)                yi=Ai (Ki/ Yi) α/(1‐ α) hi,

where, for country or time period i, yi is output per worker, Ki/Yi is the
capital/output ratio, hi is human capital per worker, Ai is TFP, and ɑ is the capital
coefficient in the aggregate production function. Adjusting output per worker by
a measure of human capital and the capital/output ratio then provides a direct
measure of TFP. Capital/output ratios are typically taken as directly measured,
and ɑ=1/3 is often assumed, which then leaves the question of how to measure
the human capital of the work force in country or time period i. Various creative
approaches to this measurement issue have been used. Hall and Jones (1999)
and Jones and Romer (2010) assume that h can be represented by a Mincer‐style
earnings function and use estimated returns to schooling to construct measures
of hi. Hendricks (2002) assumes that the wage of observationally equivalent
workers who migrate from country i to work in the US, compared to the wage of
workers from the US who work in the US, provides a measure of differences in hi.

      Assuming workers are paid their marginal products implies that it is also
possible to use the wage rates of workers doing identical jobs in different
countries or at different times to account for human capital differences. A worker
with the base skill level h0i will be paid w0i which, because marginal products are
proportional to average products in a Cobb Douglas production function, will be
proportional to Ai (Ki/ Yi) α/(1‐ α) h0i. Since h0i =h00 (for all i) for workers using the
same skills, it follows that the wage rate of the base level skilled worker (w0i) in



5
    See Paul Douglas (1948). This is the same Douglas, of course, whose real wage series is contained in Figure 3.
                                                    11


country i can be expressed, relative to the wage rate of the base level skilled
worker in a base country (w00), using (1) as

                (2) w0i/w00= [Ai (Ki/ Yi) α/(1‐ α)]/ A0 (K0/ Y0) α/(1‐ α).

According to (2), if workers are paid their marginal products, wage ratios of the
base skill group can be accounted for by differences in capital/output ratios and
differences in total factor productivity. Differences in human capital per worker
will not affect this wage ratio because the workers being compared are using the
same skills. Alternatively, equation (2) also implies that adjusting relative wages
for differences in capital/output ratios will provide a measure of relative total
factor productivity (Ai/A0). Of course, if the wage structure is distorted by
minimum wages or monopoly or monopsony in product or factor markets, the
assumption that h0i is the same in each country will fail. Thus, assumptions about
competitive markets are critical for using wage rates to measure TFP.

                                 C. Product Prices and Real Wage Rates

       If real wage rates differ from place to place, then the prices of non‐tradable
goods will also differ from place to place. Prices of non‐tradables must differ
because local wage rates indicate the cost of a factor of production that is
important in producing a non‐tradable good. These input price differences will
thus result in output price differences. This point is very important for
understanding what price deflator is appropriate for the computation of a real
wage. The simplest version of this phenomenon, often known as the Balassa‐
Samuelson effect,6 is based on the observation that if tradable goods prices are
the same everywhere, and if productivity differs in the production of tradable
goods, then the prices of non‐tradable goods must differ too. This results because
the equality of wage rates between workers in the tradable and non‐tradable
sectors within a country makes labor intensive goods more expensive to produce
in high productivity countries.




6
    See Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964).
                                            12


      Consider a product produced according to a Cobb‐Douglas production
function from a combination of both tradable goods and local labor that is paid
wage w0i. The cost of producing such a good will be

         (3)                pni=w0iap1‐a,

where pni is the price of the quasi‐tradable good, p is the (constant across places)
price of tradable goods, and 0<a<1, is the fraction of the cost of production that is
due to local labor. Equation (3) describes the price of the quasi‐tradable good as
a concave function of the local wage. A real wage defined as

         (4)               w0i/pni=(w0i/p)1‐a,

is a purchasing‐power‐parity price adjusted wage, where the weights in the
purchasing power basket are allocated in the proportion a and 1‐a to non‐
tradables and tradables, respectively. This index is a concave function of the
wage rate measured in the tradable price and it will thus show a smaller gap
between high and low wage countries than would a real wage rate measured in
tradable prices. It is natural to think of the tradable‐goods‐based wage rate ,
w0i/p, as being measured by the wage rate expressed in a common currency,
since exchange rates are meant to equate the prices of tradable goods. It is this
wage rate that should be linked to the marginal product of labor and TFP.
Likewise, it is natural to think of the quasi‐tradable‐goods‐based wage rate, w0i/pni
, as more closely related to the welfare of workers as represented by a constant‐
utility real wage index.

                             IV. Measuring McWages

       To demonstrate how a well‐defined real wage rate may be used, I have
been collecting data on wages (and prices) from McDonald's restaurants since
1998. Perhaps the most famous statement of the identical nature of the items
McDonald’s sells was articulated by Thomas Friedman (1999, p. 239) in his
bestselling The Lexus and the Olive Tree: “Every once in a while when I am
traveling abroad, I need to indulge in a burger and a bag of McDonald’s French
fries. For all I know I have eaten McDonald’s burgers and fries in more countries
                                                       13


of the world than anyone, and I can testify that they all really do taste the same
(italics in the original).”7

                                               A. Data Collection

       There is a reason that McDonald’s products are similar. These restaurants
operate with a standardized protocol for employee work. Food ingredients are
delivered to the restaurants and stored in coolers and freezers. The ingredients
and food preparation system are specifically designed to differ very little from
place to place. Although the skills necessary to handle contracts with suppliers or
to manage and select employees may differ among restaurants, the basic food
preparation work in each restaurant is highly standardized. Operations are
monitored using the 600‐page Operations and Training Manual, which covers
every aspect of food preparation and includes precise time tables as well as color
photographs.8

       A key motivation for the use of standardized work protocols is the implied
warrantee of food safety that eating at a McDonald’s restaurant provides when a
traveler has little information about the quality of local establishments. The
standardized McDonald’s brand is both a risk (in case of some failure) and a
reward (when failure is rare). As a result of the standardization of both the
product and the workers’ tasks, international comparisons of wages of
McDonald’s crew members are free of interpretation problems stemming from
differences in skill content or compensating wage differentials. I suspect there are
other internationally diversified companies that have a similar structure and that
might also make suitable candidates for data collection.

      My original survey of McDonald’s wages was carried out as a pilot project
with the cooperation of the McKinsey Global Institute. To determine if the project

7
  Friedman goes on to use this observation to advance his controversial “Golden Arches Theory of Conflict,” which
posits that countries with McDonald’s restaurants do not engage in warfare with each other.
8
  A candid description of these procedures is provided by Royle (2000). About 90% of all employees at McDonald’s
are hourly paid Crew and Training Squad workers. Employees typically start work at a food preparation station,
and are then rotated through various stations and eventually to the sales counter. As a result, workers may
undertake several different assignments at different times.
                                                       14


was feasible, data were collected in the month of December 1998 for a limited list
of 13 countries.9 Since the data collection went quite smoothly the primary
project was started with the collection of data for 27 countries during the
summer of 2000, specifically including a number of transitional and developing
countries.

        In general, the data collection was for McDonald’s restaurants operating in
a large urban area, typically a capitol city or, in larger countries, the two largest
cites. In later work, starting in 2007, data were collected for this project with a
business intelligence firm. For larger countries data were collected in multiple
locations, stratified by city size. In most cases wage rates are simply hourly pay,
without any adjustment for benefits or taxes. In some cases the data indicated a
pay scale giving wage rates depending on seniority; in this case the mid‐point of
that scale was taken as the wage rate. Finally, in a few countries it was necessary
to estimate an hourly wage rate based on an average monthly salary divided by
average hours worked.

         Although the reliability of these data is hard to assess at a general level,
there is quite a bit of anecdotal evidence to support the estimates shown below.
It is straightforward to compare our estimates of Big Mac prices with those that
the Economist magazine has reported for many years. The correlation averages
about .99. Other evidence comes from personal data collection, often provided
by economists who have eaten in a McDonald’s restaurant.

                                   B. Comparisons to Other Wage Data

      One direct way to assess the reliability of these data is to compare them to
what other data already exist. Although McDonald’s currently operates in about
120 countries, many of these are very small. As of 2007, my data on wage rates in
McDonald’s restaurants (the McWage) are available for about half of these
countries. There are no other sources of wage data with such broad coverage,
but there are several sources that provide more limited opportunities for
comparison.
9
 Belgium, Brazil, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Poland, Russia, Sweden, UK, and USA. Our
concern was the reputation that McDonald’s has for secrecy regarding many of its practices.
                                        15


       One of the best known sources for international comparisons of wage rates
is that provided by the US Bureaus of Labor Statistics (BLS) for wage rates and
compensation costs in manufacturing. Although the occupations covered are
certainly not directly comparable, these BLS data nevertheless provide a general
measure of the level of wage rates in the broad labor market in several countries.
The result of a comparison of the McWage (converted to US dollars at then‐
current exchange rates) and the BLS wage measures (also in US dollars) for 2007 is
contained in Figure 4.

        In Figure 4 wage rates for each country are expressed relative to the US.
Thus the point (1,1) represents the combination of the US McWage and the BLS
wage measure for the US. The line drawn is a 45 degree line, so that points above
it indicate a relative BLS wage higher than the comparable McWage, and points
below it represent a relative BLS wage that is lower than the comparable
McWage. It is apparent from the figure that these two separate measures of the
wage rate are closely related.

      Two additional points are worth noting. First, no matter whether measured
by the BLS data or the McWage, there are many countries that have higher, and in
some cases far higher, wage rates than the US. Second, in the richer countries
with a high minimum wage (as in Denmark), the McWage tends to be higher than
the BLS measure of the wage. It follows that when minimum wages are binding
on McDonald’s restaurant workers considerable care is required in the
interpretation of the McWage.

       Figure 5 compares, using the same graphical method, the McWage and the
wage rates for laborers from the available ILO data for 2007. As with the BLS
data, it is apparent that both these measures of the wage rate are highly related.
The ILO data contain more representation from very low wage countries than the
BLS data and for these the McWage appears, if anything, to be higher than the
laborer wage rate. This may, of course, represent differences in how a laborer’s
occupation is defined in the different countries from which the ILO has obtained
data.
                                                         16


       Figure 6 provides a comparison of the McWage deflated by two different
price indexes. The data in Figures 4 and 5 refer to wages measured in a common
currency, and they may therefore be considered as measured in the price of
tradable commodities. These measure the cost in a common currency of
employing a worker. By contrast, Figure 6 compares two measures that deflate
the McWage by price indexes that may be thought to measure the prices a
consumer‐worker faces for a basket of goods (containing both tradable and non‐
tradable goods) that consumer‐worker’s actually purchase.

       The more common measure of a purchasing‐power‐price (PPP) index from
the ICP is used to deflate the McWage on the horizontal axis of Figure 6. A more
unconventional measure of purchasing power is used to deflate the McWage on
the vertical axis: the price of a Big Mac. What is apparent from the comparison
of the PPP‐deflated McWage and the measure of Big Macs per Hour Worked
(BMPH) is that they are very closely related.

      The reason for this is apparent from Figure 7, which plots the Big Mac price
against the US dollar measure of the McWage. The motivation for this plot is
equation (3), which displays the same concave form as is displayed in the figure.
Figure 7 has an eerie resemblance to the plot of PPP prices against real GDP per
capita in Summers and Heston (1991), suggesting that both plots are reflecting
the Balassa‐Samuelson effect noted above. The regression estimate of the
parameter a, which has the interpretation as the fraction of a Big Mac that is non‐
tradable and due to labor costs, is about .6.10

      For the less developed countries there is a clear tendency for the PPP
adjusted McWage to be greater that the BMPH in Figure 6. There are many
possible interpretations of this, but one obvious possibility is that the Big Mac is a
more expensive (i.e., tradable) bundle of goods than is appropriate for indexation
of wage rates in very low wage countries. On the other hand, it is worth noting

         10
            This is not far from the fraction of the cost of a Big Mac that Parsley and Wei (2007) estimate as due to
labor costs. Parsley and Wei also report a detailed study of the cost components of the Big Mac and their reaction
to exchange rates.
                                                       17


that the BMPH does not depend on any exchange rate adjustment, so that
distortions in exchange rates do not affect its calculation.

       Figure 8 provides a final comparison of McWages with output per man hour
for countries where this is available. These variables are also highly correlated,
but there is a very noticeable tendency for the McWage to be elevated relative to
output per man hour in countries with high minimum wages. This is an important
issue to consider when using wage rates to provide indirect measures of
aggregate productivity.

                          V. Comparisons of the Level of Real Wages

      Table 3 provides a basic cross‐section of data for 2007 on prices and wages
from McDonald’s restaurants. In order to create a manageable, readable table I
have aggregated the more than 60 countries for which there are data into a group
of economic regions. These are admittedly only a heuristic device for ease of
interpretation, but the aggregation used here captures about 85% of the
variability in the raw data on wage rates.11 The year 2007 was selected both
because the sample of countries for which data were collected was expanded in
that year, but also because the financial crisis that affected many countries had
not yet begun.

        The first column of Table 3 contains the wage rate for a McDonald’s crew
member in US dollars (at then‐current exchange rates), while the third column
contains the price of a Big Mac (again in US dollars). For ease of comparison the
second column expresses the McWage in the economic region indicated relative
to its value in the US. Finally, the fourth column contains the ratio of the price of
a Big Mac to the McWage (that is, it contains the measure of Big Macs per hour of
work, BMPH).

      There are three obvious, dramatic conclusions that it is easy to draw from
the comparison of wage rates in Table 3. First, the developed countries, including
the US, Canada, Japan, and Western Europe have quite similar wage rates,

11
  That is, a regression of the McWage for all countries on dummy variables representing these regions explains
about 85% of the variance in wage rates.
                                         18


whether measured in dollars or in BMPH. In these countries a worker earned
between 2 and 3 Big Macs per hour of work, and with the exception of Western
Europe with its highly regulated wage structure, earned around $7 an hour. A
second conclusion is that the vast majority of workers, including those in India,
China, Latin America, and the Middle East earned about 10% as much as the
workers in developed countries, although the BMPH comparison increases this
ratio to about 15%, as would any purchasing‐power‐price adjustment. Finally,
workers in Russia, Eastern Europe, and South Africa face wage rates about 25 to
35% of those in the developed countries, although again the BMPH comparison
increases this ratio somewhat. In sum, the data in Table 3 provide transparent
and credible evidence that workers doing the same tasks and producing the same
output using identical technologies are paid vastly different wage rates. As we
shall see, a straightforward explanation of these vast wage differences attributes
them almost entirely to differences in the total factor productivity in these
countries, not to differences in skill or human capital.

       Table 4 shows measures of hypothetical total factor productivity for each
economic region relative to the US. The first column of the table provides a
measure of TFP using the method proposed by Hall and Jones (1999), but which I
have updated to 2007 using the data in the Penn World Table 7.0. The Hall‐Jones
method is based on adjusting output per man for (a) differences in schooling
levels of the work force and (b) capital/output ratios, but I have here assumed
capital/output ratios are the same in all countries. The second column shows the
results of using equation (2) to measure the hypothetical TFP with the relative
wage of workers in McDonald’s restaurants.

      It is apparent from Table 4 that for a vast part of the world the measures of
TFP based on wage rates are remarkably similar to those based on output
accounting measures. This is not surprising given the high correlation between
the McWage data and output per man hour indicated in Figure 8 and the key role
that output per man hour plays in the calculation of conventional TFP measures.
Given the potential for error in these calculations, however, the similarity of these
estimates is impressive, especially in view of the simplicity with which it is
possible to estimate TFP from wage rate differences. Since the adjustment for
                                                        19


capital/output ratios plays such a small role in these calculations (see Hall and
Jones (1999), Table 1) it is apparent that McWage ratios are, by themselves, good
short hand measures of TFP differences across countries.

       Figure 9 displays the relation between the TFP measures contained in Table
4. This figure shows where the wage based measures of TFP are problematic. In
countries with very high minimum wage rates, like Australia and much of Western
Europe, the wage structure is altered and the McWage no longer serves as a
measure of aggregate output differences.12 Monopoly in the product market or
monopsony in the labor market would also undermine the usefulness of wage
rates for this purpose.13

                              VI. Comparing Changes in Real Wages

       Table 5 and Figures 10, 11, and 12 provide details on wage and price
changes over the period 2000‐2007. Data were collected for a much more limited
set of countries in the early part of this period, so that the number of
comparisons is more limited for this period.

       The first, third, and fourth columns of Table 5 provide the ratio of the
McWage, the price of a Big Mac, and the BMPH in 2007 to the value in 2000.
These ratios provide measures of growth. In the second column the growth in a
country’s wage is expressed relative to the growth in the US‐‐ a measure of the
difference in growth from the US.

      All these wage rates and prices are expressed in US dollars at then‐current
exchange rates. If exchange rates fully reflect changes in the prices of tradables,
as the purchasing power parity hypothesis suggests, then these wage and price
changes are fully comparable across countries. However, the purchasing power

12
   This does not necessarily mean that the marginal product of a worker in the sector covered by a minimum wage
statute differs from the wage rate actually paid, but it does mean that the wage structure has been altered. The
resulting distortion of relative wages means that the McWage does not serve as a way to measure differences in
the overall level of wage rates in a country’s labor market.
13
   Without competitive labor and product markets the firm’s first order condition for profit maximization requires
that marginal revenue product equal marginal factor cost. The former will generally be lower than the firm’s
output price, and the latter will generally be greater than the wage rate, which means that in either case the real
wage rate (measured in terms of the firm’s product price) is not equal to the marginal product of labor.
                                                        20


parity hypothesis, even if accurate for longer periods of time, may not be
appropriate in the analysis of shorter periods.14 An attractive feature of the
BMPH measure of the real wage rate is that it does not rely on exchange rates at
all. It is a direct physical measure of the output a worker may purchase with an
hour of work, and it is comparable over time and across space.

      The primary message of Table 5 and the accompanying figures is that
growth in real wage rates was entirely confined to the developing countries of
Russia, India, and China during the period 2000‐2007.

       Generally speaking each country represented in Table 5 displays increases
in nominal wages and prices. What is remarkable is the dramatic disparity in the
growth in real wages as measured by the BMPH. In both Canada and the US the
real wage rate declines somewhat, while in Japan it does not change.15 In
contrast, the growth rate in real wages is over 50% in this period in China and
India, while it is over 150% in Russia. The choice of 2000 for the start of data
collection is unfortunate in the case of Russia, as it is well known that the Russian
financial crisis in the late 1990s resulted in a collapse in living standards. No
doubt some of the massive growth in Russia simply represents a return to
previous wage levels.

      The cases of India and China, countries that contain nearly one‐half of the
world’s population, are especially noteworthy. There have been many anecdotal
conjectures about the accuracy of Chinese growth as reflected in official accounts.
The data in Table 5 clearly confirm considerable growth in real wage rates in
China , averaging about 9% per year.

      Likewise, growth in real wage rates in India was at nearly 8% per year in this
period. There has been much debate about poverty in India over this period.
While the data in Table 5 do not speak directly to that issue, workers in
McDonald’s restaurants are not highly paid relative to other workers, even by
14
  See especially Rogoff (1996) for a useful survey of the issues.
15
  Unfortunately, data for some of the countries in the economic region defined as Western Europe in previous
tables was not collected in 2000, so a broad comparison for this region over the period 2000 to 2007 is not
possible. A more detailed analysis at the level of the country, rather than the region, would show a broadly similar
conclusion, but with some growth in real wage rates in Eastern Europe.
                                         21


Indian standards. It is hard to imagine that the scale of growth these data display
did not have considerable effects on the welfare of Indian workers more
generally.

        Table 6 and the accompanying Figures 13‐15 contain data on changes over
the recent period from 2007 to 2011 that reflects the current financial crisis and
its aftermath. The first column contains the McWage in 2011 relative to its value
in 2007, while columns 2 and 3 provide the ratios for the Big Mac price and the
BMPH. The clear message from Table 6 is that, with a couple of notable
exceptions, real wage rates have either fallen (sometimes quite sharply) or
remained constant over this period. These real wage declines have been
associated with both nominal wage and price increases, but the price increases
have not been fully matched by corresponding nominal wage increases.

       The two primary exceptions are Russia and China. The pace of real wage
increases in Russia is impressive, and much harder to attribute to the recovery
from the Russian financial crisis nearly a decade before. China’s growth has
slowed down over this period to a rate that is about two‐thirds of the growth rate
in the pre‐crisis period. With these two exceptions, the previous decade’s nearly
universal real wage growth in the developing countries has not been replicated in
the most recent period.

                             VII. Concluding Remarks

       My goal here has been to demonstrate how measures of wage rates that
are comparable across space and time may be used in economic analysis. I have
tried to stress the importance of assessing the underlying theoretical framework
used for measurement as well as how that framework can assist in the
interpretation of what we measure.

       I began by providing just a little of the flavor of the long and distinguished
history of the measurement of real wage rates. In the past measurement focused
on changes wages within a given country over time. Today much of the emphasis
has shifted to constructing credible measurements that permit comparisons of
wage rates across countries. In principle, we would like to accomplish both these
                                         22


comparisons with one measure, but this is a virtual impossibility in a world where
the quality and nature of new goods changes rapidly.

       One appealing aspect of measuring worker welfare with real wage rates is
the greater availability of the underlying data from historical periods. Recent
historical research has accumulated to the point where it seems possible to draw
some tentative conclusions. Real wage rates seem to have been remarkably
similar across countries before the industrial revolution, and perhaps only
modestly above subsistence levels even in the best of circumstances. In the
period since the industrial revolution real wage rates have diverged across
countries, with catch up taking place in different countries at different points in
time.

       Finally, I have explored some data I have been engaged in collecting on
wage rates and prices in McDonald’s restaurants over the last decade. These data
suggest that there are extraordinarily large differences in the wage rates received
by workers doing the same work and using the same skills in the rich and poor
countries. These data also show that there has been some remarkable growth in
the world’s low wage countries in the last decade, but that this growth has
slowed, and in many cases halted, since the start of the recent financial crisis. I
hope that the future evolution of real wage rates in both poor and rich countries
will be measured more systematically in the future than has been the case in the
past.
                                              23


                                     REFERENCES

Abbott, Michael and Orley Ashenfelter. 1976. “Labour Supply, Commodity Demand and
     the Allocation of Time.” The Review of Economic Studies, 43(3): 389‐411.

Allen, Robert C. 1994. "Real Incomes in the English‐Speaking World, 1879‐1913." Labour
       Market Evolution: The Economic History of Market Integration, Wage Flexibility
       and the Employment Relation. London: Routledge.

Allen, Robert C. 2004. “Mr. Lockyer meets the Index Number Problem: the standard of
       living in Canton and London in 1704.” Working Paper.

Allen, Robert C. 2007. “How Prosperous Were the Romans? Evidence from Diocletian’s
       Price Edict (301 AD).” University of Oxford Department of Economics Discussion
       Paper 363.

Allen, Robert C. 2011. Global Economic History: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford:
       Oxford University Press.

Allen, Robert C., Jean‐Pascal Bassino, Debin Ma, Christine Moll‐Murata, and Jan Luiten
       van Zanden. 2011. “Wages, Prices, and Living Standards in China, 1739‐1925: in
       comparison with Europe, Japan, and India.” Economic History Review, 64: 8‐38.

Ashenfelter, Orley. 1980. “Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of Aggregate
     Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 48(3): 547‐564.

Balassa, Bela. 1964. “The Purchasing‐Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal.” Journal of
      Political Economy, 72(6): 584‐596.

Deaton, Angus. 2010. “Price Indexes, Inequality, and the Measurement of World
     Poverty.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 5‐34.

Douglas, Paul H. 1930. Real Wages in the United States, 1890‐1926. Boston and New
     York: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Douglas, Paul H. 1948. “Are There Laws of Production?” The American Economic
     Review, 38(1): 1‐41.
                                              24


Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.”
      Econometrica, 70(5): 1741‐1779.

Freeman, Richard B., and Remco H. Oostendorp. 2000. “Wages Around the World: Pay
     Across Occupations and Countries.” National Bureau of Economic Research
     Working Paper 8058.

Friedman, Thomas L. 1999. The Lexus and the Olive Tree. New York: Farrar, Straus and
      Giroux.


Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
       More Output Per Worker Than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       114(1): 83‐116.

Ham, John C. 1982. “Estimation of a Labour Supply Model with Censoring Due to
     Unemployment and Underemployment.” The Review of Economic Studies, 49(3):
     335‐354.

Hendricks, Lutz. 2002. “How Important Is Human Capital for Development? Evidence
     from Immigrant Earnings.” The American Economic Review, 92(1): 198‐219.

Jones, Charles, I., and Paul M. Romer. 2010. “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions,
      Population, and Human Capital.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
      2(1): 224‐245.

Lewis, H. Gregg. 1957. "Hours of Works and Hours of Leisure." Paper presented at the
      Proceedings of Ninth Annual Meetings in Madison, WI. Industrial Relations
      Research Association, 196‐206.

Maddison, Angus. 1998. Chinese Economic Performance in the Long‐Run. Paris: OECD
     Development Centre.

Parsley, David C., and Shang‐Jin Wei. 2007. “A Prism into the PPP Puzzles: The Micro‐
      Foundations of Big Mac Real Exchange Rates.” The Economic Journal,
      117(October): 1336‐1356.
                                               25


Pencavel, John H. 1977. “Constant‐Utility Index Numbers of Real Wages.” The American
     Economic Review, 67(2): 91‐100.

Prescott, Edward C. 1998. “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity.”
      International Economic Review, 39(3): 525‐551.

Rees, Albert. 1961. Real Wages in Manufacturing: 1890‐1914. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
      University Press.

Rodrik, Dani. 1999. “Democracies Pay Higher Wages.” The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 114(3): 707‐738.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1996. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle.” Journal of Economic
     Literature, 34(2): 647‐668.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. 2010. “Global Wage Inequality and the International Flow of
     Migrants.” Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper 983.

Royle, Tony. 2000. Working for McDonald's in Europe: The Unequal Struggle. London:
      Routledge.

Samuelson, Paul A. 1964. “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems.” The Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 46(2): 145‐154.

Scheidel, Walter. 2009. “Real wages in early economies: Evidence for living standards
      from 1800 BCE to 1300 CE.” Princeton/Stanford Working Papers in Classics
      Version 4.0.

Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston. 1991. “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An
    Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950‐1988.” The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 106(2): 327‐368.

Trefler, Daniel. 1993. “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!”
      Journal of Political Economy, 101(6): 961‐987.

Winston, Gordon C. 1966. “An International Comparison of Income and Hours of Work.”
     The Review of Economics and Statistics, 48(1): 28‐39.
                                                     26


                        TABLE 1: REAL WAGE RATES IN LONDON AND CANTON, 1704

                       English Price/Chinese Price        English Budget Shares Chinese Budget Shares

Starch                            4.79                            0.48                   0.6

Meat                              1.66                            0.13                  0.05

Milk                              0.89                            0.13                  0.01

Tea                               26.6                            0.03                  0.05

Sugar                            15.24                            0.04                  0.12

Charcoal                          0.19                            0.04                  0.02

Lighting                          1.96                            0.05                  0.03

Cotton                            3.38                            0.05                  0.08

Cloth

Iron Work                         3.12                            0.02                  0.02

Nails                             1.45                            0.02                  0.02



CPI                                                                3                    4.91

Wage Rate                         3.67                            3.67                  3.67

Real Wage                                                         1.22                  0.75


Note: The price ratios are measured by first using the East India exchange rate to convert each price to a
common currency (essentially grams of silver). The budget share for starch is a per calorie measure
using rice (China) and bread (England). The real wage is the wage rate divided by the CPI

Source: Allen (2004)
                                              27




  Cents
 35



 30



 25



 20



 15



 10                                                                    Rees Average Hourly
                                                                       Earnings
                                                                       Douglas Average
  5                                                                    Hourly Earnings



  0
   1890                1895            1900             1905                1910

                     FIGURE 1: AVERAGE HOURLY EARNING IN CENTS, 1890‐1914

Source: Douglas (1930), Rees (1962)
                                               28




 110


 105


 100


  95


  90


  85


  80
                                                                                 Rees Price
  75                                                                             Index
                                                                                 Douglas
  70                                                                             Price Index


  65


  60
    1890               1895             1900             1905             1910


                     FIGURE 2: CONSUMER PRICE INDEXES, 1890‐1914 (1914=100)

Source: Douglas (1930), Rees (1962)
                                             29




  Real Wage Index                                                                  Weekly Hours
  105                                                                                     61.00


  100
                                                                                          60.00
   95


   90                                                                                     59.00


   85
                                                                                          58.00
   80


   75                                                                                     57.00

                                                  Rees Real Wage Index
   70
                                                  Douglas Real Wage Index                 56.00
   65
                                                  Average Hour/Week

   60                                                                                     55.00
     1890              1895           1900              1905                1910

         FIGURE 3: REAL WAGE INDEXES AND WEEKLY HOURS WORKED, 1890‐1914 (1914=100)

Source: Douglas (1930), Rees (1962)
                                                      30


               TABLE 2: REAL WAGE RATES IN VARIOUS PARTS OF THE WORLD, 1900‐1914


                                    Wage Relative to "Barebones Subsistence" Cost (1900‐1914)


             Japan                                              1.36

            Canton                                              1.01

            Beijing                                             1.39

             Delhi                                              1.43

           Florence                                              1.8

            Bengal                                              1.51

            London                                              7.49

            Oxford                                              6.06

          Amsterdam                                             5.07

          Mexico City                                           1.51

            Bogota                                              1.33

            Chicago                                             6.08



Note: The Real Wage is measured for a full‐time, full‐year laborer (generally a building laborer).

Source: Allen, et al. (2011), Allen (1994), Allen (2011)
                                                                         31




                    2.5



                                                                                                               Norway
                     2
                                                                                                             Denmark



                                                               Germany
                    1.5
   BLS Wage Ratio




                                                                         Finland               Switzerland
                                              Netherlands
                                                      Austria
                                                                               Ireland
                                                                                 Belgium
                                                                               Sweden
                                                     Canada                  Australia
                                                                            UK

                     1                                   USAItaly             France
                                                           New Zealand
                                                   SpainJapan
                                      Korea
                                          Israel
                    0.5
                                 Singapore
                                 Czech
                                Taiwan
                             Hong      Republic
                                    Kong
                                 Poland
                          Brazil
                           Mexico
                       Philippines
                     0Sri Lanka
                          0             0.5                1                   1.5         2                 2.5        3
                                                                     McWage Ratio


                          FIGURE 4: THE McWAGE COMPARED TO BLS WAGE ESTIMATES, 30 COUNTRIES, 2007

Note: The McWage and the BLS wage estimates for manufacturing are each expressed relative to the US
level, and displayed with a 45 degree line. This implies that the US is at the point 1,1.

Source: Authors calculations, BLS < ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/ForeignLabor/>
                                                                  32




                    1.50

                                                                                              Germany     United  Kingdom
                                                                                                              Finland
                    1.30
                                                                                Canada

                    1.10
                                                                                       USA
                    0.90                                                                     Italy
   ILO Wage Ratio




                    0.70
                                                                       Puerto Rico
                    0.50

                                       Hong Kong
                    0.30                         Czech Rep.
                                             Singapore
                                     Chile
                    0.10       Peru
                                Costa
                           El Salvador Rica Russia
                                    Belarus
                               Azerbaijan
                           IndiaMexico
         ‐0.10                0.10           0.30       0.50      0.70          0.90         1.10       1.30       1.50
           ‐0.10
                                                               McWage Ratio


                       FIGURE 5: THE McWAGE COMPARED TO ILO WAGE ESTIMATES, 19 COUNTRIES, 2007

 Note: The McWage and the ILO wages for laborers are each expressed relative to the US level, and
displayed with a 45 degree line. Denmark has a McWage ratio of 2.57 and an ILO wage ratio of 3.13, off
the dimensions of the chart.

Source: Authors calculations, http://laborsta.ilo.org/ (The ILO October Inquiry).
                                                                33




                1.80


                1.60
                                                                                                          Denmark

                1.40                                                                        Australia

                                                                         Japan                          Switzerland
                1.20
                                                                                UK          Belgium           Norway
                                                                                  Sweden
                                                                                    Ireland
   BMPH Ratio




                1.00                                                    New Zealand France
                                                                          USA
                                                              Canada Germany
                                                                     Italy Finland
                0.80
                                                            Austria
                0.60                       Hong KongNetherlands Spain
                                               Ecuador
                                                   RussiaKorea Israel
                                                    Estonia
                                       ParaguaySaudi  Arabia
                                                Singapore
                                                    Czech Republic
                0.40                               Lithuania
                                               Poland
                                                   Latvia
                                        SouthGuatemala
                                               Africa
                                           Ukraine
                                       Chile
                                   China       Belarus
                                             Argentina
                                           Turkey
                                         Lebanon
                0.20              Peru
                                 Malaysia
                                   Uruguay
                                Philippines
                                 Thailand
                                     Azerbaijan
                                     Costa
                                 Mexico
                              India        Rica
                             El Venezuela
                                   Morocco
                                Salvador
                                Honduras
                          Indonesia
                               Georgia
                            Sri Lanka
                             Brazil
                          Dominican
                             Egypt    Republic
                                Colombia
                            Pakistan
                0.00
                       0.00     0.20      0.40      0.60       0.80       1.00       1.20     1.40         1.60       1.80
                                                            PPP McWage Ratio


FIGURE 6: THE McWAGE ADJUSTED FOR PURCHASING POWER PARITY PRICES COMPARED TO BIG MACS
                      PER HOUR OF WORK (BMPH), 62 COUNTRIES, 2007

Note: The McWage is adjusted for purchasing power price prices in 2005, the latest year available. The
PPP adjusted McWage and Big Macs Per Hour are each expressed relative to the US level, and displayed
with a 45 degree line.

Source: Authors calculations, Penn World Table <http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/ php_site/ pwt70/ pwt70
_form. php>
                                                                      34


                   4.50

                                                                                                             Western Europe*
                   4.00



                   3.50


                                 Latin America*                                          Canada
   Big Mac Price




                   3.00                                                                       U.S.



                   2.50          Middle East*
                                                                                              Japan
                                    Eastern Europe*
                                      South Africa
                   2.00      The rest of Asia* Russia


                   1.50
                                China
                             India

                   1.00
                          0.00       1.00       2.00    3.00   4.00        5.00   6.00     7.00       8.00     9.00   10.00
                                                                      McWage


                                    FIGURE 7: THE BIG MAC PRICE COMPARED TO THE McWAGE, 2007

Note: See Note to Table 3. The regression line is from a log linear regression with slope .586.

Source: Authors Calculation
                                                                       35


                         1.50


                         1.30


                         1.10                                          Netherlands
                                                                                            USA
                                                                                                Germany
                         0.90
   Hourly Output Ratio




                                                                                   Austria
                                                                                   Canada
                         0.70
                                                                              Spain     Japan Italy
                                             Singapore
                                          Hong Kong
                                           Taiwan                                                  New Zealand
                                                                   Israel
                         0.50
                                                  Czech Republic
                                                          Korea
                                              PolandEstonia
                                               Lithuania
                                          Turkey
                         0.30         Argentina
                                 Venezuela
                                   Mexico          Latvia
                                        Chile
                                 Brazil
                                Colombia
                                 Peru
                         0.10


           ‐0.10                 0.10         0.30        0.50        0.70           0.90         1.10      1.30   1.50
             ‐0.10
                                                                   McWage Ratio


                          FIGURE 8: THE McWAGE COMPARED TO OUTPUT PER MAN HOUR, 27 COUNTRIES, 2007

Note: The McWage and output per man hour are each expressed relative to the US level, and displayed
with a 45 degree line.

Source: Authors calculations, Penn World Table <http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/ php_site/ pwt70/ pwt70
_form. php>
                                                  36


       TABLE 3: McWAGES, BIG MAC PRICES AND BIG MACS PER HOUR OF WORK (BMPH), 2007


 Countries and Economic Regions       McWage       McWage Ratio      Big Mac Price       BMPH

               U.S.                     7.33            1.00              3.04            2.41

             Canada                     6.80            0.93              3.10            2.19

              Russia                    2.34            0.32              1.96            1.19

           South Africa                 1.69            0.23              2.08            0.81

              China                     0.81            0.11              1.42            0.57

              India                     0.46            0.06              1.29            0.35

              Japan                     7.37            1.01              2.39            3.09

         The rest of Asia*              1.02            0.14              1.95            0.53

         Eastern Europe*                1.81            0.25              2.26            0.80

        Western Europe*                 9.44            1.29              4.23            2.23

          Middle East*                  0.98            0.13              2.49            0.39

         Latin America*                 1.06            0.14              3.05            0.35



Note: The McWage is the wage of a crew member at McDonald’s. The McWage Ratio is the McWage
relative to its US value. BMPH is the McWage divided by the price of a Big Mac. Economic regions are
aggregated using population weights from 2010. The rest of Asia includes Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea,
Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, and Thailand; Eastern Europe includes Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine; Western Europe
includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and UK; the Middle East includes Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan,
Saudi Arabia, and Turkey; Latin America includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, and Venezuela.

Source: Authors Calculation
                                                 37


TABLE 4 COMPARING HYPOTHETICAL MEASURES OF TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY, 2007

                    Hypothetical TFP Based Hypothetical TFP
Economic Region
                      on Output/Capita     Based on McWage

U.S.                           1.00                1.00

Canada                         0.91                0.93

Russia                         0.37                0.32

South Africa                   0.26                0.23

China                          0.21                0.11

India                          0.15                0.06

Japan                          0.90                1.01

The rest of Asia*              0.29                0.14

Eastern Europe*                0.33                0.27

Western Europe*                1.00                1.29

Middle East*                   0.29                0.13

Latin America*                 0.36                0.16

Oceania*                       0.95                1.50



Note: “Hypothetical TFP based on adjusted output/capita” is based on the method in Hall and Jones
(1999) updated by the author to 2007 using PWT7.0, but assuming that capital/output ratios are the
same in all regions. “TFP measured by relative McWages” is the McWage Ratio for each region. Both
TFP measures are expressed relative to the US level. Economic regions are aggregated using population
weights from 2010. The Rest of Asia includes Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Sri Lanka, Malaysia,
Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand; the Eastern Europe includes Czech Republic, Estonia, Lithuania,
Latvia, Poland, and Ukraine; The Western Europe includes Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Germany,
Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, UK, Ireland, Italy, Netherland, Norway, and Sweden; The Middle East
includes Egypt, Israel, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey; the Latin America includes
Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Peru, El
Salvador, Uruguay, and Venezuela; Oceania includes Australia and New Zealand.

Source: Authors Calculation.
                                                                                           38




                                                 1.20



                                                 1.00                                                      U.S.     Western Europe*
   Hypothetical TFP based on Output per Capita




                                                                                                                                   Oceania*
                                                                                                       Canada
                                                                                                           Japan

                                                 0.80



                                                 0.60



                                                 0.40
                                                        Latin America*Russia
                                                              Eastern Europe*
                                                      The rest of
                                                       Middle     Asia*
                                                               East*
                                                              South Africa
                                                 0.20     China
                                                       India


                                                 0.00
                                                        0.00   0.20       0.40      0.60        0.80       1.00      1.20      1.40       1.60
                                                                                 Hypothetical TFP based on McWage


                                           FIGURE 9: COMPARISON OF HYPOTHETICAL TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY MEASURED WITH
                                                                OUTPUT/WORKER AND McWAGES, 2007

Note: see Note to Table 4. Both TFP measures are expressed relative to the US level, and displayed with
a 45 degree line.

Source: see Source of Table 4
                                                39




TABLE 5: GROWTH IN McWAGES, BIG MAC PRICES AND BIG MACS PER HOUR OF WORK (BMPH), 2000‐
                                        2007

                                   McWage Ratio Relative to
                   McWage Ratio                             Big Mac Price Ratio BMPH Ratio
                                          the U.S

       U.S.             1.13                 1.00                    1.21            0.93

     Canada             1.51                 1.34                    1.66            0.91

      Russia            4.63                 4.11                    1.84            2.52

      China             1.92                 1.71                    1.20            1.60

      India             1.57                 1.40                    1.03            1.53

      Japan             0.95                 0.85                    0.94            1.02



Note: The McWage Ratio is the McWage in 2007 divided by the McWage in 2000, and likewise for the
Big Mac Price and the BMPH. The McWage Ratio Relative to the U.S. is the McWage Ratio divided by
the US McWage Ratio.

Source: Authors Calculation
                                               40




  Percentage
400


350


300


250


200


150


100


 50


  0
            U.S.            Canada    Russia        China         India   Japan
 ‐50


                     FIGURE 10: PERCENTAGE GROWTH IN McWAGES, 2000‐2007

Note: See Note to Table 5

Source: Authors Calculation
                                                     41




  Percentage
 90.00

 80.00

 70.00

 60.00

 50.00

 40.00

 30.00

 20.00

 10.00

  0.00
               U.S.           Canada        Russia        China        India      Japan
‐10.00

‐20.00

                      FIGURE 11: PERCENTAGE GROWTH IN BIG MAC PRICES, 2000‐2007

Note: See Note to Table 5

Source: Authors Calculation
                                                42




   Percentage
  200




  150




  100




   50




    0
                U.S.          Canada   Russia        China       India        Japan



  ‐50

           FIGURE 12: PERCENTAGE GROWTH IN BIG MACS PER HOUR OF WORK, 2000‐2007

Note: See Note to Table 5

Source: Authors Calculation
                                                 43


TABLE 6: GROWTH IN McWAGES, BIG MAC PRICES AND BIG MACS PER HOUR OF WORK (BMPH)

                                             2007‐2011

                     McWage Ratio          Big Mac Price Ratio              BMPH Ratio

       U.S.                   1.06                1.16                          0.91

      Canada                  1.47                1.56                          0.94

      Russia                  1.78                1.24                          1.43

   South Africa               0.89                1.29                          0.69

      China                   2.00                1.62                          1.24

       India                  1.36                1.58                          0.86

      Japan                   1.46                2.04                          0.72

 The rest of Asia*            1.34                1.42                          0.94

 Eastern Europe*              1.31                1.22                          1.08

 Western Europe*              1.12                1.19                          0.95

   Middle East*               1.26                1.26                          1.00

  Latin America*              1.51                1.45                          1.04

     Oceania*                 1.22                1.39                          0.88



Note: The McWage Ratio is the McWage in 2011 divided by the McWage in 2007, and likewise for the
Big Mac Price and the BMPH. The McWage Ratio Relative to the U.S. is the McWage Ratio divided by
the US McWage Ratio. Economic regions are aggregated using population weights from 2010. The Rest
of Asia includes Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, and
Thailand; the Eastern Europe includes Azerbaijan, Belarus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, and Ukraine; the Western Europe includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and UK; Middle East
includes Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey; Latin America includes
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico, Uruguay, and Venezuela; Oceania includes Australia and
New Zealand.

Source: Authors Calculation
                                            44




  Percentage
120.00


100.00


 80.00


 60.00


 40.00


 20.00


  0.00


 ‐20.00



                     FIGURE 13: PERCENTAGE GROWTH IN McWAGES, 2007‐2011

Note: See Note to Table 6

Source: Authors Calculation
                                             45




   Percentage
 120.00



 100.00



  80.00


  60.00



  40.00


  20.00


   0.00



 ‐20.00



                  FIGURE 14: PERCENTAGE GROWTH IN BIG MAC PRICES, 2007‐2011

Note: See Note to Table 6

Source: Authors Calculation
                                           46




  Percentage
 50.00


 40.00


 30.00


 20.00


 10.00


  0.00


‐10.00


‐20.00


‐30.00


‐40.00

           FIGURE 15: PERCENTAGE GROWTH IN BIG MACS PER HOUR OF WORK, 2007‐2011

Note: See Note to Table 6

Source: Authors Calculation
