                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EXECUTIVES' "OFF-THE-JOB" BEHAVIOR, CORPORATE CULTURE, AND FINANCIAL
                            REPORTING RISK

                                          Robert Davidson
                                            Aiyesha Dey
                                           Abbie J. Smith

                                        Working Paper 18001
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18001


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




We acknowledge the financial support of the Accounting Research Center and the Fama-Miller Center
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the Institute for Fraud Prevention. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18001.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert Davidson, Aiyesha Dey, and Abbie J. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Executives' "Off-The-Job" Behavior, Corporate Culture, and Financial Reporting Risk
Robert Davidson, Aiyesha Dey, and Abbie J. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 18001
April 2012, Revised June 2012
JEL No. G30,G34,G38

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine how executives’ behavior outside the workplace, as measured by their ownership of luxury
goods (low “frugality”) and prior legal infractions, is related to financial reporting risk. We predict
and find that CEOs and CFOs with a legal record are more likely to perpetrate fraud. In contrast, we
do not find a relation between executives’ frugality and the propensity to perpetrate fraud. However,
as predicted, we find that unfrugal CEOs oversee a relatively loose control environment characterized
by relatively high probabilities of other insiders perpetrating fraud and unintentional material reporting
errors. Further, cultural changes associated with an increase in fraud risk are more likely during unfrugal
(vs. frugal) CEOs’ reign, including the appointment of an unfrugal CFO, an increase in executives’
equity-based incentives to misreport, and a decline in measures of board monitoring intensity.


Robert Davidson                                      Abbie J. Smith
Georgetown University                                University of Chicago Booth School of Business
McDonough School of Business                         5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Rafik Hariri Building                                Chicago, IL 60637
37th and O Streets, NW                               abbie.smith@chicagobooth.edu
Washington, DC 20057
rhd22@georgetown.edu

Aiyesha Dey
University of Minnesota
Carlson School of Management
321 - 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
deya@umn.edu
                Executives’ “Off-The-Job” Behavior, Corporate Culture,
                             and Financial Reporting Risk

1. Introduction

         We examine how and why two aspects of top executives’ behavior outside the workplace, as

measured by their legal infractions and ownership of luxury goods, are related to the likelihood of future

misstated financial statements, including fraud and unintentional material reporting errors.1 We

investigate two potential channels through which executives’ off-the-job behavior is linked to the

probability of future misstatements: 1) the executive’s propensity to misreport (hereafter “propensity

channel”); and 2) changes in corporate culture (hereafter “culture channel”).2

         Our first measure of executive behavior, prior legal infractions, includes driving under the

influence, other drug related charges, domestic violence, reckless behavior, disturbing the peace, and

speeding tickets. Motivated by the criminology literature, we interpret these legal infractions as a

symptom of a relatively high disregard for laws and lack of self-control. We predict and find a direct,

positive relation between CEOs’ and CFOs’ prior records and their propensity to perpetrate fraud

(propensity channel), as reflected in the executive being named for fraudulent corporate reporting in an

SEC Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release (AAER). We find no relation between CEOs’ prior

legal infractions and other insiders being named in fraud, unintentional reporting errors, or other

symptoms of a relatively weak control environment (culture channel).

         Our second measure of executive behavior is the ownership of luxury goods, including expensive

cars, boats, and houses. We interpret the ownership of luxury goods as a symptom of relatively low

“frugality”. Motivated by psychology and managerial accounting literatures, we predict that CEOs who

refrain from acquiring luxury goods (hereafter “frugal CEOs”) are likely to run a “tight ship” relative to


1
  We measure an executive’s legal infractions and luxury asset ownership over the period up to and including the
year before the reporting error or initiation of fraud. We refer to these as “prior” legal infractions and luxury asset
ownership.
2
  We use “culture” to refer to a firm’s multifaceted control environment with likely effects on the risk of
misreporting (e.g. internal control systems, director monitoring, equity-based incentive plans, reliability
of CFO, etc.). Hereafter we use “culture” and “control environment” interchangeably.

                                                          2
unfrugal CEOs (culture channel). Consistent with the culture channel, we find that the probabilities of

both fraudulent reporting by other insiders and erroneous reporting are higher in firms run by an unfrugal

(vs. frugal) CEO, and these differences become more pronounced over the CEO’s tenure. Further, we

find some evidence that the increasing probability of fraud over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs is associated

with the appointment of an unfrugal CFO, as well as an increase in more “traditional” fraud risk factors;

i.e. an increase in executives’ equity-based incentives and weakened board monitoring. In contrast to

executives with records, we find no evidence that unfrugal executives have a higher propensity to

perpetrate fraud. This is not surprising given no obvious connection between frugality and the ability to

rationalize illegal behavior.

        In summary, we find that both executives’ prior legal records and ownership of luxury goods are

related to financial reporting risk. However, our hypotheses and results differ with respect to how and

why legal records and asset ownership are related to misreporting. Executives with a record have a

relatively high probability of being named in fraud, interpreted as evidence of a high propensity to

perpetrate fraud (propensity channel). In contrast, firms run by unfrugal executives have relatively high

probabilities of fraud perpetrated by other insiders and unintential reporting errors, and these corporate

reporting risks become more pronounced over the course of the tenure of unfrugal CEOs (culture

channel).

        The interpretation of our results is subject to several key caveats. First, our sample size is

constrained by the high cost of the background checks we use to obtain data on legal records and asset

ownership. 3 Our fraud and error samples are small and have a high proportion of fraud and error firms

relative to the underlying population of firms. These sample limitations reduce the power of our tests and

limit inferences about the magnitude of the effects of executive type on the probability of fraud and errors

in the general population of public U.S. companies.



3
  The sample for our main analysis of fraudulent reporting includes 109 fraud firms and 109 matched nonfraud
firms. The sample for our analysis of reporting errors includes 94 error firms and 179 control firms. Section 3
describes our sample selection procedures.

                                                      3
        Second, our fraud and error samples include only firms whose misreporting is detected and

enforced, raising the possibility that our results are confounded by factors associated with the SEC’s

detection and enforcement procedures. We address this concern in several ways. In our fraud analyses, we

use a matched sample of fraud and control firms, and test the robustness of results to the inclusion of a

variety of control variables for firm and executive visibility and other attributes that may affect detection

and enforcement. Second, as our most compelling identification strategy for isolating the propensity

channel, we analyze the relation between executive type and the likelihood that the executive is named in

fraud using CEO and CFO pairs from 75 fraud firms (holding constant all nonexecutive-level factors for

each CEO-CFO pair). We find results consistent with those based on the matched sample of 109 fraud

and 109 nonfraud firms. Third, as an additional identification strategy for the propensity channel, we

examine the relation between CEO type and both intentional (fraud and CEO being named in fraud) and

unintentional misreporting (errors). As expected, the probability of fraud and the CEO being named in

fraud is elevated in firms run by CEOs with a record and the probability of errors is not. Fourth, as our

most compelling identification strategy for isolating the culture channel, we examine changes in the

prevalence of misreporting over the tenure of the CEO by CEO type, and link these to changes in specific

aspects of the control environment. Finally, we examine the relation between CEO type and a measure of

less egregious earnings management unaffected by SEC detection and enforcement procedures.

Nevertheless, our interpretation of results as evidence of misreporting, per se, remains subject to this

important caveat.

        Third, endogenous sorting of executives to firms may bias our results. Our identification

strategies above, as well the robustness of results to our instrument for executive frugality mitigate, but do

not eliminate, this concern.

        Subject to these caveats, our paper makes three main contributions. First, our evidence provides

new insights into the risk of materially misstated financial statements. Second, we introduce novel

measures of executive “type” based on prior legal infractions and luxury asset ownership. We document

evidence suggesting that these measures of executives’ “off-the-job” behavior capture meaningful

                                                      4
differences in managerial style in a financial reporting context, raising the possibility that these measures

are useful in exploring other aspects of corporate behavior and performance. And third, we provide the

first evidence of which we are aware of how changes in corporate culture over the tenure of CEOs differ

in an intuitive and intriguing way by CEO type.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature and

develops our hypotheses. Section 3 describes the sample and data and provides some descriptive statistics.

Section 4 presents our analysis of the relation beween fraud and executive type, and our analysis of the

propensity channel. Section 5 presents our analysis of the culture channel. Section 6 presents sensitivity

analyses and Section 7 provides concluding remarks and future research opportunities.


2. Hypotheses Development

        Our research builds on several literatures. Hambrick and Mason's (1984) "Upper Echelons

Theory" argues that managerial experiences, values and cognitive styles, such as honesty, affect their

choices and consequent corporate decisions. Consistent with this theory, Bertrand and Schoar (2003)

document significant manager fixed effects on corporate investment behavior, financing policy,

organizational strategy and performance. Similarly, Bamber, Jiang and Wang (2010) and Dyreng, Hanlon

and Maydew (2010) document significant management fixed effects on firms’ voluntary accounting

disclosures and corporate tax avoidance, respectively.

        Other studies focus on identifying specific managerial characteristics associated with corporate

decisions and/or performance. For example, Kaplan, Klebanov and Sorensen (2011) find that subsequent

corporate performance is positively associated with CEOs’ general abilities and execution skills, and

Malmendier and Tate (2009) document that award-winning “superstar” CEOs subsequently

underperform, manage earnings more, and extract more compensation.

        Personal characteristics that have received considerable attention are overconfidence and

narcissism. Roll (1986) argues that management overconfidence is associated with unsuccessful corporate

takeovers. Malmendier and Tate (2008; 2005) find that overconfident CEOs are more likely to engage in


                                                     5
value-destroying mergers and acquisitions (M&A) and link overconfidence to corporate investment

decisions. Cain and McKeon (2010) argue that overconfidence leads to increased overall risk taking and

more frequent M&A activity, while Schrand and Zechman (2011) find that overconfident CEOs are more

likely to initially overstate earnings by small, within GAAP amounts, which can then put them on a

“slippery slope” to accounting fraud. Aktas, Bodt, Bollaert and Roll (2011) find that CEO narcissism in

both the acquirer and target companies has a negative effect on the takeover process. Finally, based on

psychometric tests administered to CEOs, Graham, Harvey and Puri (2010) find evidence consistent with

a matching between behavioral traits of executives and the kinds of companies they join. Further, they

find these behavioral traits, such as optimism and risk aversion, help explain compensation structure.

         Our study also builds on the auditing and earnings management literatures. The auditing literature

has long acknowledged the potential importance of ethics and tone at the top. The concept of a “Fraud

Triangle” was formally incorporated in SAS 99 (Consideration of Fraud on a Financial Statement Audit,

October 2002), specifying three prerequisites for fraud: 1) an incentive or pressure to commit fraud, 2) an

opportunity to perpetrate fraud (e.g. absence of controls, ineffective controls, or the ability of

management to override controls), and 3) an attitude that enables the rationalization of fraud (hereafter a

“propensity” to perpetrate fraud). Prior earnings management research focuses primarily on the first two

factors (i.e. incentives and opportunities), with the notable exception of Schrand and Zechman (2011)4.

         We build on these literatures by examining how and why executives’ prior behavior outside the

workplace, as measured by legal records and ownership of luxury goods, is associated with the risk that

financial statements are materially misstated,5 including fraud and material reporting errors. While both



4
  A large literature focuses on the motives and opportunities to misreport. See, for example, DeFond and Jiambalvo
(1991),Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney (1995), Beasley (1996), Klein (2002), Abbot, Parker, and Peters (2004),
Agrawal and Chadha (2005), Farber (2005), Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2006), Larcker, Richardson, and Tuna
(2007), Davidson (2011), Dechow, Ge, Larson, and Sloan (2011), Dey and Liu (2011), and Schrand and Zechman
(2011).
5
  While CEO legal infractions and low frugality may be related to other attributes such as overconfidence and risk-
seeking, we argue that these capture distinct character traits of individuals. In sensitivity analyses (see Section 6.1)
we find that measures of CEO overconfidence, narcissism, and risk-seeking are not significantly correlated with our
measures of CEOs’ records and frugality, and our results are robust to controlling for measures of CEO
overconfidence, narcissism, and risk-seeking tendencies.

                                                           6
types of misreporting misinform capital markets, analysts, competitors, suppliers, directors and other

users of financial statements, they are distinguished by intent; fraud is intentionally perpetrated by

insiders, while errors are unintentional, and generally viewed as a manifestation of a weakness in a firm’s

internal control systems.

         Our focus on executives’ prior legal records as a financial reporting risk factor is motivated by the

criminology and psychology literatures. The criminology literature defines crime as an act of force or

fraud undertaken in the pursuit of self interest, and argues that individuals with greater propensities to

commit crimes are likely to have low self-control and are less likely to actually conform to social norms

and laws (Gottfredson and Hirschi, 1990). Jones and Kavanagh (1996) show that individuals lacking

conventional morality exhibit significantly more unethical behavioral tendencies than others. Blickle,

Schlegel, Fassbender and Klein (2006) argue that low self-control and high hedonism are positively

related to the likelihood of committing white-collar crime. Further, individuals displaying unethical

tendencies, such as past criminal behavior, tend to persist in this type of behavior by justifying it through

moral disengagement and by exhibiting motivated forgetting of information that might otherwise limit

their dishonesty (Gendreau, Little and Goggin, 1996; Shu, Francesca and Bazerman, 2009). Finally,

Fisman and Miguel (2007) find that UN diplomats’ unpaid parking tickets in NYC are significantly

related to the corruption and legal enforcement in their home country, suggesting that even minor legal

violations can capture differential behavioral norms.

         If the presence/absence of a record captures meaningful variation in regard for laws and self-

control, we expect executives with a record to have a relatively strong propensity to intentionally mislead

investors (propensity channel).6 Hence, we predict that firms run by record holders are more likely to

issue fraudulent financial statements, and that record holders are more likely to be named by the SEC for

perpetrating fraud. In contrast, we do not expect an executive’s propensity to misreport to have a direct


6
  The link between records and disregard for laws & a lack of self-control may arguably vary with the severity of the
infraction (e.g. speeding tickets vs. more severe violations) and/or the number of infractions. Our results are robust
to using two alternatives to the presence/absence of a record; 1) presence/absence of speeding tickets; 2) # prior
infractions.

                                                          7
effect on the probability of reporting errors, since errors are deemed unintentional. However, a corporate

culture that is more conducive to misstatements may be established during the reign of record holder

CEOs, elevating the risk of errors and fraud (culture channel).7

        Our focus on executives’ ownership of luxury goods as a financial reporting risk factor is

motivated by considering insights from both psychology and managerial accounting literatures. We

interpret executives’ ownership of luxury goods as a manifestation of relatively low frugality.8 Frugality

is identified in the consumer psychology literature as a distinct psychological trait characterized by the

degree to which a consumer is both restrained in acquiring and resourceful in using goods and services to

achieve long term goals (DeYoung, 1996; Lastovicka, Bettencourt, Hughner and Kuntze, 1999). This

research suggests that frugality is not synonymous with pure deprivation or cheapness, but rather reflects

short-term sacrifices in buying and using consumer goods and services to achieve longer-term goals.

Further, frugality is likely to be indistinct from non-materialism (Lastovicka, Bettencourt, Hughner and

Kuntze, 1999). The question naturally arises as to how frugality affects an executive’s stewardship of

corporate resources.

        Anderson and Lillis (2011) examine the notion of corporate frugality and suggest that it indicates

an enduring corporate trait of consistent disciplined management of spending to achieve long term

strategic objectives. Using a mix of field research and survey methods, they document that frugal

companies have a relatively strong focus on controls and efficiency enhancing investments. Anderson and

Lillis conjecture that the antecedent of such a frugal corporate culture includes frugal executives. Other




7
   Sorting of CEOs with records to firms with a weak control environment also could lead to more misreporting in
firms run by such CEOs. However, we find no evidence of sorting of record holders to such firms in our matched
sample, suggesting that sorting is not driving our results. An interesting question for future research is whether
record holder CEOs sort to firms with distinct cultures, growth opportunities, managerial discretion, regulatory
environments, risk, etc. in unmatched samples.
8
  Liu and Yermack (2007) interpret the purchase of large homes as signals of CEO entrenchment, and find the such
purchases are associated with a deterioration in future corporate performance.

                                                        8
researchers also stress the importance of key individuals, such as the CEO or the CFO, in overlaying an

individual culture of frugality on an organization (Mazzini, 1989).9

        If our measure of the ownership of luxury goods captures meaningful variation in executives’

frugality, and if frugal CEOs oversee a culture of corporate frugality characterized by relatively strong

discipline and rigorous controls (culture channel), we expect firms run by unfrugal CEOs to have higher

financial reporting risk than firms run by frugal CEOs, as evidenced by a relatively high probability of

fraudulent corporate reporting, of other insiders being named in fraud, and of unintentional reporting

errors. We expect these three differences to become more pronounced over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs

as the control environment deteriorates (relative to firms run by frugal CEOs). Finally, we expect the

increase in fraud risk over the tenure of unfrugal (vs. frugal) CEOs to be associated with changes in

measured aspects of the control environment, including an increase in executives’ equity-based incentives

to misreport, the appointment of an unfrugal or record holding CFO, a decline in board monitoring

intensity, and an increase in the estimated probability of a material internal control weakness due to

changes in the firm’s business model.

        We include the appointment of a CFO with a record or an unfrugal CFO as a measure of a

weakening culture due to the hypothesized disregard for rules and lack of focus on controls by record

holders and unfrugal executives, respectively. We consider executives’ equity-based incentives because

prior researchers posit an associated motivation to mislead the capital markets by inflating reported

performance (e.g. Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew, 2006; Davidson, 2011; Armstrong, Jagolinzer, and

Larcker, 2010; Johnson, Ryan and Tian, 2009) and find mixed support for this hypothesis.

        We consider the probability of a material control weakness as a symptom of deterioration in

culture because ineffective internal control systems increase opportunities to perpetrate fraud and the

likelihood of unintentional reporting errors. Our estimates of the probability of a material weakness in

internal controls for each year in the tenure of sample CEOs, based on a simplified version of Doyle, Ge


9
  Some examples include Sam Walton’s tightfisted management of Wal-Mart and Ingvar Kamprad’s policy of
continuous cost reduction at IKEA.

                                                     9
and McVay (2007),10 are intended to capture a change in the risk of a material control weakness due to a

change in business strategy. If the effectiveness of internal controls is reduced, for example, by corporate

growth and investment strategies of unfrugal CEOs or record holders, more misstatements are likely to

result.11

            Finally, we consider three measures of the intensity of board monitoring as a symptom of the

culture/control environment: the stock-based compensation of independent directors as a percentage of

shares outstanding (increases board monitoring), the structural independence of the board (increases

board monitoring), and whether the CEO is socially connected to any of the independent directors

(decreases board monitoring). The latter measure is motivated by recent papers documenting that social

ties with the CEO can compromise the monitoring activities of otherwise independent directors (Hwang

and Kim, 2009; Dey and Liu, 2011). There is at least some evidence (albeit mixed) that board monitoring

as measured by each of these proxies is associated with financial reporting quality (Bhagat and Bolton,

2008; Bhagat, Carey and Elson, 1999; Klein, 2002; Farber, 2005; Larcker, Richardson and Tuna, 2007;

Dey and Liu, 2011).

            Although, as described above, we predict that unfrugal (vs. frugal) CEOs are associated with

relatively high financial reporting risk through the culture channel, we have no clear prediction about

whether unfrugal executives have a higher probability of being named in fraud than frugal executives,

since there is no obvious connection between one’s frugality and regard for laws (propensity channel).

While unfrugal (i.e. materialistic) CEOs presumably have a relatively strong desire to maintain a

luxurious lifestyle with high compensation (e.g. bonuses, option gains etc.), it seems unlikely that this

temptation will induce unfrugal CEOs to commit fraud unless they have an attitude that enables them to

rationalize the crime. This is ultimately an empirical question.


10
   We exclude two explanatory variables, SPEs and number of segments, from the Doyle, Ge and McVay (2007)
model due to the lack of data.
11
   In a related study focused on the relation between CEO frugality and corporate investment behavior, we find
preliminary evidence that unfrugal CEOs engage in more acquisitions, invest less in organic growth (R&D), and
generate lower future accounting and stock returns per dollar invested than frugal CEOs. Such changes in business
strategy may reduce the effectiveness of internal control systems.

                                                      10
         To summarize, we predict that firms run by CEOs who have a legal record or own luxury goods

have a higher probability of future material misstatements. However, our priors differ with regard to how

and why legal records and asset ownership are related to reporting risk. We expect record holders are

more likely to be directly involved in perpetrating fraud (propensity channel). In contrast, we do not have

strong priors regarding CEO frugality and the propensity to commit fraud. However, we expect that a

corporate culture conducive to misstatements (fraud and/or errors) is more likely in firms run by unfrugal

CEOs (vs. frugal CEOs), and possibly record holders (culture channel), with such cultural differences

becoming more pronounced over the course of the CEO’s tenure.



3. Sample, Data, and Descriptive Statistics

3.1 Sample and Data

         We derive our sample of fraud firms from all SEC AAERs. These releases summarize

investigations the SEC brings against the agents of firms for violations of SEC and Federal rules, and

provides detailed information regarding the nature and timing of the violation (including the start and end

dates), the accounts that were manipulated, and the direction of manipulation. Over the violation period

1980 through 2004, we have a total of 3,148 AAERs. We only consider firms for which it can be

determined that their financial statements were materially misstated. After eliminating AAERs not

involving accounting fraud and redundant cases we are left with 852 firms.12

         From this sample of 852 firms, we remove 28 AAERs due to option backdating and asset or

revenue understatements. After merging the remaining sample with CRSP and Compustat, we are left

with 271 firms. The two primary reasons for the decline in sample size are the lack of any identifying

code for the firm (363 firms) and the absence of CRSP and Compustat data before and during the period


12
   AAERs only document cases of fraud that are detected and enforced. As discussed above, we attempt to address
this concern in several ways. Further, as Dechow, Ge, Larson and Sloan (2011) point out, the SEC identifies firms
for review through anonymous tips, news reports, voluntary firm restatements, and their own review practices.
Several independent sources provide information regarding potential malfeasance, which should reduce the
influence of the SEC’s detection methods on our results. Nevertheless, our interpretation of results is subject to the
caveat that fraud detection and/or enforcement may be related to CEO behavior.

                                                         11
wherein the fraud began (190 firms). We eliminate an additional 161 firms for which executive

compensation data are not available on ExecuComp (which begins in 1992), and one firm for which we

could not obtain accurate asset ownership information. Our final sample includes 109 firms whose fraud

was initiated between 1992 and 2004.13 Table 1, Panel A summarizes the sample selection process.

        Table 1, Panel B presents the industry membership of the fraud sample. Over half of the sample

firms are concentrated in two Fama-French industry groupings, “Consumer Durables, Non-durables,

Wholesale, Retail and Some Services (Laundries and Repair Shops)”                 and “Business Equipment,

Telephone and Television Transmission”.

        For each fraud firm we select a control firm from the same Fama-French industry group (five-

industry classification) whose estimated probability of fraud in the fraud initiation year is closest to the

that of the fraud firm. We generate estimates of fraud probabilities from a logit model (fraud vs. no

fraud) estimated for all firms with available data for seven model variables: CEO age, average total assets,

debt to equity ratio, excess stock returns, standard deviation of excess stock returns, and market to book

value of equity, all measured in the year prior to the fraud initiation of a given fraud firm, and the equity

beta estimated over the prior 3 years. By considering industry, year, firm size, growth opportunities,

leverage, and volatility we are attempting to match on important aspects of the business and contracting

environment. We incorporate abnormal stock returns in the year prior to the fraud initiation year to

mitigate recent performance differences between the two samples. Finally, we consider CEO age due to

the potential influence of age on an executive’s record, asset ownership, and financial reporting behavior.

        We depict our fraud firm-years with an indicator variable, FRAUD, that equals 1 in fraud firm-

years, and 0 for all other firm-years.14 For all fraud firms, we examine whether any executives were

named by the SEC as being directly involved in the perpetration of the fraud. EXEC_NAMED




13
  About 70 percent of our sample firms initiated fraud between 1997 and 2001.
14
  We include in our analyses all years since the CEO of each fraud firm was appointed for which we have data, up
to and including the year of the initiation of the fraud. We use the same years for each fraud firm’s matched
nonfraud firm.

                                                      12
(CEO_NAMED) is an indicator variable equal to 1 in firm-years for which a given executive (CEO) is

named by the SEC for perpetrating the fraud, and 0 otherwise.

        We obtain our sample of material reporting errors by combining the sample of restatements due

to errors from the Audit Analytics database with the error sample in Hennes, Leone and Miller (2008).15

Our error sample includes 94 firms over the sample period 1995 – 2005. Our corresponding control

sample comprises the 109 non-fraud firms in the control group for our fraud analyses as well as 70 firms

that do not have reporting errors randomly selected from each major industry over the sample period. We

depict error firm-years with an indicator variable, ERROR, that equals 1 for the year when the firm had an

error in its financial statements (subsequently restated), and equals 0 in all other sample firm-years.

        Our data on executives’ legal infractions and ownership of real estate, boats, and luxury vehicles

are obtained from numerous federal, state and county databases accessed by licensed private

investigators. We augment our real estate data by hand collection from public real estate information on

the internet.16 The legal infractions include criminal convictions, specifically, traffic violations, driving

under influence and other drug and alcohol related charges, reckless endangerment and domestic violence

charges. We set an indicator variable, RECORD, equal to 1 if the executive has any such convictions in

his personal record as of the year prior to the year of the initiation of the fraud (or the corresponding year

for the matched control (nonfraud) firm), and 0 otherwise.17 FRUGAL is an indicator variable equal to 1 if

the executive does not own any luxury assets, including a primary residence worth more than twice the

average of the median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of the corporate headquarters, any

additional residences or vacation homes worth more than twice the average home prices in that

15
   Hennes, Leone and Miller (2008) begin with the GAO database of restatements, and identify the subset resulting
from clerical errors. The GAO database excludes restatements that are not due to errors or manipulation.
Specifically, the GAO claims to exclude restatements related to “mergers and acquisitions, discontinued operations,
stock splits, issuance of stock dividends, currency-related issues (for example, converting from Canadian dollars to
U.S. dollars), changes in business segment definitions, changes due to transfers of management, changes made for
presentation purposes, general accounting changes under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP),
litigation settlements, and arithmetic and general bookkeeping errors. As a general rule we also excluded
restatements resulting from accounting policy changes because they did not necessarily reveal previously
undisclosed, economically meaningful data to market participants.”
16
   Our acquisition and use of asset data conforms to all provisions of the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA).
17
    As a sensitivity check, we employ an alternative measure of RECORD that is set to 1 if the executive has any
convictions in his record, regardless of when they occurred. Our results are robust to this alternative.

                                                        13
metropolitan area (as defined by the Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA)), boats greater than 25 feet in

length, and cars with a purchase price greater than $75,000, at any time prior to the fraud initiation year

(or the corresponding year for the matched control firm), and 0 otherwise.

          Table 2 presents the sample distribution of CEO legal records and luxury asset ownership.

(Figures 1 and 2 (3 and 4) graphically portray the frequencies of legal infractions and ownership of assets

by type for the fraud and non-fraud samples (error and nonerror samples)). The measures of CEO type are

significantly different across the fraud and control samples. More CEOs in the fraud sample have records:

specifically, 20% of the fraud firm CEOs have a record, as compared to 4.5% of CEOs of non-fraud firms

(t-test of the difference is significant at .01 level). The total number of legal infractions in the fraud

sample is 38 vs. 9 in the control sample (difference significant at .01 level). These include 12 CEOs with

serious crimes (such as reckless behavior and domestic violence, driving under influence, and felony drug

charges), comprising 11% of CEOs in the fraud sample versus no CEOs with serious crimes in the control

sample.

          CEOs in the fraud sample appear modestly less frugal (67 unfrugal CEOs in the fraud sample vs.

53 in the control sample, difference significant at .01 level). Specifically, 56% of cars worth at least

$75,000 and 58% of boats are owned by CEOs in the fraud sample (both significant at .10 level). Fifty

four percent of expensive homes, (as valued by more than two times the average of median prices within

ten miles of the corporate headquarters), are owned by fraud firm CEOs (not significant).

          The percentages of CEOs with records are generally similar across the error (8%) and control

(7%) samples. However, ownership of luxury goods is significantly (.05 level) more prevalent among

CEOs in the error sample; specifically, 65% of the error firm CEOs own luxury goods vs. 47% of non-

error firm CEOs. As compared to control firm CEOs, a significantly higher percentage of error firm CEOs

possess cars above $75,000 (29% vs. 20%), boats (34% vs. 22%) and houses worth more than twice the




                                                   14
average prices in neighboring zip codes (37% vs. 26%).18 These results are in line with the conjecture of a

relatively “loose” control environment in firms run by unfrugal CEOs.

           We obtain data on firm and governance characteristics of sample firms from several sources.

Firm characteristics and stock return data are obtained from Compustat and CRSP, respectively. We use

governance data from the RiskMetrics database (previously called Investor Responsibility Research

Center (IRRC) database), executive compensation data from ExecuComp, and analyst information from

I/B/E/S.

           We obtain social connections between the CEO and directors from BoardEx of Management

Diagnostics Limited, a private research company specialized in social network data on company officials

of US and European public and private companies. The data contain relational links between directors and

other officials for active companies. Links in the dataset are constructed by cross-referencing employment

history, educational background and professional qualifications.19 To examine the social connections of

independent directors with their CEOs, we consider whether an independent director overlapped with the

CEO in the past for two or more years in at least one of the following: university, military service,

employer. We also consider the director to be socially connected to the CEO if he or she is a member of

one or more clubs (e.g. golf clubs), serves in one or more charities, or is a member of other similar

organizations with the CEO. Appendix Table I presents definitions and data sources for all dependent and

independent variables.



3.2 Descriptive Statistics for Fraud Sample

           Table 3, Panel A presents descriptive statistics for various, board, firm and CEO characteristics

for our matched sample of fraud and nonfraud firms. The variables are measured as of the year before the

18
  Given that the error and control sample have different sizes, we express the descriptives and corresponding figures
for this sample in percentages.
19 One example of a typical entry would be as follows: in the year 2005, Mr. Greene, CEO of Unicorn Inc., was
“connected” to Mr. White, President of ABC Inc. since between 1992 and 1997 they both were employed by and
served on the board of directors of XYZ Inc, respectively as CFO and COO. BoardEx does not depend on business
professionals to volunteer their own data on the above aspects. Instead more than 500 trained analysts gather data on
business professionals.

                                                        15
fraud was initiated (or the corresponding year for the matched control firm). Differences in the mean and

median values for the fraud vs. nonfraud samples are reported as well as their significance levels.

        The CEO has social ties with his outside directors in 61% of fraud firms vs. 39% of control firms

(difference significant at .01 level). The other board characteristics (the proportion of the board that is

independent (%INDEP) and the percentage of outstanding shares of stock held by independent directors

(DIR_SHARES)) do not differ significantly across the fraud and nonfraud samples.

        Turning to firm characteristics, fraud firms are more visible, with significantly higher analyst

following and more press coverage. The F-Score (the output of Model 1 of Dechow, Ge, Larson, and

Sloan (2011)) is significantly higher in the fraud sample, indicating a higher estimated risk of fraud

among these firms. Fraud firms also have higher estimated risk of a material internal control weakness.

Surprisingly, the percentage of fraud firms in the industry (2-digit SIC code) is significantly lower for

fraud firms. And as expected, firm size, market-to-book, Tobin’s Q, and ROA are fairly similar across the

two samples, indicating that the two samples are matched reasonably well on these dimensions.

        Finally, turning to CEO characteristics, CEOs in the fraud sample have more wealth, shorter

tenure, more overconfidence, and more press coverage than the CEOs in the control sample. None of the

other CEO characteristics (age, delta of his stock and option portfolio, perks, and narcissism) are

significantly different across the two sets of firms.

        Table 3, Panel B presents Pearson correlations between our main variables. Briefly, FRAUD is

significantly positively correlated with legal infractions, as measured by RECORD (Pearson correlation

(r) = .09, .01 level), while FRAUD is not significantly correlated with FRUGAL. FRUGAL and RECORD

are negatively correlated (r = -.04, .05 level). As expected, the F-Score is significantly positively

correlated with FRAUD (r = .07, .01 level) and with RECORD (r = .13, .01 level). These correlations

support the hypothesized relation between fraud and CEOs’ records. While FRAUD is significantly

positively correlated with media coverage of the firm (r = .15, .01 level), the latter is not significantly

correlated with RECORD or FRUGAL. Media coverage of the CEO is marginally positively correlated

with FRAUD (r = .05, .10 level), and highly negatively correlated with FRUGAL (r = -.08, .01 level).

                                                        16
3.3 Descriptive Statistics for Error Sample

         Table 3, Panel C presents summary statistics for our error and control samples. All variables in

the error sample are measured as of the year before the error occurred. We match the control firms to

error firms on the basis of the start year of CEO, and measure all variables in each control firm using the

same year used in the matched error firm.20 As expected, IC_WEAKNESS (including that in the first year

of the CEO’s tenure as well as the year before the error occurred), the estimated risk of an internal control

weaknesses associated with a firm’s business model, is significantly higher in the error sample. We

estimate IC_WEAKNESS as the fitted value from a modified version of the model in Doyle, Ge and

McVay (2007) including firm size, firm age, loss, foreign transactions, acquisitions and restructurings.

Each of these individual components are significantly different across the error and control firms (except

for restructurings). Specifically, error firms are smaller, younger, have lesser foreign transactions, lesser

acquisitions, and higher losses. Error firms also have higher average CEO tenure. However, CEO age is

not significantly different across the error and control samples.

         The correlation table (Table 3, Panel D) reveals that ERROR is not significantly correlated with

RECORD, but is significantly negatively correlated with FRUGAL (r = -.034, 0.05 level), consistent with

the hypothesized tighter control environment in firms run by frugal CEOs.21 We examine these relations

below in more depth in a multivariate setting.



4. Executive Type vs. Fraud and the Propensity Channel

4.1 Empirical Analyses of Matched Sample of Fraud and Nonfraud Firms




20
   Our results are robust to the following alternative approaches for measuring all variables for the control sample: 1)
variables are measured as of 2000 which is the median year for the occurrence of errors; 2) variables are measured
as of 2003 which is the 75th percentile year for the occurrence of errors; and 3) variables are measured as of the
latest year for the firm in the sample.
21
   ERROR is negatively correlated with firm size and age and positively correlated with sales growth and
restructuring.

                                                          17
        We test whether the likelihood of fraud varies with CEO type (measured by RECORD and

FRUGAL) using a dynamic hazard model, setting FRAUD equal to 1 for fraud firm-years, and 0 otherwise

(including non-fraud years of the fraud sample firms and all years of the nonfraud sample firms). Our

rationale for choosing the hazard model over a single-period logit model is based on Shumway (2001),

which indicates two shortcomings in multinomial choice models: (1) a sample selection bias that may

arise from using only one, non-randomly selected observation per firm, and (2) a failure to model time-

varying changes in the underlying or baseline risk of an event (such as bankruptcy or fraud). A hazard

model overcomes these methodological concerns by including every available firm-year observation. Our

main “fraud” model appears below:

        FRAUD = α0 + α 1 × RECORD + α2 × FRUGAL + α3 × TOBIN’S_Q + α4 × ROA
        + α5 × %IND_FRAUD +                                                                (1)


The variable %IND_FRAUD (the percentage of firms in the same 2-digit industry that are fraud firms in

the current year) is included to control for the industry related incidence of fraud using a narrower

definition of industry than used to identify the matched control firms. Lagged values of Tobin’s Q and

return on assets are included to control for past firm performance.22

        To test whether the likelihood of being named in fraud (propensity channel) varies by CEO type

(RECORD and FRUGAL), we estimate the following hazard model (“CEO named” model):

        CEO_NAMED = α0 + α 1 × RECORD + α2 × FRUGAL + α3 × TOBIN’S_Q + α4 × ROA
        + α5 × %IND_FRAUD +                                                                (2)


The dependent variable, CEO_NAMED , is equal to 1 in fraud-years for which the CEO is named in the

AAER as being a perpetrator of fraud, and 0 in all other firm-years for all fraud and nonfraud firms. We

expect record holders to have a relatively high propensity to perpetrate fraud (α 1 >0); however, we do not

have strong priors about the relation between FRUGAL and CEO_NAMED (α2).



22
  We repeat the above analysis (and all subsequent analyses) by replacing the indicator variables, RECORD and
FRUGAL with the number of legal infractions and number of luxury assets (houses, cars and boats). Our
(untabulated) results are generally similar to those reported.

                                                    18
        We check the robustness of results from the main models to the inclusion of a variety of

additional control variables. One set of variables attempts to control for the visibility of the firm and the

CEO. A potential concern is that our fraud sample is limited to firms for which the violation of GAAP is

detected and enforced. To the extent fraud detection and/or enforcement procedures (against the firm

and/or specific individual) vary with CEO type, our interpretation of results as evidence of fraudulent

reporting, per se, is problematic. In light of prior research suggesting that the visibility of the firm

increases the likelihood of detection (Miller, 2006), we add several controls for visibility, including press

coverage of the firm, press coverage of the CEO, analyst following, and auditor changes (we only report

the results for press coverage, but the results for RECORD and FRUGAL are similar for the other two

visibility measures).

        We also control for the wealth of the CEO because wealthier CEOs are likely to own more luxury

goods. We include perquisites the CEO receives from the firm in a given year to control for their potential

substitution for a CEO’s ownership of luxury goods. We also include the F-Score, the predicted

probability of misstatements using the primary model developed by Dechow, Ge, Larson and Sloan
                                                                                                23, 24
(2011), to control for additional firm characteristics associated with misstatements.                    Because the

inclusion of each of the additional control variables results in a loss of observations, we report results for

models with and without each of these additional controls.

        Table 4 presents the results of model (1).25 As predicted, we find a significant positive relation

between FRAUD and RECORD (significant at the .01 level in all models). The hazard ratio for RECORD

in the base model (column 1) indicates that the probability of fraud in the next year is higher (in the


23
    Model 1 from Dechow, Ge, Larson and Sloan (2011) includes accruals based on the accruals model developed
by Richardson, Sloan, Soliman and Tuna (2005)), the change in receivables, the change in inventory, %soft assets,
the change in cash sales, the change in ROA, and an indicator variable measuring the issuance of stock and/or debt.
To the extent that the F-Score is based on symptoms of fraudulent reporting (accruals etc.), inclusion of the F-Score
may “throw the baby out with the bath water”. However, a comparison of the results with vs. without the F-Score
reveals that this is not the case.
24
   In untabulated results, we also include control variables for executives’ equity-based incentives to misreport
(DELTA), and opportunities to misreport (board monitoring (%INDEP, SOCIAL, and DIR_SHARES) and probability
of an internal control weakness due to business strategy (IC_WEAKNESS)). Our results are robust to these controls.
25
   Standard errors are clustered by firm in all analyses. As a robustness check, we cluster standard errors in fraud
models by matched pair and find consistent results.

                                                        19
matched sample) by approximately 120% in firms run by CEOs with a legal record relative to firms run

by CEOs with a clean record. In contrast, we do not find a significant relation between FRAUD and

FRUGAL in any of the models in Table 4.

        Table 5, Panel A presents the results of the CEO named model (2), representing our investigation

of the direct involvement of the CEO in fraudulent reporting (propensity channel). The results provide

strong support for our prediction that record holders are more likely to be named for perpetrating fraud

(RECORD is significant at the .01 level in all models). The hazard ratio for RECORD indicates that the

probability that a firm’s CEO is named for perpetrating fraud is higher (in the matched sample) by 647%

in firms run by CEOs with a legal record relative to firms run by CEOs with a clean record. In contrast,

we do not find a significant relation between CEO_NAMED and FRUGAL in any of the models in Table

5. This is not surprising given there is no obvious reason to expect a relation between an executive’s

frugality and his ability to rationalize illegal behavior. Overall the results in Table 5, Panel A support a

link between CEO type and fraudulent reporting through the propensity channel for CEOs with a record,

but not for unfrugal CEOs.



4.2 Additional Analysis of the Propensity Channel: CEO-CFO Pairs of the Fraud Sample

        An important concern in the above models is the potential for omitted correlated variables. For

example, if executives sort to firms in a nonrandom fashion, then the variables measuring CEO type may

be proxying for such omitted firm characteristics. The nonrandom matching of executives with firms

generally makes the identification of “executive effects” difficult. However, the AAERs identify the

executive(s) named as the perpetrator of the fraud, providing a unique setting to identify the relation

between executives’ personal vs. financial reporting behavior while holding constant firm-level factors

(and all other non-executive level factors) for each CEO-CFO pair.




                                                    20
        We consider a subsample of 75 fraud firms where the CEO was named in 48 cases, and the CFO

was named in 37 cases (both executives were named in 30 cases and neither were named in 14 cases).26 In

this subsample of fraud firms, 24% of the CEOs and 17% of the CFOs had legal infractions prior to the

year of fraud initiation. In comparison, 31% and 22% of the named CEOs and CFOs had legal infractions.

Also, 32% of the CEOs and 25% of CFOs in the subsample of fraud firms were classified as unfrugal

prior to the year of fraud initiation, as compared to 33% of named CEOs and 32% of named CFOs. Using

data on the legal infractions and luxury asset ownership for 75 CEOs and 75 CFOs of the subsample of 75

fraud firms (and excluding all nonfraud firms), we test whether the likelihood that a given CEO or CFO is

named in perpetrating the fraud is positively related to his legal infractions or low frugality, controlling

for the press coverage of the given executive during the fraud period.

        The results of the estimated logit regression are reported in Table 5, Panel B. The coefficient on

RECORD is statistically significant at the .05 level. The marginal effect of this coefficient (significant at

.01 level) suggests that the likelihood of a given CEO or CFO at a fraud firm being named (vs. not

named) for perpetrating the fraud is 42% higher if that executive has previously broken the law. We

repeat this analysis by excluding the 14 fraud firms for which neither the CEO nor CFO is named to

assure that results are not driven by omitted correlated variables associated with whether or not any

executives are named. We also find a positive and significant (.05 level) coefficient on RECORD in this

reduced sample, indicating that the likelihood of a given CEO or CFO at a fraud firm being named for

perpetrating the fraud is 25% higher if that executive has a prior record. In contrast, the coefficients on

FRUGAL are insignificant in both models.

        Collectively the results in Tables 4 and 5 are consistent with the propensity channel for record

holder CEOs: we document that fraud risk is elevated in firms run by CEOs with a prior record and such

record holders are significantly more likely than non-record holders to be directly involved in fraud. In




26
   Given the high cost of data on legal infractions and asset ownership, we selected a random subsample of the 109
fraud firms for this analysis of CEO-CFO pairs.

                                                        21
contrast, we find no evidence that the level of an executive’s frugality is associated with his propensity to

commit fraud.



5. CEO Type and the Culture Channel

        Section 5 presents our analysis of the hypothesized “culture channel” through which executive

type (RECORD and FRUGAL) is linked to the probability of material misstatements. We define corporate

culture as the governance and control environment of the company deemed likely to affect financial

reporting risk, and conduct the following series of analyses. In section 5.1 we examine by CEO type how

the likelihood of fraud and of the CEO being named in fraud vary over the tenure of the CEO (Table 6).

In section 5.2, we examine the relation between other insiders being named in fraud and CEO type (Table

7, Panel A), and examine by CEO type how the likelihood of others being named varies over the tenure of

the CEO (Table 7, Panel B). In section 5.3 we examine the relation between reporting errors and CEO

type (Table 8, Panel A), and examine by CEO type how the likelihood of reporting errors varies over the

tenure of the CEO (Table 8, Panel B). And in section 5.4, we examine by CEO type changes in specific

aspects of firms’ control environment over the tenure of the CEO, including the type of CFO appointed

(Table 9, Panel A), and various corporate governance characteristics expected to affect financial reporting

risk (Table 9, Panels B and C). We also examine by CEO type how these changes in corporate culture are

related to changes in the probability of fraud (Table 10).



5.1 Fraud and CEO Named vs. CEO Tenure

        We first examine by CEO type how the probabilities of fraud and of the CEO being named in

fraud vary over the tenure of the CEO. We estimate the following fraud and CEO named models for four

subsamples, namely subsamples of CEOs with records, CEOs without records, frugal CEOs and unfrugal

CEOs:

        FRAUD or CEO_NAMED = α0 + α 1 × TENURE + α2 × TOBIN’S_Q + α3 × ROA
        + α4 × %IND_FRAUD +                                                                (3)


                                                     22
        Table 6 presents these results, along with Z statistics for differences in α1 (coefficient on

TENURE) for the subsamples of CEOs with vs. without a record, and for subsamples of CEOs with high

vs. low frugality. The relation between FRAUD and TENURE is insignificant for both record holder and

non-record holder subsamples, and the difference in α1 between these two subsamples is insignificant.

Similar “nonresults” are reported for the CEO_NAMED model except for a marginally negative relation

between CEO_NAMED and TENURE in the subsample of record holders. The results in Table 6 do not

provide evidence in support of a deterioration in the culture of firms run by record holders (culture

channel).

        In contrast, the results in Table 6 indicate that the relation between FRAUD and TENURE is

negative and significant (at .05 level) for frugal CEOs and positive and significant (at .05 level) for

unfrugal CEOs. The reported hazard ratios imply that the likelihood of fraudulent corporate reporting

declines by 6% per year over the tenure of frugal CEOs and increases by 6% over the tenure of unfrugal

CEOs. The Z statistic of -3.89 suggests that the difference between the two subsamples is significant at

the .01 level. This is consistent with the hypothesized erosion of corporate culture over the tenure of

unfrugal CEOs, both in an absolute sense and relative to frugal CEOs. The probability that the CEO is

named in fraud does not vary significantly over the tenure of frugal or non-frugal CEOs, consistent with

our prior conclusions on the lack of an association between an executive’s frugality and his propensity to

commit fraud.



5.2 Other Insiders Named in Fraud

        We test whether the likelihood that other insiders are named in fraud varies with CEO type by

estimating the following hazard model (“Others named model”):

        OTHERS_NAMED = α0 + α 1 × RECORD + α2 × FRUGAL + α3 × TOBIN’S_Q + α4 × ROA
        + α5 × %IND_FRAUD +                                                             (4a)




                                                   23
The dependent variable, OTHERS_NAMED, equals 1 if insiders other than the CEO were named by the

SEC for perpetrating fraud in a given year, and 0 for all other firm-years in the total sample. We repeat

the above models by including controls for the media coverage and the F-score.

         A potential concern with this model is omitted correlated variables because we are not comparing

executives within a firm (like our analysis of CEO-CFO pairs of fraud firms in Section 4). To identify the

effect of CEO type on the probability that other insiders are named, we reestimate model (4a) using a

seemingly unrelated bivariate probit model (biprobit). This model addresses the concern that the two

outcomes (sorting of CEOs into firms and the occurrence of fraud) have correlated, unobservable

determinants. The biprobit model produces a rho statistic that tests whether the sorting of CEOs by type

into firms biases our misreporting model of interest. We use this model because both our dependent

variable and our endogenous regressor are binary, meaning that IV OLS and IV binary models should not

be used. Nevertheless, we verify the robustness of our results across IV models.27 We use cash as a

proportion of total assets as our instrument for CEO frugality, based on the intuition that cash-rich firms

would prefer to hire CEOs who are more restrained in their spending and place a greater emphasis on

long-term strategic goals when making investment decisions. However, there is likely to be no direct

association between cash assets and other insiders perpetrating fraud, except through the CEO type. The

F-statistic (see Appendix Table II Panel A) indicates that a weak instrument is not a concern in this

analysis.28 Further, the rho statistic from the biprobit model suggests that is is unlikely that correlated

omitted variables are driving our results. Our results are robust across the biprobit and hazard models.29




27
   We present the first stage regression of both the IV and the biprobit models and the supporting statistics in
Appendix Table II, Panel A. The F-statistics corresponding to the IV models further indicate that the instrument
used is appropriate. We were unable to obtain a good instrument for RECORD, and could not conduct a biprobit
analysis for this variable.
28
   Our results are robust to using research and development expense as a proportion of total assets as an instrument
(we us this in subsequent models); however, in this model cash as a proportion of total assets proves to be a stronger
instrument.
29
   We perform analogous robustness checks for the fraud and CEO named analyses above and find similar results.
However, we believe that the CEO-CFO matched pairs analysis reported in Section 4 is our most compelling
identification strategy for the propensity channel.

                                                         24
        We also examine by CEO type how the probability that other insiders are named in fraud varies

over the tenure of the CEO by estimating the following model for four subsamples, namely subsamples of

CEOs with records, CEOs without records, frugal CEOs and unfrugal CEOs:

        OTHERS_NAMED = α0 + α 1 × TENURE + α2 × TOBIN’S_Q + α3 × ROA
        + α4 × %IND_FRAUD +                                                               (4b)


        The results in Table 7, Panels A and B, present results for the Others named models (4a) and (4b).

We report results corresponding to both the hazard and biprobit models in Panel A, but due to the

similarity of the results we discuss only those related to the hazard models.

        The relation between OTHERS_NAMED and RECORD is insignificant in all models in Panel A,

providing no evidence that the risk of other insiders perpetrating fraud increases with RECORD as would

have been expected if CEOs with a record tend to oversee a relatively loose control environment. Further

the results in Panel B indicate that the probability that others are named declines marginally more over the

tenure of CEOs with (vs. without) a record (Z = 1.76, significant at .10 level), opposite to the direction

implied by a relative deterioration in the culture of firms run by record holders.

        In contrast, Table 7, Panel A documents a negative and statistically significant relation between

OTHERS_NAMED and FRUGAL in all models. The hazard ratio for FRUGAL in the base model (.064

reported in column 1) implies that the probability that others are named for perpetrating fraud during the

next year is 94% lower in firms run by frugal (vs. unfrugal) CEOs. This is consistent with the prediction

that frugal CEOs run a relatively “tight ship”. Further, Panel B documents that the probability that others

are named in fraud decreases significantly over the tenure of frugal CEOs (.05 level) and increases

significantly over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs (.10 level). The hazard ratio for TENURE of the frugal

CEOs (.389) implies that the probability that other insiders perpetrate fraud during the next year declines

by about 61% a year over the tenure of frugal CEOs, while the corresponding hazard ratio for unfrugal

CEOs (1.057) implies that the probability that other insiders perpetrate fraud during the next year

increases by about 6% a year over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs. The Z statistic for the difference in tenure

effect for frugal versus unfrugal CEOs (Z = -3.42) is significant (.01 level), consistent with a relative

                                                     25
weakening of the control environment during the reign of unfrugal (vs. frugal) CEOs. Collectively the

others named analyses reported in Table 7, Panels A and B, are consistent with the prediction that

frugality is related to financial reporting risk through the culture channel.



5.3 Reporting Errors

        As further evidence of the relation between CEO type and corporate culture, we test whether the

probability of reporting errors varies by CEO type (model 5a), and how the relation between the

probability of reporting errors and CEO tenure varies by CEO type (model 5b estimated separately by

CEO type):

        ERROR = α0 + α 1 × RECORD + α2 × FRUGAL + α3 × IC_WEAKNESS +                        (5a)


        ERROR = α0 + α 1 × TENURE + α2 × IC_WEAKNESS +                                      (5b)


        The dependent variable, ERROR, is an indicator variable that equals 1 in firm-years containing a

material reporting error (identified by a subsequent restatement), and zero otherwise. IC_WEAKNESS (the

estimated probability of an internal control weakness from a simplified version of the Doyle, Ge and

McVay (2007) model), is included to control for the inherent challenges to firms’ internal control

systems resulting from their business strategy. We estimate two additional versions of the above models,

one using IC_WEAKNESS_START which is the internal control weakness estimated during the first year

of the tenure of the CEO (as a proxy for the strength of the internal control system upon his appointment

as CEO), and the other using the individual components used to estimate the probability of internal

control weakness, namely, firm size, firm age, loss, foreign transactions, acquisitions, sales growth and

restructurings. We re-estimate model (5a) using a biprobit model in which we use R&D expense as a

proportion of total assets as an instrument to control for potential selection of frugal executives into firms

(See Appendix Table II, Panel B, for the first stage results and supporting statistics suggesting the

strength of the instrument used). Our instrument is based on the intuition that firms that have a longer



                                                      26
term focus, such as on growth through innovation, are more likely to hire frugal CEOs. However, there is

likely to be no direct association between R&D expense and errors (except through the executive effect).

        Table 8, Panels A and B present the results of models (5a) and (5b), respectively. In Panel A we

present all three specifications of the hazard and biprobit models. Panel A documents an insignificant

relation between ERROR and RECORD in all models. Further, Panel B documents an insignificant

relation between ERROR and TENURE for subsamples of CEOs with and without records. And the

difference in the relation between ERROR and TENURE across these two subsamples is insignificant.

        In contrast, as predicted Panel A documents a significant negative relation between ERROR and

FRUGAL in all models. The hazard ratio for FRUGAL in the base model (column 1) (0.59) implies that

the probability of a material reporting error during the next year is approximately 41% lower in sample

firms run by frugal (vs. unfrugal) CEOs, consistent with a relatively strong control environment in firms

run by frugal CEOs. Moreover, Panel B documents that the probability of reporting errors decreases

significantly (.10 level) over the tenure of frugal CEOs by 4% per year, while it increases significantly

(.10 level) over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs by 4% a year. The Z statistic (Z = -3.31) is significant at the

.01 level, consistent with the predicted relative increase in reporting risk over the tenure of unfrugal

CEOs.

        Collectively the error analyses reported in Table 8, Panels A and B, are consistent with the

prediction that frugal CEOs run a relatively tight ship, and that there is a significant deterioration in the

control environment over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs relative to frugal CEOs. Consistent with all other

tests above of the culture channel pertaining to FRUGAL, these results support the hypothesis that CEO

frugality is linked to financial reporting risk through the culture channel. And consistent with all other

tests above of the culture channel pertaining to RECORD, the error analyses provide no evidence that

CEOs’ records are related to financial reporting risk through the culture channel.



5.4. Governance and Control Environment



                                                    27
        In our final analyses of the culture channel, we examine whether and how CEO type is associated

with changes in the governance and control environment of their firms.

        We first estimate logit model (6a) to test whether the probability of appointing a CFO with a

record or an unfrugal CFO varies by CEO type:

        CFO_RECORD or CFO_FRUGAL = α0 + α1 × RECORD + α2 × FRUGAL + α3 ×SIZE
        + α4 × ROA + α5× MTB + α6 ×ACQUISITION + α7 × STD_RET + α8 × IND_COMP_CFO +  (6a)



The control variables in model (6a) attempt to capture firm characteristics that might attract unfrugal

CFOs or those with prior records, including firm size, growth, volatility, performance, and past

acquisition intensity. We also include the median industry CFO compensation to control for the potential

tendency for these CFOs to be attracted to higher paying industries.

        Table 9, Panel A reports the results for model (6a). The probability of appointing a CFO with a

record or a frugal CFO is not significantly related to whether or not the CEO has a record (RECORD).

However, the probability of appointing a CFO with a record is significantly lower if the CEO is frugal

(.05 level), and the probability of appointing a frugal CFO is significantly higher if the CEO is also frugal

(.05 level). Given the key role that CFOs play in financial reporting, the appointment of CFOs with a

clean record and high frugality is consistent with the management of a tight control environment. Hence

the documented relations between the CFO appointments and FRUGAL support the prediction that frugal

CEOs oversee a tight control environment relative to unfrugal CEOs, consistent with the culture channel.

        We next examine whether CEO type is associated with changes in our other measures of

corporate culture over the CEO’s tenure. We estimate the following models for each of the corporate

culture variables, including DELTA, IC_WEAKNESS, %INDEP, SOCIAL, and DIR_SHARES:

        CORP CULTURE VARIABLE = α0 + α1 × RECORD + α2 × TENURE
        + α3 × RECORD × TENURE + Controls +                                                (6b)


        CORP CULTURE VARIABLE = α0 + α1 × FRUGAL + α2 × TENURE
        + α3 × FRUGAL × TENURE + Controls +                                                (6c)



                                                    28
         The control variables for each dependent variable are motivated by prior research (Bryan, Hwang,

Klien and Lilien, 2010; Coles, Daniel and Naveen, 2005; Linck, Netter and Yang, 2008; Dey and Liu,

2011).

         Table 9, Panels B and C report the results for models (6b) and (6c), respectively. The results in

Panel B provide no evidence that changes in the corporate culture over the tenure of CEOs is different for

CEOs with vs. without records. In contrast, the results in Panel C indicate that DELTA and SOCIAL

increase significantly (.05 level) and DIR_SHARES decrease significantly (at .10 level) over the tenure of

unfrugal CEOs (captured by the coefficient on TENURE in each model). Further, these changes are

significantly less pronounced over the tenure of frugal CEOs (difference between the two groups captured

by the coefficient on FRUGAL x TENURE in each model). These results are consistent with an increase in

executives’ equity-based incentives to misreport (as measured by high DELTA) and a decrease in board

monitoring intensity (as evidenced by an increase in SOCIAL and a reduction in DIR_SHARES) under the

reign of unfrugal CEOs in both absolute terms, and relative to frugal CEOs. While we cannot infer

whether such changes are “suboptimal”, they are likely to be associated with an increase in financial

reporting risk over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs (in absolute terms and relative to frugal CEOs). (See

discussion of Table 10 below). Our other two measures of the culture, IC_WEAKNESS and %INDEP, do

not vary significantly over the tenure of frugal or unfrugal CEOs.

         Given our evidence of an association between CEO frugality and the control environment, we

attempt to provide further insight into the culture channel by examining the extent to which the fraud vs.

nonfraud years of the fraud sample can be explained by changes in DELTA, SOCIAL, and DIR_SHARES

for the unfrugal and frugal CEOs. We also examine the extent to which fraud vs. nonfraud firm-years for

the matched sample of fraud and nonfraud firms can be explained by DELTA, SOCIAL, DIR_SHARES,

and CFO type (i.e. CFO_RECORD or CFO_FRUGAL). We focus on these measures of the corporate

culture because of their significant changes over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs. We estimate the following

model for corporate culture variables:



                                                    29
        FRAUD = α0 + α1 × FRUGAL + α2 × CORP CULTURE VARIABLE + α3 × FRUGAL × CORP CULTURE
        VARIABLE + α4 × TOBIN’S_Q + α5 × ROA + α6 × %IND_FRAUD +                                   (6d)



        The results reported in the left half of Table 10 indicate that in fraud firms run by unfrugal CEOs,

equity-based incentives of the top executives (DELTA) and social ties between independent directors and

the CEO (SOCIAL) are significantly higher in fraud years that in nonfraud years (α2 significantly > 0 at

.05 and .01 levels, respectively). These effects are significantly less pronounced in fraud firms run by

frugal CEOs (α3 significantly < 0 at .10 and .05 levels, respectively). However, DIR_SHARES is not

significantly different in the fraud vs. nonfraud years of fraud firms run by frugal or unfrugal CEOs.

        The right half of Table 10 reports results based on the matched sample of fraud and nonfraud

firms. In contrast to the results above, DELTA is no longer significantly related to FRAUD in firms run by

unfrugal CEOs (and the interaction between FRUGAL and DELTA is no longer significant). However, in

firms run by unfrugal CEOs, CFO_FRUGAL and DIR_SHARES are significantly negatively related to

FRAUD (.05 level) and (as before) SOCIAL is significantly positively related to FRAUD (.01 level). And

the latter two results are significantly less pronounced in firms run by frugal CEOs. Although we cannot

infer causality, these results do suggest that in firms run by unfrugal CEOs, there is an elevated fraud risk

in firm-years with an unfrugal CFO and weak board monitoring (as measured by high SOCIAL and low

DIR_SHARES).

         The key results presented in this section can be summarized as follows. In firms run by unfrugal

CEOs, fraud is significantly positively related to executives’ equity-based incentives (DELTA) (for

analysis based on fraud firms), the presence of an unfrugal CFO (for analysis on pooled sample), and

weak board monitoring (as measured by high SOCIAL (for both analyses) and low DIR_SHARES (for

analysis based on pooled sample)). Further, all of these “fraud risk factors” increase significantly over

tenure of unfrugal CEOs relative to corresponding changes over the tenure of frugal CEOs. Collectively

these results are consistent with the observed increase in the probabilities of fraud, other insiders being

named in fraud, and reporting errors over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs, and provide support for the


                                                    30
hypothesis that a culture characterized by a relatively loose control environment develops during the

tenure of unfrugal CEOs. In contrast, we find little evidence of the culture channel for CEOs with records.



6. Sensitivity Analyses

         We conduct additional analyses to enhance the interpretation of results. First, we examine

whether our measures of CEO type are capturing characteristics that are distinct from those discussed in

the literature. Second, we examine how CEO type is related to less egregious forms of misreporting to

provide additional assurance that our results on the relation between the risk of material misstatements

and CEO type are not due to SEC detection or enforcement procedures.



6.1 Comparison to Overconfidence, Narcissism and Risk-Seeking

         Our measures of CEO type may be capturing personal attributes that have been discussed in the

literature, including overconfidence, narcissism and risk-seeking (e.g., Malmendier and Tate, 2005; 2008;

Zweigenhaft and Marlowe, 1973; Jorgenson, 1977).30 We examine whether our measures of executive

type are related to these attributes. Data availability limits us to one measure of overconfidence from

Malmendier and Tate (2005), whereby we classify CEOs as overconfident if they are habitual net

acquirers of their firm’s stock.31 We measure narcissism by the area covered by an executive’s signature


30
   Malmendier and Tate (2005) consider three measures of overconfidence. First, they measure CEO overconfidence
based on the optimal timing of option exercises for underdiversified, risk averse CEOs. Briefly, unlike outside
investors, CEOs cannot trade their options and hedge their risks by short selling company stock. Further, their
human capital and reputation are intimately linked to their company’s performance, making them overexposed to
their firm’s idiosyncratic risk. Therefore, in most cases, a risk averse CEO should exercise his/her options given a
sufficiently high stock price. They consider a benchmark for the minimum percentage in the money at which a CEO
should exercise his/her options for a given year after the vesting period. The measure of overconfidence compares
the benchmark prediction to the actual exercise behavior of a CEO. The idea is that a CEO who persistently
exercises options later than suggested by the benchmark is overconfident about his/her ability to keep the company’s
stock price rising. Second, they look at the end of the option’s duration – if a CEO is optimistic enough about his
firm's future performance that he holds options all the way to expiration (typically 10 years), then the CEO is
classified as overconfident. Finally, since underdiversified CEOs should avoid acquiring additional equity, they
classify as overconfident CEOs who habitually increase their holdings of company stock.
31
   We slightly modify their approach to increase the size of our sample. Whereas Melmendier and Tate (2005)
exclude the first five years of a CEO’s tenure and look at whether he is a net acquirer over the next five years, we
exclude the first four years of a CEO’s tenure and look at whether he is a net acquirer over the next four years. This
modification increases the number of CEOs for which we can calculate the measure from 40 to 76.

                                                         31
scaled by the number of letters in the name (hand collected from SEC DEF 14A filings and 10-K reports)

(Zweigenhaft and Marlowe, 1973; Jorgenson, 1977). We measure the risk-seeking nature of CEOs by

examining whether they own motorcycles, and also by the risk-taking activities in their firms as measured

by the research and development, capital expenditures and acquisitions undertaken by these CEOs

(Kothari, Laguerre and Leone, 2002; Coles, Daniel and Naveen,2005; Biddle, Hillary and Verdi, 2009).

We are able to compute the overconfidence measure for 76 firms, the narcissism measure for 70 firms and

risk-seeking measures for our full sample of 218 fraud and nonfraud firms.32

           We find that these measures of CEO overconfidence, narcissism and risk-seeking are not

significantly correlated with our measures of CEO type. Next, we reestimate our main fraud and CEO

named models, including measures of CEO overconfidence, narcissism and risk-seeking as control

variables (not reported for brevity). The main effect of RECORD continues to be positive and significant

and FRUGAL continues to be insignificant. The proxies for CEO narcissism and risk-seeking are not

statistically significant, while CEO overconfidence is significant (at .10 level) in the fraud model.



6.2 CEO Type and Earnings Management

           In our final analysis, we attempt to provide further insight as to whether the observed relation

between fraud and CEO type is driven by SEC detection and enforcement procedures, rather than the

occurrence of misreporting. We investigate the relation between CEO type and proxies for less egregious

forms of earnings management that are not subject to this concern. We conduct this analysis on our

combined sample of fraud and non-fraud firms. We only consider quarters after the CEO in question

assumes his position up until the year that the fraud is initiated (the corresponding year for the matched

non-fraud firm).

           Our primary measure of earnings management is the percentage of the previous 8 quarters that a

firm exactly meets or beats the most recent consensus analysts’ forecast by one cent (MEET_BEAT). Our



32
     We note that a caveat in these analyses is the limited data we have on CEO overconfidence and narcissism.

                                                          32
results are robust to using other proxies for earnings management from prior research, including measures

of accruals quality and discretionary accruals calculated using the modified Jones model (Jones, 1991).33

        We test the association between MEET_BEAT and CEO type using OLS regression and verify

that the results are robust to using an IV model with research and development as a proportion of assets as

our instrument for CEO frugality.34 However, as before we fail to find a good instrument for CEO record.

Table 10 reports the results of this analysis. Consistent with our fraud analysis, we find a significant and

positive coefficient for the RECORD (.05 level or better). In particular, a company run by a CEO with a

record is associated with an increase of 5.56 in the percentage of quarters when it meets or beats the

consensus analysts’ forecast. These results provide additional assurance of a connection between

executives’ prior legal infractions and earnings manipulation. We also find a significant and negative

coefficient on the FRUGAL variable (.10 level), but only for the IV model. An unfrugal CEO is

associated with a decrease by 10.96 in the percentage of quarters when the firm meets or beats the

consensus analysts’ forecast.



7. Summary and Conclusions

        We examine how and why two aspects of top executives’ behavior outside the workplace, legal

infractions and ownership of luxury goods, are related to the likelihood of materially misstated financial

statements. Based on a sample of fraud and matched non-fraud firms, we document that CEOs (and

CFOs) with prior legal infractions have a relatively high propensity to perpetrate fraud (i.e. named in the

fraud), but no evidence that such CEOs are associated with a corporate culture characterized by a

relatively weak control environment.


33
   These measures of earnings management are controversial, including concerns with the potential for correlated
omitted variables and measurement error (see Dechow, Ge and Schrand (2010) for a discussion of the pros and cons
for using these measures). Therefore, our results should be interpreted with these drawbacks in mind. Mindful of the
limitation of empirical proxies, we rely heavily on the established research in our choice of these proxies. We note
that these tests are necessarily joint tests of whether manipulation of reported earnings is associated with CEO type
and the validity of the earnings management proxies.
34
   The results (untabulated) of these earnings management analyses are consistent across the full sample, and the
fraud and non-fraud subsamples.

                                                        33
        In contrast, we find no relation between the frugality of executives (as measured by their

ownership of luxury goods) and their propensity to perpetrate fraud.          However, consistent with a

weakening of the control environment, we find a relative increase in financial reporting risk over the

tenure of unfrugal CEOs as reflected by the probabilities of fraud, others being named in fraud, and

material reporting errors. Further, the increase in fraud risk over the tenure of unfrugal CEOs is related to

changes in several aspects of the corporate culture, including an increase in executives’ equity-based

incentives, a decrease in measures of board monitoring, and the appointment of an unfrugal CFO.

        Our paper is subject to several limitations. First, our sample size is necessarily small and

nonrepresentative of the underlying population with respect to the proportion of firms with fraud and

material reporting errors. Second, our fraud and error samples include only cases of fraudulent and

erroneous reporting that are detected and enforced. While we attempt to address this concern, we cannot

eliminate it. Hence, our interpretation of results as evidence of misreporting per se, is subject to this

important caveat. And third, although our analysis of CEO-CFO pairs of fraud firms and our biprobit

model, in particular, reduce concerns about omitted correlated variables, we cannot completely eliminate

these concerns or infer a causal relation between our measures of CEO type, corporate governance, and

misreporting.

        Subject to these caveats, our research provides evidence that the probability of materially

misstated financial statements varies in an intuitive and intriguing way with executives’ off-the-job

behavior, contributing new insights into financial reporting risk. We also provide new evidence of how

changes in several dimensions of the corporate culture over the tenure of the CEO differ by CEO type.

Our results suggest that our novel measures of executive type (RECORD and FRUGAL) capture

meaningful variation in managerial “style” in a financial reporting context, suggesting that these measures

may be useful in exploring other aspects of corporate behavior and performance.

        In our related research, preliminary results provide further encouragement that RECORD and

FRUGAL capture meaningful differences in executives’ regard for laws and frugality, respectively, as

posited here. These results suggest that the inside trades of executives with (vs. without) prior legal

                                                    34
infractions have a stronger positive relation to future earnings surprises and are more profitable,

consistent with a higher propensity of record holders to trade on inside information. And companies run

by unfrugal CEOs are significantly more likely to engage in large acquisitions, to invest less in long-term

organic growth, to operate assets in place less efficiently, to generate inferior subsequent accounting and

stock return per dollar of corporate investment, and to go bankrupt, suggesting a pattern of low frugality

with regard to the stewardship of corporate resources.

        Our study lays the groundwork for additional future research. For example, is the behavior of

unfrugal (i.e. materialistic) executives more responsive to financial incentive packages? Do the effects of

board monitoring depend on the type of executives being monitored? Does director type “matter”? Are

the prior legal infractions and ownership of luxury goods by politicians related to their stewardship of

taxpayers’ money?




                                                   35
References

Abbot, L., Parker, S., Peters, G., 2004. Audit committee characteristics and restatements. Auditing: A
   Journal of Practice and Theory 23, 69-87.

Adams R., Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 2010. The role of boards of directors in corporate governance: A
   conceptual framework and survey. Journal of Economic Literature 48, 58-107.

Agrawal, A., Chadha, S., 2005. Corporate governance and accounting scandals. The Journal of Law and
   Economics 48, 371-406

Aktas, N., Bodt, E., Bollaert, H., Roll, R., 2011. CEO narcissism and the takeover process: From private
   initiation to deal completion. Unpublished working paper.

Anderson, C., Anthony, R., 1986. The New Corporate Directors: Insights for Board Members and
   Executives. Wiley, New York, NY.

Anderson, S., Lillis, A., 2011. Corporate frugality: Theory, measurement and practice. Forthcoming,
   Contemporary Accounting Research.

Armstrong, C., Jagolinzer, A., Larcker, D., 2010. Chief executive officer equity incentives and accounting
   irregularities. Journal of Accounting Research 48, 225-271.

Bamber, L., Jiang, J., Wang, I., 2010. What’s my style: The influence of top managers on voluntary
   corporate financial disclosure. The Accounting Review 85, 1131- 1162.

Beasley, M., 1996. An empirical analysis of the relation between the board of director composition and
   financial statement fraud. The Accounting Review 71, 443-465.

Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm policies. The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1198

Bhagat, S., Black, B., 1999. The uncertain relation between board composition and firm performance. The
   Business Lawyer 54, 921-963.

Bhagat, S., Bolton, P., 2008. Corporate governance and firm performance. Journal of Corporate Finance
   14, 257-273.

Bhagat, S., Carey, D., Elson, C., 1999. Director ownership, corporate performance and management
   turnover. The Business Lawyer 54, 921-963.

Biddle, G., Hillary, G., Verdi, R., 2009. How does financial reporting quality relate to investment
   efficiency? Journal of Accounting and Economics 48, 112 131.

Blickle, G., Schlegel, A., Fassbender, P., Klein, U., 2006. Some personality correlates of business white
    collar crime. Applied Psychology: An International Review 55, 220-233.

Bryan, S., Hwang, L., Klein, A., Lilien, S., 2010. Outside director compensation: An empirical analysis of
   economic determinants. Unpublished working paper.



                                                   36
Cain, M., McKeon, S., 2010. Sensation seeking and firm risk: Evidence from CEO pilots. Unpublished
   working paper.

Coles, J., Daniel, N., Naveen, L., 2005. Managerial incentives and risk-taking. Journal of Financial
   Economics 79, 431-468.

Core, J., Guay, W., 2002. Estimating the value of employee stock option portfolios and their sensitivites
   to price and volatility. Journal of Accounting Research 40, 613-630.

Davidson, R., 2011. Accounting fraud: Booms, busts and incentives to perform. Unpublished working
   paper.

Dechow, P., Ge, W., Larson, C., Sloan, R., 2011. Predicting material accounting manipulations.
   Contemporary Accounting Research 28, 17-82.

Dechow, P., Ge, W., Schrand, K., 2010. Understanding earnings quality: A review of the proxies, their
   determinants and their consequences. Journal of Accounting and Economics 50, 344-401.

Dechow, P., Sloan, R., Sweeney, A., 1995. Detecting earnings management. The Accounting Review 70,
   193-225.

DeFond, M., Jiambalvo, J., 1991. Incidence and circumstances of accounting rrrors. The Accounting
   Review 66, 643-655.

Dey, A., Liu, X., 2011. Audit committee independence and corporate financial reporting: The role of
   social networks. Unpublished working paper.

DeYong, R., 1996. Some psychological aspects of reduced consumer behavior. Environment and
   Behavior 28, 358-409.

Doyle, J., Ge, W., McVay, S., 2007. Determinants of weaknesses in internal control over financial
   reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics 44, 193-223.

Dyreng, S., Hanlon, M., Maydew, E., 2010. The effects of executives on corporate tax avoidance. The
   Accounting Review 85, 1163-1189.

Erickson, M., Hanlon, M., Maydew, E., 2006. Is there a link between executive equity incentives and
    accounting fraud? Journal of Accounting Research 44, 113-143.

Fama, E., Jensen, M., 1983. Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and Economics 26, 301-
   325.

Farber, D., 2005. Restoring trust after fraud: Does corporate governance matter? The Accounting Review
    80, 539-561.

Fisman, R., Miguel, E., 2007. Corruption, norms, and legal enforcement: Evidence from UN diplomatic
    parking tickets. Journal of Political Economy 115, 1020-1048.

Gendreau, P., Little, T., Goggin, C., 1996. A meta-analysis of the determinants of adult offender
   recidivism. Criminology 34, 575-607.


                                                   37
Gottfredson, M., Hirschi, T., 1990. A General Theory of Crime. Stanford C: Stanford University Press.

Graham, J., Harvey, C., Puri, M., 2010. Managerial attitudes and corporate actions. Unpublished working
   paper.

Hambrick, D., Mason, P., 1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its top managers.
   Academy of Management Review 9, 193-206.

Hennes, K., Leone, A., and Miller, B., 2008. The importance of distinguishing erros from irregularities in
   restatement research: The case of restatements and CEO/CFO turnover. The Accounting Review 83,
   1487-1519.

Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 2003. Boards of directors as an endogenously determined institution: A
   survey of the economic literature. Federal Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 9, 7-26.

Hwang, B., Kim, S., 2009. It pays to have friends. Journal of Financial Economics 93, 138-158.

Johnson, S., Ryan, H., Tian, Y., 2009. Managerial incentives and corporate fraud: The sources of
   incentives matter. Review of Finance 13, 115-145.

Jones, J., 1991. Earnings management during import relief investigations. Journal of Accounting
    Research 29, 193-228.

Jones, G., Kavanagh, M., 1996. An experimental examination of the effects of individual and situational
    factors on unethical behavior interntions in the workplace. Journal of Business Ethics 15, 511-523.

Jorgenson, D., 1977. Signature size and dominance: A brief note. The Journal of Psychology 97, 269-
    270.

Kaplan, S., Klebanov, M., Sorensen, M., 2011. Which CEO characteristics and abilities matter?
   Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Klein, A., 2002. Audit committee, board of director characteristics and earnings management. Journal of
    Accounting and Economics 33, 375-400.

Kothari, S. P., Laguerre, T., Leone, A., 2002. Capitalization versus expensing: Evidence on the
   uncertainty of future earnings from capital expenditures versus R&D outlays. Review of Accounting
   Studies 7, 355-382.

Larcker, D., Richardson, S., Tuna, I., 2007. Corporate governance, accounting outcomes and
    organizational performance. The Accounting Review 82, 963-108.

Lastovicka, J., Bettencourt, L., Hughner, R., Kuntze, R., 1999. Lifestyle of the tight and frugal: Theory
    and evidence. Journal of Consumer Research 26, 85-98.

Linck, J., Netter, J., Yang, T., 2008. The determinants of board structure. Journal of Financial Economics
    87, 308-328.

Liu,C., Yermack, D., 2007. Where are the shareholders’ mansions? CEOs’ home purhcases, stock sales,
    and subsequent company performance. Unpublished working paper.


                                                   38
Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2005. CEO overconfidence and corporate investment. Journal of Finance 60,
   2661-2700.

Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2008. Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market’s
   reaction. Journal of Financial Economics 89, 20-43.

Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2009. Superstar CEOs. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1593-1638.

Mazzini, R., 1989. Cost effectiveness via modifications of organizational culture. AACE International –
   Transactions of the Annual Meeting, J.4.1-J.4.7.

Miller, G., 2006. The press as a watchdog for accounting fraud. Journal of Accounting Research 44,
    1001-1033.

Norton, E., Wang, H., Chunrong, Ai., 2004. Computing interaction effects and standard errors in logit and
   probit models. Stata Journal 4, 154-167.

Richardson, S., Sloan, R., Solimon, M., Tuna, I., 2005. Accrual reliability, earnings persistence, and
   stock prices. Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 437-485.

Roll, R., 1986. The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers. The Journal of Business 59, 197-216.

Schrand, C., Zechman, S., 2011. Executive overconfidence and the slippery slope to financial
   misreporting. Forthcoming, Journal of Accounting and Economics.

Shu, L., Francesca, G., Bazerman, M., 2009. Dishonest deed, clear conscience: Self preservation through
   moral disengagement and motivated forgetting. Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper.

Shumway, T., 2001. Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: A simple hazard model. The Journal of
   Business 74, 101-124.

Zweigenhaft, R., Marlowe, D., 1973. Signature size: Studies in expressive movement. Journal of
   Consulting and Clinical Psychology 40, 469-473.




                                                   39
                                                Table 1, Panel A
                                              Fraud Sample Selection

Total AAERs                                                                                            3148

AAERs not involving accounting fraud and redundant AAERs                                               2298

Total accounting fraud AAERs                                                                            852

Cases of options backdating                                                                             24

Cases of asset/revenue understatement                                                                    4

Number of fraud cases                                                                                   824


Firms without CRSP identifiers                                                                          329


Firms with CRSP identifiers but no data to calculate lagged returns                                     190


Firms without Compustat identifiers/data                                                                34


Number of fraud cases with CRSP & Compustat data                                                        271

Firms without required compensation data on ExecuComp or executive data                                 162
from eFOTT

Final Sample                                                                                            109


Average Duration of Fraud                                                                            2.50 years
Median Duration of Fraud                                                                              2 years
Shortest Case                                                                                        1 quarter
Longest Case                                                                                         13 years
This table describes the selection of the final fraud sample, including the number of fraud firms.




                                                            40
                                          Table 1, Panel B
                           Industry Composition of Fraud and Error Samples

                                                        SAMPLE FRAUD FIRMS                SAMPLE ERROR FIRMS
                                                          NUMBER OBS. (%)                   NUMBER OBS. (%)

Consumer Durables, Nondurables, Wholesale,
Retail and Some Services (Laundries and Repair
Shops)                                                           30 (27%)                          19 (20%)


Manufacturing, Energy and Utilities
                                                                 14 (13%)                          12 (13%)

Business Equipment, Telephone and Television
Transmission                                                     28 (26%)                          20 (21%)

Healthcare, Medical Equipment and Drugs
                                                                  8 (7%)                           16 (17%)

Other – Mines, Construction, Building
Management, Transportation, Hotels, Bus Services,
Entertainment and Finance                                        29 (27%)                          27 (29%)


TOTAL                                                           109 (100%)                        94 (100%)
This table reports the Fama-French industry distribution for our sample fraud and error firms, 1992-2004 for fraud firms
and 1993-2005 for error firms. The fraud firm control sample was matched by industry. The industry distribution for
the error firm control sample is similar to that for the error sample.




                                                          41
                     Figure 1: Legal Infractions by Firm Type
                                 Fraud Firm CEOs        Non‐Fraud Firm CEOs


                                                                                       22




                                                                                                      9
    8


                                 4                              4


                0                         0                            0

Felony Drug Charges           Domestic Violence          Reckless Endangerment              Traffic




                    Figure 2: Asset Ownership by Firm Type
                                 Fraud Firm CEOs        Non‐Fraud Firm CEOs

        83                                                                       82
                                              79
                                                                                               70
                         65
                                                           56




             Car > 75k                        Boat > 25 Feet                     Home > 2x Cost




                                                   42
   Figure 3: Legal Infractions (Percentage) by Firm Type
                                 Error Firm CEOs    Non‐Error Firm CEOs


         7.92%

                              6.98%




                                                                  0.00%                    0.00%

                    Traffic                                               Other Infractions




   Figure 4: Asset Ownership (Percentage) by Firm Type
                                 Error Firm CEOs    Non‐Error Firm CEOs

                                                                                  36.63%
                                         33.66%

28.72%
                                                                                                   26.16%

                                                      22.09%
                 20.35%




    Car > 75k                               Boat > 25 Feet                           Home > 2x Cost




                                                    43
                                                            Table 2
                             Summary of CEO Prior Legal Records and Luxury Asset Ownership Data

                                                           FRAUD                CONTROL NON-                ERROR             CONTROL NON-
                                                           FIRMS                 FRAUD FIRMS                FIRMS              ERROR FIRMS
                                                          (N = 109)                (N = 109)                (N = 94)             (N = 180)
                                                           Number                   Number                     %                    %

Prior Legal Infractions of CEOs
CEOs with Prior Legal Infractions                            22***                       5                    8%                      7%
All Legal Infractions                                        38***                       9                   13%                      8%
CEOs with Serious Legal Infractions
(Domestic violance, reckless behaviors, DUI, drug            12***                       0                    0%                      0%
related charges)
Serious Legal Infractions                                    16***                       0                    0%                      0%

Luxury Asset Ownership of CEOs
Frugal CEOs                                                   42*                       56                  35%**                    53%
Unfrugal CEOs                                                 67*                       53                  65%**                    47%
Cars worth more than $75,000                                  83*                       65                   29%*                    20%
Boats longer than 25 feet                                79*                     56                 34%**                 22%
Homes worth more than twice the average of
                                                         82                      70                 37%**                 26%
median home prices of neighbouring zip codes
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. T tests are conducted for differences in means between the fraud/non-fraud firms
and error/non-error firms.

This table presents the composition of the data on CEOs’ legal infractions and asset ownership for the fraud, non-fraud, error and non-error samples.
We note that while we present the raw numbers of legal infractions and assets for the fraud and non-fraud samples, we percentages (of total firms in
sample) for the error and non-error samples due to different sample sizes.




                                                                        44
                                                                   Table 3, Panel A
                                         Descriptive Statistics for Fraud Firms vs. Matched Control Firms

                                         FRAUD SAMPLE                             MATCHED SAMPLE                           DIFFERENCE
                                MEAN       MEDIAN STD. DEV.              MEAN        MEDIAN    STD. DEV.                 MEAN       MEDIAN
Board Characteristics
% INDEP                          76.68        78.17         11.77         75.10          77.78          13.20             1.58               0.39
SOCIAL                           0.61         1.00          0.49          0.39           0.00           0.49            0.22***            1.00***
DIR_SHARES                       0.17         0.02          0.79          0.14           0.03            0.59             0.03              -0.01
Firm Characteristics
SIZE                             7.05          6.90         2.10           7.09           6.98          1.84              -0.04             -0.08
MTB                              1.70          0.95         2.45           1.47           1.03          1.61              0.23*             -0.08
TOBINS_Q                         2.62          1.89         2.41           2.49           2.04          1.65               0.13            -0.15*
ROA                              0.05          0.04         0.11           0.06           0.04          0.12              -0.01              0.00
ANALYST_FOLL                     15.01        12.00         10.49         12.75          11.00          8.97            2.26***            1.00**
MEDIA_FIRM                        355           85           693           184             80           395              171***             5***
%IND_FRAUD                       0.38          0.19         0.61           0.53           0.25          0.94            -0.15***          -0.06***
FSCORE                           1.88          1.39         2.57           1.44           1.23          1.02            0.44***           0.16***
IC_WEAKNESS                      -0.65        -0.69         0.41          -0.71          -0.74          0.39             0.06**            0.05**
CEO Characteristics
CEO_AGE                          66.35        67.00          7.99         66.92        68.000           8.490             -0.57             -1.00
CEO_DELTA                      2,391,681     209,600      8,648,717     1,351,525      146,328        7,933,319         1,040,156          63,272
WEALTH                           17.00        16.71          1.90         16.58         16.52            1.74            0.42***           0.19***
TENURE                            8.17         7.00          6.14         10.68          9.00            8.02           -2.51***           -2.00**
PERKS                                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                                                           444               0.00
                                  9675         0.00          3438          9231         0.00            45311
OVERCONFIDENCE                    0.76         1.00          0.43          0.64         1.00             0.48            0.12**             0.00
NARCISSISM                       58.63        52.50         31.96         63.75         48.29           44.53             -5.12             4.21
MEDIA_CEO                        13.70        5.00          36.06          9.84         4.00            34.08            3.86**            1.00**
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. T tests (Wilcoxon/Chi-square tests) are conducted for differences in means (medians).




                                                                         45
                                                                      Table 3, Panel B
                                                           Pearson Correlations for Fraud Sample




                                                                                            %IND_FRAUD




                                                                                                           MEDIA_FIRM




                                                                                                                          MEDIA_CEO
                                                                   TOBIN’S_Q
                                      RECORD




                                                                                                                                      WEALTH
                                                  FRUGAL




                                                                                                                                                         FSCORE
                          FRAUD




                                                                                                                                                 PERKS
                                                                                    ROA
FRAUD
RECORD                  0.09***
FRUGAL                    -0.01     -0.04**
TOBIN’S_Q                 0.08*      0.06**     0.06***
ROA                      0.05**       0.00        -0.04          0.36***
%IND_FRAUD                 0.03     0.08***     0.06***            0.01         -0.05**
MEDIA_FIRM              0.15***       0.00         0.03          0.17***          0.05*   0.13***
MEDIA_CEO                 0.05*       -0.04     -0.08***           0.00           0.04    0.14***        0.36***
WEALTH                     0.06      0.07**        0.04          0.28***        0.08***     0.01         0.26***         0.07**
PERKS                      0.05       -0.03       -0.05          -0.08**         -0.06*     0.01         0.20***        0.13***       0.09**
FSCORE                  0.07***     0.13***        0.05          0.09***          -0.03    -0.03           0.03           -0.01         -0.04   -0.04
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level




                                                                               46
                                                                  Table 3, Panel C
                                             Descriptive Statistics for Error Firms vs. Control Firms


                                     ERROR SAMPLE                            CONTROL SAMPLE                               DIFFERENCE
                                MEAN   MEDIAN STD. DEV.                 MEAN    MEDIAN    STD. DEV.                     MEAN       MEDIAN
IC_WEAKNESS                        -0.61       -0.64         0.36         -0.76          -0.80           0.39            0.15***          0.16***
IC_WEAKNESS_START                  -0.41       -0.39         0.44         -0.64          -0.68           0.42            0.23***          0.29***
SIZE                                6.59        6.55         1.43          7.50           7.38           1.87            -0.91***         -0.83***
FIRM_AGE                            2.18        2.08         1.22          2.96           3.09           0.88            -0.78***         -1.01***
LOSS                                0.21        0.00         0.41          0.13           0.00           0.34             0.08***         0.00***
FOREIGN                             0.13        0.00         0.11          0.23           0.00           0.42            -0.10***          0.00***
ACQUISITIONS                        0.05        0.00         0.14          0.07           0.00           0.21             -0.02**            0.00
SALES_GROWTH                        0.33        0.00         0.47          0.24           0.00           0.42             0.09***            0.00
RESTRUCTURE                         0.01        0.00         0.03          0.01           0.00           0.03               0.00             0.00
CEO_AGE                              65          65          9.90           65             63            8.43               0.17             2.00
TENURE                              9.35         7           8.62          8.78            7             7.44              0.57*             0.00
 ***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. T tests (Wilcoxon/Chi-square tests) are conducted for differences in means (medians).




                                                                        47
                                                                          Table 3, Panel D
                                                               Pearson Correlations for Error Sample




                                                                                                                                                              SALES_GROWTH
                                                                                   IC_WEAKNESS_




                                                                                                                                                                             RESTRUCTURE
                                                                    IC_WEAKNESS




                                                                                                                                               ACQUISITION
                                                                                                              FIRM_AGE




                                                                                                                                   FOREIGN
                                          RECORD




                                                      FRUGAL
                            ERROR




                                                                                       START




                                                                                                                          LOSS
                                                                                                    SIZE
ERROR
RECORD                       0.01
FRUGAL                     -0.03**        0.00
IC_WEAKNESS               0.07***      -0.09***         0.01
IC_WEAKNESS_START         0.08***      -0.11***        -0.01       0.62***
SIZE                        -0.04*      0.07***      0.06***      -0.60***        -0.57***
FIRM_AGE                  -0.12***      0.08***        -0.02       -0.2***        -0.62***        0.47***
LOSS                         0.02         -0.01     -0.06***      0.55***          0.29**         -0.17**   -0.07***
FOREIGN                      -0.02      -0.04**     0.08***        0.21***         0.05**         0.17***    0.18***      -0.00
ACQUISITION                  0.03         -0.02       0.04*        0.47***         0.08***        -0.05**    0.06***     0.12**    -0.01
SALES_GROWTH               0.04**         -0.01       0.04*        0.39***         0.13***        -0.07**   -0.15***      -0.01    0.02      0.11***
RESTRUCTURE               0.07***        0.05**       0.05**       0.19***          -0.02          -0.01     0.12***     0.23**   0.08**     0.16***         -0.02
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level




                                                                                   48
                                                                             Table 3 (Cont.)
                                                                              Description

Panel A and Panel C of Table 3 present the mean, median and standard deviations of the board, firm, and CEO characteristics over all sample years for the fraud /
non-fraud samples and the error / non-error samples, respectively. The differences in the variables between the two samples and the significance of t-tests of
differences in means and Wilcoxon/Chi-square tests of differences in medians also are presented. Panel B and Panel D of Table 3 present the Pearson correlations of
some of the main dependent and independent variables for the fraud and error samples respectively (Spearman correlations (unreported) are similar to those reported).

The variables are defined as follows: %INDEP is the proportion of the board that is independent directors; SOCIAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is
socially connected with any of his independent board members via mutual alma maters, military, clubs and social organizations and prior employment; DIR_SHARES
is the median stock-based compensation of the independent directors measured as the total number of shares owned by independent directors as a percentage of total
shares outstanding of the firm; SIZE is the log of market capitalization of the firm; MTB is the market value of equity divided by the book value of equity;
TOBIN’S_Q is the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets; ROA is the prior year’s operating income before depreciation divided by the firm’s
average total assets, adjusted for the industry median; ANALYST_FOLL is the number of analysts issuing forecasts for a firm in the year; MEDIA_FIRM is the
number of articles on the firm in the year; %IND_FRAUD is the number of fraud firms in the firm's 2 digit SIC code divided by the total number of firms in that 2
digit SIC code that year; FSCORE is the output from the predictive model for accounting manipulations reported in Dechow et al. (2011); IC_WEAKNESS is the
fitted score using a modified version of the model in Doyle et al. (2007); CEO_AGE is the age of the CEO; CEO_DELTA is the dollar change in the value of a CEO’s
stock and option portfolio for a 1% change in stock price; WEALTH is the log of the fair value of the CEO’s wealth derived from stock and options from the firm plus
other compensation received over the previous 3 years; TENURE is the number of years the individual has been the CEO of the firm; PERKS is the average value of
all perquisites received by the CEO in the past 3 years; OVERCONFIDENCE is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is a net acquirer of the firm’s stock;
NARCISSISM is the area covered by a CEO’s signature scaled by the number of letters in his name; MEDIA_CEO is the number of articles on the CEO in the year;
FRAUD is a dummy variable that equals 1 in the years a firm committed accounting fraud, and 0 otherwise; RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO
was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; FRUGAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a boat, a
car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more than twice the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate
headquarters, or additional homes worth more than twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0
otherwise; IC_WEAKNESS_START is the fitted score in the first year of a CEO’s tenure using a modified version of the model in Doyle et al. (2007); FIRM_AGE is
the logarithm of the number of years the firm has been on CRSP; LOSS is a dummy variable that equals 1 if net income is negative in the current quarter; FOREIGN
is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the firm has foreign currency transactions; ACQUISITION is the sum of acquisitions over the past two years scaled by the market
capitalization of prior year; SALES_GROWTH is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the industry-adjusted growth in sales over the last year is in the top quintile;
RESTRUCTURE is the sum of restructuring charges over the past two years scaled by the market capitalization of the prior year; ERROR is a dummy variable that
equals 1 for the years a firm had a material clerical error in reported numbers.




                                                                                49
                                            Table 4
                                       FRAUD vs. CEO Type

                                                 DEPENDENT VARIABLE = FRAUD
                                HAZARD         HAZARD   HAZARD     HAZARD                    HAZARD
                                 RATIO          RATIO    RATIO      RATIO                     RATIO
                                   (Z)            (Z)       (Z)        (Z)                      (Z)
RECORD                          2.214***       1.985***  2.59***    1.98***                  2.351***
                                  (4.25)         (3.61)        (4.34)         (3.33)           (3.91)
FRUGAL                             0.913         0.924         0.892          1.059            0.816
                                  (-0.49)       (-0.46)        (-0.57)        (0.28)           (-0.92)
TOBIN’S_Q                         1.044*         0.986         1.015          1.005             1.03
                                  (1.73)        (-0.46)        (0.56)         (0.17)           (1.11)
ROA                                1.014         1.014          1.01          1.018*           1.011
                                  (1.54)         (1.64)        (1.16)         (1.74)           (1.22)
%IND_FRAUD                         1.064         0.981         0.958          1.066            1.058
                                  (0.73)        (-0.17)        (-0.41)        (0.59)           (0.60)
MEDIA_FIRM                                     1.038***
                                                 (4.33)
WEALTH                                                         1.001
                                                               (1.10)
PERKS                                                                        1.056***
                                                                              (4.41)
FSCORE                                                                                        1.064**
                                                                                               (2.24)
PSEUDO R2                           0.09          0.10           0.10           0.12            0.08
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                1,703         1,062          1,141            679            1,095
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; * 10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.



                                                   50
                                                                Table 4 (Cont.)
                                                                 Description


Table 4 presents the results of the hazard models examining the relation between fraud and CEO type (record and frugality).

The variables are defined as follows: FRAUD is a dummy variable that equals1 in the years a firm committed accounting fraud, and 0
otherwise; RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the year of fraud initiation,
0 otherwise; FRUGAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary
residence worth more than twice the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or
additional homes worth more than twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation,
0 otherwise; TOBIN’S_Q is the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets; ROA is the prior year’s operating income before
depreciation divided by the firm’s average total assets, adjusted for the industry median; %IND_FRAUD is the number of fraud firms in the
firm's 2 digit SIC code divided by the total number of firms in that 2 digit SIC code that year; MEDIA_FIRM is the number of articles on
the firm in the year; WEALTH is the log of the fair value of the CEO’s wealth derived from stock and options from the firm plus other
compensation received over the previous 3 years; PERKS is the average value of all perquisites received by the CEO in the past 3 years;
FSCORE is the output from the predictive model for accounting manipulations reported in Dechow et al. (2011).




                                                                   51
Table 5, Panel A: Analysis of Propensity Channel with Matched Sample of Fraud & Nonfraud Firms
                                   CEO_NAMED vs. CEO Type

                                                 DEPENDENT VARIABLE = CEO_NAMED
                                       HAZARD         HAZARD         HAZARD       HAZARD HAZARD
                                        RATIO          RATIO          RATIO        RATIO         RATIO
                                           (Z)             (Z)           (Z)           (Z)           (Z)
         RECORD                        7.471***        8.140***      8.831***      7.131***     6.245***
                                         (6.81)          (7.04)        (6.49)        (5.91)        (5.31)
         FRUGAL                           1.394          1.608         1.327         1.389         1.157
                                         (1.10)          (1.51)        (0.87)        (0.94)        (0.42)
         TOBIN’S_Q                      1.068**          1.035         1.054         1.032         1.045
                                         (2.32)          (1.28)        (1.60)        (1.08)        (1.36)
         ROA                              1.011          1.016         1.007        1.024*         1.011
                                         (0.93)          (1.31)        (0.58)        (1.93)        (0.87)
         %IND_FRAUD                       0.920         0.787*         0.737         0.868         0.849
                                         (-0.55)        (-1.66)       (-1.21)       (-0.59)       (-1.01)
         MEDIA_CEO                                     2.148***
                                                         (4.78)
         WEALTH                                                        1.001
                                                                       (0.64)
         PERKS                                                                     1.088***
                                                                                     (6.62)
         FSCORE                                                                                    1.045
                                                                                                   (1.42)
         PSEUDO R2                         0.46           0.47          0.47          0.42          0.48
         NO. OF OBSERVATIONS              1,703          1,062         1,141          679          1,095
          ***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; * 10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.




                                                       52
                                    Table 5, Panel B:
          Analysis of Propensity Channel with CEO-CFO Pairs of Fraud Firms:
                             NAMED_EXEC vs. CEO Type

                                               DEPENDENT VARIABLE = NAMED_EXEC
                                                                          FIRMS WITH AT LEAST ONE NAMED
                                      75 FRAUD FIRMS
                                                                                      EXECUTIVE
                              COEF.                  MARGINAL                 COEF.           MARGINAL
                                  (Z)                 EFFECTS                    (Z)           EFFECTS
INTERCEPT                     -0.446*                                          0.375
                               (-1.71)                                         (1.03)
RECORD                        1.314**                 0.423***                1.346**           0.25**
                                (2.43)                  (6.05)                 (2.31)            (2.56)
FRUGAL                          0.226                   0.082                   0.605            0.112
                                (0.66)                  (1.08)                 (0.87)            (0.93)
MEDIA_EXEC                     -0.002                  -0.001                  -0.001           -0.001
                               (-0.83)                 (-0.79)                (-0.12)           (-0.12)
PSEUDO R2                                     0.04                                            0.06
NO. OF
                                              150                                              122
EXECUTIVES
NO. OF FIRMS                                 75                                            61
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; * 10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Table 5 Panel A presents the results of the hazard models examining the relation between CEO type (RECORD and
FRUGAL) and his being named by the SEC for perpetrating fraud. Table 5 Panel B presents the results of logit models
examining the relation between the record and frugality variables for the CEOs and CFOs in the fraud sample and
whether or not the executive is named as a perpetrator of the fraud. The first two columns present the log odds ratios
and marginal effects for all fraud firms, and the next two columns present the log odds ratios and marginal effects for
only those fraud firms where at least one executive was named.

The variables are defined as follows: CEO_NAMED/EXEC_NAMED is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO /
executive is named by the SEC for perpetrating the fraud, 0 otherwise; RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a
CEO was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; FRUGAL is a dummy
variable that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more
than twice the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or
additional homes worth more than twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the
year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; TOBIN’S_Q is the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets;
ROA is the prior year’s operating income before depreciation divided by the firm’s average total assets, adjusted for
the industry median; %IND_FRAUD is the number of fraud firms in the firm's 2 digit SIC code divided by the total
number of firms in that 2 digit SIC code that year; MEDIA_CEO/ MEDIA_EXEC is the number of articles on the
CEO/CFO for the year; WEALTH is the log of the fair value of the CEO’s wealth derived from stock and options from
the firm plus other compensation received over the previous 3 years; PERKS is the average value of all perquisites
received by the CEO in the past 3 years; FSCORE is the output from the predictive model for accounting
manipulations reported in Dechow et al. (2011).




                                                     53
                                                    Table 6: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                            FRAUD and CEO_NAMED vs. CEO Tenure by CEO Type

                                            DEPENDENT VARIABLE = FRAUD                                     DEPENDENT VARIABLE = CEO_NAMED
                               RECORD       NO RECORD   FRUGAL      UNFRUGAL                       RECORD NO RECORD       FRUGAL     UNFRUGAL
                               HAZARD        HAZARD     HAZARD       HAZARD                        HAZARD      HAZARD     HAZARD      HAZARD
                                RATIO         RATIO      RATIO        RATIO                         RATIO       RATIO      RATIO       RATIO
                                  (Z)             (Z)        (Z)         (Z)                           (Z)         (Z)        (Z)          (Z)
TENURE                           0.910          0.987    0.941**       1.06**                        0.87*       0.998      0.963        1.051
                                (-1.59)        (-0.61)    (-2.17)      (1.96)                       (-1.81)     (-0.04)    (-1.00)       (0.80)
TOBIN’S_Q                        0.984          1.057      1.034      1.256**                        1.048      1.069*     1.061*      1.295**
                                (-0.22)         (1.81)     (1.24)      (2.74)                        (0.59)      (1.84)     (1.86)       (2.14)
ROA                              1.007          1.015      1.106        0.996                        1.011       1.012      1.007        0.995
                                 (0.21)         (1.52)     (1.30)      (-0.27)                       (0.34)      (0.93)     (0.48)      (-0.33)
%IND_FRAUD                       1.095          1.028      1.099        1.188                         0.99        0.63      1.124        0.919
                                 (0.41)         (0.26)     (0.99)      (0.97)                       (-0.04)     (-1.00)     (0.86)      (-0.20)
Z-STATISTICS:
RECORD  NO RECORD                         1.08                                                               -0.06
                                                                           -3.89***                                                          -2.10**
FRUGAL  UNFRUGAL
PSEUDO R2                         0.02          0.07           0.07               0.25                0.48             0.11           0.10             0.25
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS               206          1,497           906                797                 206             1,497           906              797
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Table 6 presents the results for hazard models examining the relation between CEO tenure and fraud for the four CEO type subsamples. The variables are defined as
follows: FRAUD is a dummy variable that equals 1 in the years a firm committed accounting fraud, and 0 otherwise; RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a
CEO was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; FRUGAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a
boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more than twice the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate
headquarters, or additional homes worth more than twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0
otherwise; TENURE is the number of years the individual has been the CEO of the firm; TOBIN’S_Q is the market value of assets to the book value of assets; ROA is
the prior year’s operating income before depreciation divided by the firm’s average total assets, adjusted for the industry median; %IND_FRAUD is the number of
fraud firms in the firm's 2 digit SIC code divided by the total number of firms in that 2 digit SIC code that year.




                                                                               54
                                  Table 7, Panel A: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                       OTHERS_NAMED vs. CEO Type

                                                        DEPENDENT VARIABLE = OTHERS_NAMED
                                        HAZARD         BIPROB   HAZARD    BIPROB    HAZARD                      BIPROB

                                        HAZARD                       HAZARD                      HAZARD
                                                        COEF.                        COEF.                       COEF.
                                         RATIO                        RATIO                       RATIO
                                                         (Z)                          (Z)                         (Z)
                                            (Z)                          (Z)                         (Z)
RECORD                                    0.564         -3.809         0.451         -0.317         0.878         -0.074
                                         (-0.94)        (0.01)        (-1.38)        (-1.00)       (-0.23)       (-0.23)
FRUGAL                                  0.064***       -2.054**      0.073***       -1.174**      0.099**        -1.021*
                                         (-3.27)        (-2.04)       (-3.26)        (-2.26)      (-2.73)        (-1.90)
TOBIN’S_Q                                1.120*          0.048        1.094*          0.042         1.076         0.037
                                          (1.97)        (0.56)         (1.68)         (1.07)       (1.19)         (0.97)
ROA                                       1.001         -0.007         0.996         -0.003         1.002         -0.001
                                          (0.03)        (-0.79)       (-0.28)        (-0.31)       (0.18)        (-0.09)
%IND_FRAUD                                1.252          0.087         1.364          0.141         1.193         0.090
                                          (1.36)        (0.78)         (1.44)         (1.00)       (0.86)         (0.68)
MEDIA_FIRM                                                             0.958         -0.014
                                                                      (-0.86)        (-0.67)
FSCORE                                                                                             1.128          0.033
                                                                                                   (0.69)         (0.70)
RHO STATISTIC                                             0.80                        0.076                       0.061
CHI SQUARE                                                0.70                        0.03                         0.02
P-VALUE                                                   0.40                        0.86                         0.88
PSEUDO R2                                   0.55                        0.52                       0.47
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                         1,703        1,661         1,062          1,062        1,095          1,060
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Table 7, Panel A presents the results of the hazard and bivariate probit models examining the relation between CEO type and
insiders other than the CEO being named by the SEC for perpetrating the fraud.




                                                            55
                                                      Table 7, Panel B: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                                     OTHERS_NAMED vs. CEO Tenure by CEO Type

                                                                                        DEPENDENT VARIABLE = OTHERS_NAMED
                                                               RECORD                  NO RECORD        FRUGAL            UNFRUGAL
                                                             HAZARD RATIO             HAZARD RATIO   HAZARD RATIO        HAZARD RATIO
                                                                   (Z)                      (Z)              (Z)               (Z)
TENURE                                                            0.908                    0.976         0.389**             1.057*
                                                                 (-1.54)                  (-0.48)        (-2.33)             (1.84)
TOBIN’S_Q                                                         0.257                    1.051           0.812             1.202
                                                                 (-1.51)                  (1.00)          (-0.73)            (1.54)
ROA                                                               1.062                    1.009           0.974             1.001
                                                                 (0.57)                   (0.73)          (-1.14)            (0.03)
%IND_FRAUD                                                        0.742                    1.178           2.396             1.288
                                                                 (-0.90)                  (0.80)           (1.43)            (1.11)
Z-STATISTICS:
RECORD  NO RECORD                                                          1.76*
                                                                                                                                         -3.42***
FRUGAL  UNFRUGAL
PSEUDO R2                                                      0.23                    0.24                            0.59                           0.40
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                                            206                    1,497                            906                            797
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Table 7, Panel B presents the results for hazard models examining the relation between CEO tenure and insiders other than the CEO being named by the SEC for
perpetrating the fraud for the four CEO type subsamples. The variables are defined as follows: OTHERS_NAMED is a dummy variable that equals 1 if at least one
individual other than the CEO is named in the AAER as being a perpetrator of the accounting fraud, 0 otherwise; RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO
was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; FRUGAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a boat, a car
worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more than twice the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or
additional homes worth more than twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; TOBIN’S_Q is the
market value of assets divided by the book value of assets; ROA is the prior year’s operating income before depreciation divided by the firm’s average total assets, adjusted
for the industry median; %IND_FRAUD is the number of fraud firms in the firm's 2 digit SIC code divided by the total number of firms in that 2 digit SIC code that year;
MEDIA_FIRM is the number of articles on the firm in the year; FSCORE is the output from the predictive model for accounting manipulations reported in Dechow et al.
(2011); TENURE is the number of years the individual has been the CEO of the firm.




                                                                                    56
                             Table 8, Panel A: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                        ERROR vs. CEO Type

                                                 DEPENDENT VARIABLE = ERROR
                            HAZARD           BIPROB    HAZARD    BIPROB   HAZARD                    BIPROB

                            HAZARD                            HAZARD                    HAZARD
                                              COEF.                         COEF.                    COEF.
                             RATIO                             RATIO                     RATIO
                                               (Z)                           (Z)                      (Z)
                               (Z)                               (Z)                       (Z)
RECORD                         1.791           0.294           1.237         0.164        1.219       0.163
                               (1.55)          (1.54)          (0.58)        (0.91)       (0.49)     (0.81)
FRUGAL                        0.590**         -1.825**        0.617**       -1.624*      0.618**    -0.678**
                              (-2.22)          (-2.11)         (-2.23)      (-1.85)       (-2.15)    (-2.04)
IC_WEAKNESS_START            2.519***         0.396***
                               (3.75)          (3.09)
IC_WEAKNESS                                                   1.947***      0.255*
                                                               (3.54)        (1.74)
SIZE                                                                                      1.102       0.007
                                                                                          (1.37)     (0.15)
FIRM_AGE                                                                                0.485***    -0.246***
                                                                                          (-5.58)    (-2.96)
LOSS                                                                                      1.216      -0.216
                                                                                          (0.65)     (-1.00)
FOREIGN                                                                                   0.708*     -0.054
                                                                                          (-1.82)    (-0.33)
ACQUISITION                                                                               1.170       0.246
                                                                                          (0.28)     (1.04)
SALES_GROWTH                                                                              1.085      0.245*
                                                                                          (0.33)     (1.72)
RESTRUCTURE                                                                               28.975      1.671
                                                                                          (0.91)     (0.71)
RHO STATISTIC                                   0.87                         0.831                    0.362
CHI SQUARE                                      2.16                          2.2                     0.49
P-VALUE                                         0.14                          0.14                    0.49
PSEUDO R2                      0.05                             0.15                       0.22
NO. OF
                               2,082           2,038           2,176         2,038        2,176       2,038
OBSERVATIONS
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.




                                                         57
                                            Table 8, Panel B: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                              ERROR vs. CEO Tenure by CEO Type

                                                                            DEPENDENT VARIABLE = ERROR
                                               RECORD                 NO RECORD                 FRUGAL                    UNFRUGAL
                                             HAZARD RATIO            HAZARD RATIO             HAZARD RATIO               HAZARD RATIO
                                                  (Z)                     (Z)                      (Z)                        (Z)
TENURE                                             0.892                    1.029                   0.962*                     1.041*
                                                   (-1.33)                  (1.48)                  (-1.74)                    (1.77)
IC_WEAKNESS                                        0.837                  1.908***                 1.806**                     2.122*
                                                (-0.12)                 (3.43)                 (2.71)                          (1.87)
Z-STATISTICS:
RECORD  NO RECORD                                             0.02
                                                                                                                   -3.31***
FRUGAL  UNFRUGAL
PSEUDO R2                                         0.05                   0.08                   0.05                            0.18
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                               167                   2,009                  1,285                            891
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Table 8, Panel A presents the results for hazard and bivariate probit models examining the relation between CEO type and errors. Table 8, Panel B
presents the results for hazard models examining the relation between reporting errors and CEO tenure for the four CEO type subsamples.

The variables are defined as follows: ERROR is a dummy variable that equals 1 for the years a firm had a material error in reported numbers, 0
otherwise; RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0
otherwise; FRUGAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth
more than twice the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or additional homes worth more
than twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; IC_WEAKNESS/
IC_WEAKNESS_START is the fitted score using a modified version of the model in Doyle et al. (2007) for the current period or in the first year of
tenure of the CEO; SIZE is the log of the market capitalization of the firm; FIRM_AGE is the logarithm of the number of years the firm has been on
CRSP; LOSS is a dummy variable that equals 1 if net income is negative in the current quarter; FOREIGN is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the
firm has foreign currency transactions; ACQUISITION is the sum of acquisitions over the past two years scaled by the market capitalization of prior
year; SALES_GROWTH is a dummy variable that euals 1 if the industry-adjusted growth in sales over the last year is in the top quintile;
RESTRUCTURE is the sum of restructuring charges over the past two years scaled by the market capitalization of the prior year.




                                                                       58
                           Table 9, Panel A: Analysis of Culture Channel
                           Appointment of the CFO Type vs. CEO Type

                              DEPENDENT VARIABLE =                          DEPENDENT VARIABLE =
                                    CFO_RECORD                                      CFO_FRUGAL
                            COEF.           MARGINAL                        COEF.           MARGINAL
                              (Z)            EFFECTS                           (Z)           EFFECTS
INTERCEPT                  -4.405**                                          2.102*
                            (-2.51)                                          (1.80)
RECORD                       1.065              0.096                        0.173               0.028
                            (1.34)              (1.39)                       (0.27)              (0.27)
FRUGAL                     -0.797**           -0.061**                     1.011**            0.165**
                            (-2.24)            (-2.25)                       (2.31)              (2.47)
SIZE                         0.142              0.011                      -0.278**           -0.045**
                            (0.78)              (0.78)                      (-2.07)             (-2.18)
ROA                         0.052*             0.004*                        0.005               0.001
                            (1.98)              (1.99)                       (0.24)              (0.24)
MTB                          0.014              0.001                        0.298               0.049
                            (0.13)              (0.13)                       (1.53)              (1.56)
ACQUISITION                  3.230              0.245                      -4.202**           -0.686**
                            (1.56)              (1.58)                      (-2.02)             (-2.14)
STD_RET                      1.565              0.119                       -6.182*            -1.009*
                            (0.31)              (0.31)                      (-1.70)             (-1.77)
IND_COMP_CFO                 0.002              0.001                        0.001               0.002
                            (0.18)              (0.18)                       (0.99)              (1.00)
PSEUDO R2                              0.20                                            0.15
NO. OF
                                       137                                              137
OBSERVATIONS
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level.

Table 9, Panel A presents the results of logit models that examine the likelihood of hiring a CFO with a record or
an unfrugal CFO as a function of CEO type. The first two columns present the log odds ratios and marginal
effects for CFO record, and the next two columns present the log odds ratios and marginal effects for CFO
frugality.




                                                       59
                                        Table 9, Panel B: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                    Corporate Culture vs. Tenure by CEO Type (RECORD)

                                                            DELTA         IC_WEAKNESS      %INDEP         SOCIAL         DIR_SHARES
                                                            COEF.             COEF.         COEF.          COEF.            COEF.
                                                             (T)               (Z)           (T)            (Z)              (T)
INTERCEPT                                                  -3.607***        -0.685***      71.672***         0.116          0.618***
                                                             (-3.81)         (-20.39)       (14.41)         (0.85)            (4.54)
RECORD                                                        0.721           -0.010         -4.369          0.412             0.056
                                                              (0.99)          (-0.13)        (-0.99)        (1.50)            (0.62)
TENURE                                                       0.075*            0.000       -0.404***         0.005            -0.001
                                                              (1.78)          (0.01)         (-3.43)        (0.95)            (-0.43)
RECORD × TENURE                                              -0.054           -0.002          0.005         -0.008            -0.006
                                                             (-1.20)          (-0.38)         (0.01)        (-0.51)           (-1.22)
SIZE                                                       0.400***                           0.307        0.041**          -0.068***
                                                              (4.02)                          (0.58)         (2.17)           (-4.55)
MTB                                                         0.127**                           0.099         -0.010          0.022***
                                                              (2.40)                          (0.33)        (-0.60)           (3.09)
LEVERAGE                                                     -0.005                                                          -0.001**
                                                             (-0.89)                                                          (-2.21)
STD_RET                                                      3.342*                        -24.735**       -0.246
                                                              (1.86)                         (-2.55)       (-0.62)
R&D                                                                                          0.001*
                                                                                             (1.85)
CHI-SQUARE: TENURE + RECORD x TENURE ≠ 0                     0.35              0.19           0.66          0.03               1.87
ADJUSTED R2 / PSEUDO R2                                      0.19             0.01            0.07          0.08               0.05
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                                          1,828            2,893           1,508         1,586             1,466
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Interactions for logit models are calculated
using the Norton, Wang, and Ai (2004) adjustment.




                                                                     60
                                        Table 9, Panel C: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                    Corporate Culture vs. Tenure by CEO Type (FRUGAL)

                                                            DELTA         IC_WEAKNESS      %INDEP         SOCIAL         DIR_SHARES
                                                            COEF.             COEF.         COEF.          COEF.            COEF.
                                                             (T)               (Z)           (T)            (Z)              (T)
INTERCEPT                                                  -3.254***        -0.664***      69.024***      -1.403**          0.584***
                                                             (-3.69)         (-12.16)       (13.55)        (-2.18)            (5.01)
FRUGAL                                                       -0.462           -0.041          2.937         -0.158             0.071
                                                             (-1.35)          (-0.65)        (1.14)        (-0.34)            (1.61)
TENURE                                                      0.042**           -0.001         -0.234       0.051**            -0.020*
                                                              (2.02)          (-0.20)        (-1.29)        (2.11)            (-1.82)
FRUGAL × TENURE                                             -0.027*            0.001         -0.284       -0.036**            0.011*
                                                             (-1.74)          (0.27)         (-1.19)       (-2.01)            (1.70)
SIZE                                                       0.396***                           0.342        0.174**          -0.069***
                                                              (4.09)                          (0.66)        (2.06)            (-4.60)
MTB                                                         0.128**                           0.053         -0.008          0.022***
                                                              (2.41)                          (0.18)        (-0.12)           (3.15)
LEVERAGE                                                     -0.004                                                           -0.001
                                                             (-0.56)                                                          (-1.47)
STD_RET                                                      3.374*                         -23.71**       -1.564
                                                              (1.83)                         (-2.45)       (-0.84)
R&D                                                                                          0.002*
                                                                                             (1.83)
F-STAT / CHI-SQ: TENURE + FRUGAL x TENURE ≠ 0                2.60*             0.03           1.95          0.68               0.04
ADJUSTED R2 / PSEUDO R2                                      0.19             0.02            0.06          0.09               0.05
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                                          1,828            2,893           1,508         1,586             1,466
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Interactions for logit models are calculated
using the Norton, Wang, and Ai (2004) adjustment.




                                                                     61
                                                                 Table 9 (Cont.)
                                                                  Description

Table 9, Panels B and C present the results of OLS and logit (Social) models that examine changes in corporate culture as a function of CEO record
(Panel B) and frugality (Panel C). The models include all firms – fraud, error, control – with available data up to year the fraud began (fraud firms),
the error year (error firms) and 2005 (our last year with errors) for control firms.

The variables are defined as follows: DELTA is the dollar change in the value of the CEO’s stock and option portfolio for a 1% change in stock price;
CFO_RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CFO was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the fraud initiation year, 0 otherwise;
CFO_FRUGAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CFO does not own a boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more
than twice the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or additional homes worth more than
twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; IC_WEAKNESS is the fitted
score using a modified version of the model in Doyle et al (2007); %INDEP is the proportion of the board that is independent directors; SOCIAL is a
dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is socially connected with any of his independent board members via mutual alma maters, military, clubs
and social organizations and prior employment; DIR_SHARES is the median stock-based compensation of the independent directors measured as the
total number of shares owned by independent directors as a percentage of total shares outstanding of the firm;); TOBIN’S_Q is the market value of
assets to the book value of assets; ROA is the prior year’s operating income before depreciation divided by the firm’s average total assets, adjusted
for the industry median; %IND_FRAUD is the number of fraud firms in the firm's 2 digit SIC code divided by the total number of firms in that 2
digit SIC code that year; SIZE is the log of the market capitalization of the firm; MTB is the market value of equity divided by the book value of
equity; ACQUISITION is the sum of acquisitions over the past two years scaled by the market capitalization of prior year; STD_RET is the standard
deviation of monthly stock returns calculated over the year prior to the initiation of fraud (or the corresponding year for the control firm);
IND_COMP_CFO is the median 2-digit SIC code industry total compensation received by CFOs; LEVERAGE is the total debt divided by the book
value of equity; R&D is the total research and development expense scaled by total assets.




                                                                         62
                                      Table 10: Analysis of Culture Channel
                                    FRAUD vs. Corporate Culture by CEO Type

                                                     DEPENDENT VARIABLE = FRAUD
                                 FRAUD FIRMS ONLY                        FRAUD AND NON-FRAUD FIRMS
                      HAZARD         HAZARD         HAZARD     HAZARD       HAZARD      HAZARD       HAZARD
                       RATIO          RATIO          RATIO      RATIO        RATIO       RATIO        RATIO
                        (Z)             (Z)            (Z)        (Z)          (Z)         (Z)          (Z)
FRUGAL                 1.130           1.291         0.954       0.829         0.738      1.544       0.839
                       (0.67)          (0.84)        (-0.27)     (-0.85)      (-0.79)     (1.23)      (-0.80)
DELTA                 1.039**                                    1.084
                       (2.31)                                    (1.47)
DELTA x FRUGAL         0.981*                                    0.980
                       (-1.72)                                   (-0.92)
CFO_RECORD                                                                     1.373
                                                                               (1.02)
CFO_RECORD x FRUGAL                                                            1.074
                                                                               (0.11)
CFO_FRUGAL                                                                    0.578**
                                                                               (-2.08)
CFO_FRUGAL x FRUGAL                                                             1.526
                                                                               (0.88)
SOCIAL                                1.474***                                           2.638***
                                        (2.73)                                             (3.16)
SOCIAL x FRUGAL                        0.729**                                            0.325**
                                       (-2.22)                                            (-2.49)
DIR_SHARES                                            1.118                                          0.923**
                                                     (0.54)                                          (-2.05)
DIR_SHARES x FRUGAL                                   0.982                                          1.044*
                                                     (-0.34)                                          (1.81)




                                                       63
                                                                         Table 10 (Cont.)

                                                                          DEPENDENT VARIABLE = FRAUD
                                              FRAUD FIRMS ONLY                                      FRAUD AND NON-FRAUD FIRMS
                                  HAZARD            HAZARD              HAZARD             HAZARD      HAZARD      HAZARD                                 HAZARD
                                   RATIO              RATIO              RATIO              RATIO       RATIO       RATIO                                  RATIO
                                      (Z)                 (Z)                (Z)               (Z)         (Z)         (Z)                                    (Z)
TOBIN’S_Q                           0.982               0.975              0.975             1.031      1.058*      1.068*                                  1.034
                                   (-0.69)             (-0.64)            (-1.03)            (1.19)      (1.77)      (1.91)                                 (1.20)
ROA                                1.014*             1.027**            1.016**             1.007       1.010       1.012                                  1.004
                                    (1.66)              (2.61)             (2.01)            (0.84)      (1.15)      (1.31)                                 (0.50)
%IND_FRAUD                          1.126             1.324**            1.189**             1.029       1.177      1.252*                                  1.112
                                    (1.41)              (2.76)             (2.85)            (0.27)      (1.43)      (1.94)                                 (0.78)
PSEUDO R2                            0.03                0.09               0.05              0.04        0.08        0.13                                   0.03
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                  357                 526                303              1,139       1,152        931                                   1,378
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Table 10 presents the results of the hazard models examining the relation between fraud and aspects of the corporate culture that change during the tenure of unfrugal
CEOs. The first three columns present results using the fraud versus non-fraud years of the fraud firms only, while the next three columns present results using all
firms, i.e., the fraud and the non-fraud firms.
The variables are defined as follows: FRAUD is a dummy variable that equals 1 in the years a firm committed accounting fraud, and 0 otherwise; FRUGAL is a
dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more than twice the average of median home
prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or additional homes worth more than twice the average home price in the corresponding
metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; DELTA is the dollar change in the value of the CEO’s stock and option portfolio for a 1% change in
stock price; CFO_RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CFO was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the fraud initiation year, 0 otherwise;
CFO_FRUGAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CFO does not own a boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more than twice the
average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or additional homes worth twice the average home price in the
corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; SOCIAL is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is socially connected with any
of his independent board members mutual alma maters, military, clubs and social organizations and prior employment; DIR_SHARES is the median stock-based
compensation of the independent directors measured as the total number of shares owned by independent directors as a percentage of total shares outstanding of the
firm;); TOBIN’S_Q is the market value of assets to the book value of assets; ROA is the prior year’s operating income before depreciation divided by the firm’s
average total assets, adjusted for the industry median; %IND_FRAUD is the number of fraud firms in the firm's 2 digit SIC code divided by the total number of firms
in that 2 digit SIC code that year.




                                                                                  64
                                                    Table 11
                                         Earnings Management vs. CEO Type

                                         DEPENDENT VARIABLE = MEET_BEAT
                                                          IV                        IV
                                OLS
                                                      First Stage              Second Stage
                               COEF.                    COEF.                     COEF.
                                 (T)                      (T)                       (T)
INTERCEPT                     28.738***                0.251***                  30.59***
                                (4.87)                   (6.93)                   (4.66)
RECORD                         5.567**                   0.020                   5.752***
                                (1.99)                   (0.94)                   (6.03)
FRUGAL                          -2.338                                           -10.964*
                               (-1.14)                                            (-1.74)
ROA                             -0.066                   0.003*                   -0.023
                               (-0.28)                   (1.77)                   (-0.25)
SIZE                           -1.437**                0.023***                 -1.213***
                               (-2.10)                   (5.99)                   (-5.11)
MTB                            -0.004**                  -0.001                  -0.005**
                               (-8.56)                   (-1.19)                  (-2.47)
CURRENT_ASSET                 18.483***                0.177***                 20.512***
                                (3.96)                   (6.03)                   (10.58)
NET_INCOME                      0.001                    0.001                    0.001
                                (1.62)                   (0.12)                   (1.15)
LOSS (t-1)                    -4.732***                  0.025                  -4.409***
                               (-5.06)                   (1.30)                   (-5.05)
LOSS (t-2)                    -4.459***                  0.004                  -4.347***
                               (-7.22)                   (0.22)                   (-5.18)
LOSS (t-3)                    -4.793***                  -0.006                 -4.749***
                               (-7.76)                   (-0.29)                  (-5.67)
LOSS (t-4)                    -5.275***                  -0.014                 -5.311***
                               (-6.78)                   (-0.77)                  (-6.44)
R&D                                                    2.228***
                                                         (7.03)
F-STATISTIC                                              49.35
ADJUSTED R2                       0.10                     0.02                     0.06
NO. OF                                                                             7,462
                                 7,462                    7,462
OBSERVATIONS
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.




                                               65
                                                 Table 11 (Cont.)
                                                   Description

Table 11 presents the OLS and IV regression results examining the relation between CEO type and earnings
management. The instrument for frugality used in the IV model is research and development expense as a proportion of
total assets.

The variables are defined as follows: MEET_BEAT is the percentage of the prior 8 quarters when the firm met or beat
the most recent consensus analysts’ forecast by a small amount; RECORD is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO
was convicted of any legal infractions prior to the year of fraud initiation, 0 otherwise; FRUGAL is a dummy variable
that equals 1 if a CEO does not own a boat, a car worth more than $75,000, a primary residence worth more than twice
the average of median home prices in the zip codes within ten miles of his corporate headquarters, or additional homes
worth more than twice the average home price in the corresponding metropolitan area prior to the year of fraud
initiation, 0 otherwise; ROA is the prior year’s operating income before depreciation divided by the firm’s average total
assets, adjusted for the industry median; SIZE is the log of market capitalization of the firm; MTB is the market value
of equity divided by the book value of equity; CURRENT_ASSET is the current assets as a proportion of total assets;
NET_INCOME is the seasonally adjusted income before extraordinary items; LOSS (t-q) is a dummy variable that
equals 1 if net income is negative in the previous q quarter; R&D is research and development expenses as a proportion
of total assets.




                                                          66
                                               Appendix Table I
                                     Definition of Variables and Data Sources

Category         Definition of Variable           Measurement                                          Data Source
                 (Name)
Board                                             The proportion of the board that is independent.     IRRC      plus  hand
                 Board independence.
Monitoring                                        An independent director is defined as a director     collection from SEC
                 (%INDEP)
Variables                                         who is not an employee of the firm, does not         DEF 14A filings
                                                  have any business transactions with the firm,
                                                  has no family ties with the employees of the
                                                  firm and has no other interlocking relationships
                                                  with the firm.
                 Social connections between       A dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is         BoardEx
                 CEO and director. (SOCIAL)       socially connected to any of the independent
                                                  directors on the board. Social connections
                                                  between CEOs and directors include mutual
                                                  alma maters, worked in the same company/
                                                  companies in the past, served in the military
                                                  together, are currently members of the same
                                                  clubs as the CEO, serve in the same charitable
                                                  or     belong     to     other    non-professional
                                                  organizations as the CEO.
                 The stock-based compensation     The median number of shares of stock for             IRRC      plus  hand
                 of a director. (DIR_SHARES)      independent directors as a proportion of total       collection from SEC
                                                  outstanding shares of the firm.                      DEF 14A filings
Firm Variables   Accounting fraud.                A dummy variable that equals 1 in the years a        SEC AAERs
                 (FRAUD)                          firm committed accounting fraud and had an
                                                  AAER issued against it by the SEC.
                 Accounting errors.               A dummy variable that equals 1 for the years a       Audit Analytics
                 (ERRORS)                         firm had a material clerical error in reported
                                                  numbers and had to issue a restatement due to
                                                  this error.
                 Firm size. (SIZE)                The logarithm of the market capitalization of        Compustat
                                                  the firm as of the year prior to the initiation of
                                                  fraud (or the corresponding year for the control
                                                  firm).
                 Growth opportunities. (MTB)      The market value of equity divided by the book       Compustat
                                                  value of equity measured at the end of the year
                                                  prior to the initiation of fraud (or the
                                                  corresponding year for the control firm).
                 Firm value.                      The prior year’s market value of assets divided      Compustat
                 (TOBIN’S_Q)                      by the book value of assets .
                 Operating performance.           The prior year’s operating income before
                 (ROA)                            depreciation divided by the firm's average total
                                                  assets, less the industry median return on assets    Compustat
                                                  using the Fama-French 5 industry definition.
                 Leverage. (LEVERAGE)             The total debt divided by the book value of the      Compustat
                                                  equity measured in the year prior to the
                                                  initiation of fraud (or the corresponding year for
                                                  the control firm).
                 Analyst following of the firm.   The number of analysts issuing forecasts for the     I/B/E/S
                 (ANALYST_FOLL)                   firm.


                                                          67
                                             Appendix Table I (Cont.)


Category    Definition of Variable            Measurement                                                   Data Source
             (Name)
Firm        Media coverage of the          The number of media documents with the firm’s name           Hand collection
Variables   CEO/firm.                      in them in a given year(or the number of media articles      from news articles
            (MEDIA_FIRM;                   on a CEO in a year).                                         and press releases
            MEDIA_CEO)                                                                                  from Factiva.


            Prevalence of fraud by         The number of fraud firms in the firm's 2 digit SIC          SEC AAERs
            industry.                      code divided by the total number of firms in that 2 digit
            (%IND_FRAUD)                   SIC code that year.
            The F-Score for a firm.        The output from the predictive model (Model 1) for           Compustat
            (FSCORE)                       accounting manipulations reported in Dechow, Ge,
                                           Larson, and Sloan (2011). The main variables in this
                                           model include change in accounts receivables, change
                                           in inventory, the percentage of non-tangible assets,
                                           change in cash sales, change in return on assets,
                                           whether the firm issued any capital and accruals.
            Internal control weakness.     The fitted score using a modified version of the model       Compustat and
            (IC_WEAKNESS;                  in Doyle, Ge and McVay (2007). We exclude SPEs and           CRSP
            IC_WEAKNESS_START)             segments due to data limitations. We also consider this
                                           variable measured as of the first year of the CEO’s
                                           tenure or his/her start year.
            Age of the firm.               The natural logarithm of the age of the firm, measured       CRSP
            (FIRM_AGE)                     as the number of years the firm is on CRSP.
            Net income or loss.            Net income is the seasonally adjusted income before          Compustat
            (NET_INCOME; LOSS)             extraordinary items. Net loss is measured by a dummy
                                           variable that equals 1 if net income is negative in the
                                           current quarter. Net loss in a prior quarter q is
                                           represented with a subscript (t-q).
            Foreign currency               A dummy variable that equals 1 if the firm has foreign       Compustat
            transactions. (FOREIGN)        currency transactions.
            Acquisition intensity.         The sum of acquisitions over the past two years scaled       Compustat
            (ACQUISITION)                  by the market capitalization of the prior year.
            Extreme Sales growth.          A dummy variable that euals 1 if the industry-adjusted       Compustat
            (SALES_GROWTH)                 growth in sales over the last year is in the top quintile.
            Restructuring charges.         The sum of restructuring charges over the past two           Compustat
            (RESTRUCTURE)                  years scaled by the market capitalization of prior year.
            Cash. (CASH)                   The amount of cash as a proportion of total assets.          Compustat
            Research and                   The total research and development expenses as a Compustat
            development. (R&D)             proportion of total assets.
            Standard deviation of          The standard deviation of monthly stock returns              CRSP
            returns. (STD_RET)             calculated over the year prior to the initiation of fraud
                                           (or the corresponding year for the control firm).
            Meeting      or      beating   The percentage of last 8 quarters that a firm meets or       I/B/E/S and
            analysts’ forecasts.           beats (by one cent) the most recent median consensus         Compustat
            (MEET_BEAT)                    analysts forecast.
            Current asset intensity.       Current assets as a proportion of total assets.              Compustat
            (CURRENT_ASSET)



                                                            68
                                                 Appendix Table I (Cont.)


Category          Definition of Variable             Measurement                                               Data Source
                  (Name)
Executive   Legal infractions in the past of   A dummy variable that equals 1 if a CEO had any legal eFOTT
Variables   an executive (RECORD)              infraction prior to the fraud initiation year (or the
                                               corresponding year for the control firm), and 0
                                               otherwise. Legal infractions include driving under the
                                               influence, other drug-related charges,domestic
                                               violence, reckless behavior, disturbing the peace and
                                               traffic violations (including speeding tickets).
            Luxury asset ownership by an       A dummy variable that equals 1 if an executive does eFOTT
            executive. (FRUGAL)                not own any luxury assets prior to the fraud initiation
                                               year (or the corresponding year for the matched control
                                               firm), and 0 otherwise. Luxury assets include cars
                                               costing more than $75,000, boats greater than 25 feet in
                                               length and yachts, primary residences worth more than
                                               twice the average of the median home prices in the zip
                                               codes within ten miles of the corporate headquarters,
                                               and additional residences or vacation home worth twice
                                               the average home prices in that metropolitan area (as
                                               defined by the Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA)).
            Executive named in a fraud         Dummy variables that equal 1 if the CEO, or the CFO, SEC AAERs
            case. (NAMED_EXEC;                 or any other executives/directors/ employees are named
            OTHERS_NAMED)                      by the SEC as being responsible in perpetrating the
                                               fraud.
            The age of the CEO in the firm     The age of the CEO measured in the year of the ExecuComp/Boardex
            (CEO_AGE)                          initiation of fraud (or the corresponding year for the
                                               matched control firm).
            The delta of the CEO’s wealth.     The dollar change in the value of a CEO’s stock and ExecuComp
            (CEO_DELTA)                        option portfolio for a 1% change in stock price.
            Wealth of the CEO. (WEALTH)        The logarithm of the fair value of the CEO’s wealth ExecuComp
                                               derived from stock and options from the firm plus other
                                               compensation received over the previous 3 years, using
                                               the option valuation model in Core and Guay (2002).
            Tenure of the CEO. (TENURE)        The number of years the CEO has worked in his/her ExecuComp/Boardex
                                               current position.
            Perquisites received by the        The average value of all perquisites received by the       Hand collection from
            CEO. (PERKS)                       executive over the 3 years leading up to the event year.   from SEC DEF 14A
                                                                                                          filings.
            Overconfidence.                    A dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is               ExecuComp
            (OVERCONFIDENCE)                   considered overconfident, based on whether the
                                               executive is a net acquirer of shares (Malmendier and
                                               Tate (2005)). We modify the measure as net purchases
                                               after the 4th year of tenure over the next 4 years in
                                               order to obtain sufficient observations.
            Narcissism. (NARCISSISM)           The area covered by a CEO’s signature scaled by the        Hand collection from
                                               number of letters in his/her name.                         SEC DEF 14A filings
                                                                                                          and 10K reports.
            Industry CFO compensation.         The median 2-digit industry total compensation             ExecuComp
            (IND_COMP_CFO)                     received by CFOs.



                                                              69
                Appendix Table II: First Stage Models for IV and BiProbit Analyses
                      Panel A: CEO Frugality and Others Named in Fraud

                                                          DEPENDENT VARIABLE = FRUGAL
                                          IV         BIPROB      IV     BIPROB      IV                            BIPROB
INTERCEPT                             0.439***      -0.179***        0.434***      -0.190**       0.389***        -0.324***
                                       (21.53)        (-3.18)         (17.02)       (-2.68)        (13.18)          (-3.82)
RECORD                                  -0.029        -0.078          -0.027         -0.065         0.085           0.224*
                                        (-0.77)       (-0.80)         (-0.60)       (-0.56)         (1.87)          (1.84)
TOBIN’S_Q                              -0.013*       -0.037*          -0.009         -0.021        -0.011           -0.029
                                        (-1.90)       (-1.89)         (-1.19)       (-0.92)        (-1.41)          (-1.33)
ROA                                      0.001         0.001           -0.002       -0.007*         0.002            0.004
                                         (0.49)       (0.35)          (-1.62)        (-1.79)        (1.39)          (1.23)
%IND_FRAUD                            0.068***      0.211***         0.087***      0.243***       0.069**          0.220**
                                         (4.36)       (4.32)           (4.02)        (3.92)         (3.38)           (3.40)
MEDIA_FIRM                                                             0.001          0.002
                                                                       (0.21)        (0.32)
FSCORE                                                                                              0.007           0.026
                                                                                                    (0.84)          (0.95)
CASH                                  0.757***       2.190***        0.692***      1.925***       0.718***        2.012***
                                       (10.11)         (9.81)          (7.53)        (7.28)         (8.22)          (7.94)
F-STATISTIC                             32.04                          56.77                         67.6
CENTERED R2                             0.07                            0.08                         0.08
UNCENTERED R2                           0.58                            0.58                         0.68
PARTIAL CORRELATION                   0.24***                        0.22***                      0.25***
SEMI-PARTIAL                          0.24***                         0.22***                     0.24***
CORRELATION
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                   1,661        1,661         1,062         1,062         1,060                  1,060
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

This table presents the first stage models of the IV analysis and the bivariate probit models for CEO selection for the others
named in fraud analyses. The instrument for frugality is cash as a proportion of total assets. See Appendix Table I for
definitions of all variables.




                                                             70
                                     Appendix Table II (Cont.)
                        Panel B: CEO Frugality and Restatements due to Errors

                                                            DEPENDENT VARIABLE = FRUGAL
                                          IV         BIPROB              IV         BIPROB            IV         BIPROB
INTERCEPT                              0.610***       0.279***        0.592***      0.233***       0.541***         0.132
                                        (33.87)         (5.95)         (27.96)        (4.22)        (11.92)         (1.10)
RECORD                                  -0.013         -0.024          -0.027         -0.067        -0.027         -0.071
                                        (-0.31)        (-0.22)         (-0.71)        (-0.66)       (-0.69)        (-0.69)
IC_WEAKNESS_START                       0.036          0.119*
                                        (1.43)          (1.80)
IC_WEAKNESS                                                            0.008          0.040
                                                                       (0.30)         (0.57)
SIZE                                                                                               0.017**        0.041**
                                                                                                     (2.72)         (2.43)
FIRM_AGE                                                                                           -0.035**       -0.094**
                                                                                                    (-2.99)        (-3.07)
LOSS                                                                                               -0.113**       -0.297**
                                                                                                    (-3.63)        (-3.66)
FOREIGN                                                                                            0.078**        0.192**
                                                                                                     (3.01)         (2.77)
ACQUISITIONS                                                                                        0.102*         0.302*
                                                                                                     (1.89)         (1.89)
SALES_GROWTH                                                                                         0.022          0.059
                                                                                                     (0.96)         (0.96)
RESTRUCTURE                                                                                        1.059**        2.580**
                                                                                                     (2.33)         (2.15)
R&D                                    0.001***       0.001***        0.001***      0.001***       0.001**        0.001**
                                        (4.65)          (3.92)         (4.49)         (3.84)         (3.22)         (3.06)
F-STATISTIC                             23.78                          20.74                         11.93
CENTERED R2                              0.01                           0.01                         0.03
UNCENTERED R2                            0.60                           0.60                         0.60
PARTIAL CORRELATION                    0.01***                        0.09***                      0.07***
SEMI-PARTIAL                           0.01***                        0.09***                      0.07***
CORRELATION
NO. OF OBSERVATIONS                     1,661           1,661          1,062          1,062         1,060          1,060
***Significant at the 1% level; **5% level; *10% level. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

This table presents the first stage models of the IV analysis and the bivariate probit models for CEO selection for the errors
analyses. The instrument for frugality is research and development expenses as a proportion of total assets. See Appendix
Table I for definitions of all variables.




                                                             71
