                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       RIESTER PENSIONS IN GERMANY:
           DESIGN, DYNAMICS, TARGETTING SUCCESS AND CROWDING-IN

                                         Axel H. Börsch-Supan
                                           Michela Coppola
                                           Anette Reil-Held

                                         Working Paper 18014
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18014


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2012




This paper was prepared for a World Bank Workshop on Matching Defined Contribution Schemes
in Washington, D.C., June 2010. We are grateful for comments by Frank Eich, Robert Holzmann,
Richard Hinz, and David Tuesta Cardenas, and for financial support by the Research Institute for Policies
on Pension and Aging (RIPPA) and the German Science Foundation (DFG) which has generously
financed the creation of the SAVE panel data set and research based on these data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Axel H. Börsch-Supan, Michela Coppola, and Anette Reil-Held. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Riester Pensions in Germany: Design, Dynamics, Targetting Success and Crowding-In
Axel H. Börsch-Supan, Michela Coppola, and Anette Reil-Held
NBER Working Paper No. 18014
April 2012
JEL No. D14,D91,H31,H55

                                             ABSTRACT

Riester pensions are voluntary, but heavily subsidized private pension schemes in Germany. They
were designed as a matching defined contribution scheme to fill the emerging “pension gap” that is
being generated by the gradually declining generosity of the public pay-as-you-go pensions in response
to population aging. This paper investigates how the uptake of the recently introduced “Riester pensions”
depends on the state-provided saving incentives and how well the targeting to families and low-income
households has worked in practice. It documents the costs of the scheme, and collects circumstantial
evidence on displacement effects between saving for old-age provision and other purposes.

After a slow start and several design changes, Riester pension plans took off very quickly. While saving
incentives were effective in reaching parents, they were somewhat less successful in attracting low-income
earners, although Riester pensions exhibit a more equal pattern by income than occupational pensions
and unsubsidized private pension plans. Riester pension savings totaled €9.4bn in 2010 with an associated
cost of €3.5bn. One average one Euro of subsidies is thus associated with 2 Euros of households’ own
Riester saving.

There is no evidence that Riester pensions have crowded out other saving. While households who
plan to purchase housing and who attach high importance to a bequest motive are less likely to have
a Riester pension, several regression results show that occupational pensions and other forms of private
pensions act as complements rather than as substitutes. Aggregate national saving has increased since
the introduction of Riester pensions.


Axel H. Börsch-Supan                                Anette Reil-Held
Munich Center for the Economics of Aging            Munich Center for the Economics of Aging
Max Planck Institute                                Max-Planck-Institute
 for Social Law and Social Policy                   for Social Law and Social Policy
Amalienstrasse 33                                   Amalienstrasse 33
80779 Munich                                        80799 Munich
Germany                                             Germany
and NBER                                            reil-held@arcor.de
axel@boersch-supan.de

Michela Coppola
Munich Center for the Economics of Aging
Max Planck Institute
for Social Law and Social Policy
Amalienstrasse 33
80779 Munich
Germany
coppola@mea.mpisoc.mpg.de
1. Introduction: pension policy background and objectives

Demographic change poses major problems for public pay-as-you-go pension schemes around
the world, forcing many to reduce their generosity. In Germany, this took place in several
steps, starting in 1992 with an indexation of benefits to net rather than gross earnings and the
introduction of semi-actuarial adjustments in case of early retirement, and later with the
introduction of the sustainability factor in 2004 that indexes benefits to the inverse of the
system dependency ratio (i.e., the ratio of contributors to beneficiaries). It is estimated that in
2040, the benefit-to-earnings ratio will on average be about 18 percentage lower than in 2010.

These reforms will result in a large and potentially increasing gap in old-age income relative to
the current benefit levels. Recognizing this, the German, and many other governments, have
accompanied public pension reform with efforts to strengthen funded second pillar
(occupational) and third pillar (private savings) pensions. In order to accelerate the uptake of
such private pensions, two competing strategies have been applied: making such
supplementary pensions mandatory (e.g. Sweden and the Netherlands) or heavily subsidizing
savings for private pensions, typically by matching contributions, providing tax credits, and/or
permitting contributions to supplementary pension to be excluded when calculating income for
tax purposes. Germany has taken the latter incentive-oriented approach with its so-called
Riester pensions (named after Walter Riester, former German Secretary of Labor and Social
Security) that were legislated as part of the 2001 pension reform.1

Riester pensions are effectively state-subsidized voluntary individual saving arrangements with
an associated (largely annuitized) payout plan. They are designed to enable all individuals
receiving a public pension or a similar state-provided benefit to fill the emerging pension gap
through individual savings to an extent that at least offsets the reduction in public pensions.
Since it was assumed that low-income households and households with children have the
greatest difficulty in doing so, large tax credits are targeted to these households. A more
modest tax deduction for contribution applies to everyone.

In this paper the focus is on public acceptance of the Riester pensions and their dynamics over
time. Specifically, we want to highlight the distributional and cost aspects: for whom do the
saving incentives work, i.e., who has joined the new subsidized pension scheme, how costly is
the scheme, who pays for it, and who is likely to be able to fill the emerging pension income


1
 In essence, the formerly monolithic German pay-as-you-go system is transiting to a multi-pillar system with
public, occupational and private pensions. For a detailed description of the pension reform process in Germany
see Börsch-Supan and Wilke (2004). .

                                                                                                                 2
gap. Finally, we investigate whether the new private pension plans displace saving for other
purposes.

Riester pensions and their matching subsidies were introduced in a step-wise fashion from
2002 through 2008, allowing us to identify the effects of subsidies on uptake rates. We use the
German SAVE data, a new panel data set on households' saving and asset choices, socio-
demographic characteristics, and psychological determinants of saving and old-age provision
behavior. Currently, the SAVE data capture the time period between 2001 and 2010 and offer a
unique opportunity to investigate old-age provision based on very recent data with a broad set
of explanatory variables.

The issues investigated in our paper contribute to the discussion about the impact of retirement
saving incentives in various countries. In the U.S., Venti and Wise (1990) on the one side and
Gale and Scholz (1994) on the other have sparked a very controversial discussion about the
efficacy of Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) as saving devices; see Skinner and Hubbard
(1996) for an early review. Disney et. al. (2001) have provided a helpful review tailored to the
UK situation. These controversies have accompanied pension reform in almost all developed
countries, generating an interest in cross-national analyses of retirement saving behavior under
different tax and subsidy regimes, see Börsch-Supan (2003, 2004). This paper adds the recent
German experience to this discussion and updates the paper by Börsch-Supan, Reil-Held and
Schunk (2008).

The paper is structured around the themes of design, costs and the effectiveness of the new
system. Section 2 and 3 are devoted to the interaction between design and first experiences in
the process that led to the scheme as it is now: Section 2 describes the key initial design
features of Riester pensions in Germany, and Section 3 documents the uptake of Riester
pensions between 2001 and 2010 and the design adaptations contributing to the uptake
dynamics. Section 4 summarizes the costs of the Riester scheme and the changes in retirement
savings associated with them. Sections 5, 6 and 7 address the effectiveness of the scheme:
Section 5 provides descriptive statistics on the dynamics of enrolment in Riester pension plans
by socio-economic characteristics. Section 6 collects circumstantial evidence on the
macroeconomic impact of Riester pensions, in particular whether they have crowded out other
saving, and Section 7 shows how the pension income gap is likely to be filled, the ultimate aim
of the scheme. Section 8 provides some concluding observations.




                                                                                              3
2. The initial design of Riester pensions

While Riester pensions are voluntary, they are designed to fill the gap that will be created by
the scheduled reduction of public pension benefits in response to the pressures of population
aging. In order to achieve this goal, the German Retirement Savings Act2 introduced a
comprehensive regime of saving incentives for certified pension products that have become
known as “Riester pensions”. These new retirement saving arrangements are eligible to receive
subsidies in two forms: a match of the participants contribution and the deduction of all
contributions from income for tax purposes.. When initially established in 2001 the
certification regulations and subsidy mechanisms were rather complex, however they were
significantly simplified in 2005. In this section, we first describe the initial approach because it
provides many lessons for effective subsidy design.

Criteria for “certifiable” products. Initially, private pension plans were eligible for subsidies if
they fulfilled eleven criteria stipulated by the “Certification of Retirement Pension Contracts
Act”. These included, among others, the following requirements: savers must make regular
contributions; product providers must guarantee that the nominal investment return in each
calendar year be positive; benefits must be disbursed as certain types of lifelong annuities;
lump sum payments at retirement must not exceed 20% of the accumulated wealth;
administrative and marketing costs must be spread over at least ten years; and all providers
must be registered with a supervisory board. Most Riester products were provided by the
insurance industry, but also banks and investment funds offered Riester products, see Figure 2
below.

Eligibility. Not all households are eligible for the subsidies. The eligibility criteria are
complex, although the simple intention was that everyone affected by the reduction in public
pension benefits should be eligible for private pension subsidies. Hence, the group of eligible
beneficiaries includes employees paying mandatory social insurance contributions; recipients
of wage compensation benefits (such as unemployment benefit, child-raising benefits, etc.);
self-employed people who are mandatory members of the public pension system; farmers; and
tenured civil servants. Spouses of eligible individuals are also entitled to receive subsidies
(“indirect entitlements") provided that they enroll in a separate pension plan of their own.

Subsidies. Due to government budget constraints, the generosity of the subsidy scheme was
phased in starting in 2002 and ending in 2008, with a doubling the applicable parameters in
each step. This is shown in Table 1. Column 1 shows the percentage of gross earnings which

2
    The law „Altersvermögensgesetz “ dates from 2001.

                                                                                                  4
must be contributed to the plan in order to qualify for the full subsidy. The full subsidy is
displayed in columns 2-4 and has three elements. First, there is a basic subsidy (column 2) that
is a match of the participants own contribution. This basic subsidy is means-tested for low and
middle income households. Individuals eligible for this basic subsidy pay their savings into a
certified pension plan and, in the initial design, had to file an application form to receive the
subsidies each year. The plan provider receives the matching basic subsidy from the
government and credits it to the account as part of the total contribution. Second, all eligible
savers receive an additional subsidy for each child (column 3). Third, contributions to Riester
pension plans can be tax deductable as special expenses up to a maximum amount (column 4).
This amount has been fixed in nominal terms at €2100 from 2008 onwards which will, unless
changed, eventually erode this third subsidy/incentive mechanism.3

Table 1: Statutory incentives for supplementary pension provision.

           Maximum contribution           Basic subsidy           Child subsidy       Maximum tax
            [percentage of gross            [€ p. a.]               [€ p. a.]          deduction
                 earnings]                                                              [€ p. a.]
                      (1)                       (2)                    (3)                 (4)
2002                   1                        38                     46                  525
2004/05                2                        76                     92                 1050
2006                   3                       114                    138                 1575
2008                   4                       154                    185*                2100

Note: * The child subsidy is €300 for children born after 2007.

The matching contribution subsidy was reduced proportionally if contributions to the Riester
plan are lower than the maximum indicated in column 1. Since the subsidy itself is counted as
part of that contribution, some mathematical skills are required to compute the exact
contribution required to receive the full subsidy – another feature reducing the transparency of
the design. Moreover, the minimum own contribution depended on the number of children and
the year in which the individual had enrolled in the Riester plan.

The complexity of the design made the substantial size of the subsidies less apparent for many
individuals. While low-income earners receive a relatively high subsidy due to the matching
basic subsidy, higher earners accrued additional subsidies from the tax deductions due to the
progressive nature of the income tax rates. This generates a slightly U-shape profile of
subsidies as shown in Figure 1. Overall, the subsidies average about 45% of contributions,

3
 An automatic inflation adjustment was suggested for instance by the Commission for the Sustainable Financing
of the German Social Security Systems (2004), of which one author was a member.

                                                                                                                5
varying between 24% and 90% depending on income and number of children. At the mean
earnings (€42.000) the statutory subsidy rate is 39%.

Figure 1: Subsidy as percentage of total (own plus government matching) contribution

         %

       100

        90

        80

        70                                      Single, no children
                                                   Single, one child
        60                                          Married, one income, two children


        50

        40

        30

        20

        10

         0
             10.000 15.000 20.000 25.000 30.000 35.000 40.000 45.000 50.000 55.000 60.000 65.000 70.000 75.000

                                                     Annual earnings (Euro)

Note: Direct subsidy/the tax advantage as a percentage of savings in form of the new supplementary pensions.
Source: Deutsche Bundesbank (2002).




Owner-occupied housing. While savings usually must be accumulated until retirement and are
then disbursed in some type of annuity, there is an exception for owner-occupied housing. The
2001 law permitted withdrawals between €10,000 and €50,000 from the accumulated capital
which had to be paid back into the pension plan in monthly installments latest by the age of 65
(if not, the subsidies received had to be paid back). The law was changed in 2008 and
permitted withdrawals up to 100% of the accumulated capital to purchase owner-occupied
housing without having to pay back the amount withdrawn. In addition, loan agreements
(“Darlehensverträge”) and building society saving contracts (“Bausparverträge”) can be
certified as Riester products receiving the subsidies described above. So far, such housing-
related products do not constitute a significant share of Riester products, see Figure 2.

3. Uptake dynamics of “Riester pensions” and amended design

Quarterly uptake figures are provided by the Federal Ministry for Labor and Social Affairs and
are displayed in Figure 2.


                                                                                                                 6
Figure 2: Development of Riester pensions (million contracts)




                Source: Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales (2011)


Around 1.4 million Riester pension plans were taken up in the first year after the introduction
of incentives.4 After a period of initial enthusiasm, however, demand for Riester pensions
flattened in 2003 and 2004. This lackluster growth and widespread criticism of the complex
eligibility and subsidy design led to a simplification of the design in 2005 in an effort to
improve acceptance of the new system by households and providers. The changes introduced in
2005 did not affect the subsidies described in Table 1 and Figure 1 but included:

       1. The application procedure was simplified by replacing it with a one-off permanent
           subsidy application. Savers eligible for subsidies were allowed to authorize their
           pension provider to submit a subsidy application on their behalf every year.

       2. The number of certification criteria was reduced from 11 to 5. Specifically, the share of
           Riester pensions to be annuitized was reduced from 80 to 70 percent; i.e., 30% of the
           accumulated capital could be received as a lump sum.

       3. The participants minimum own contribution was standardized to €60 per annum.




4
    For an analysis of the initial phase see Dünn and Fasshauer (2003).

                                                                                                 7
   4. Transparency of pension savings product and providers was improved. Information that
       was required to be provided about investment options, the structure of the portfolio and
       the risk parameters was extended. Providers were required to introduce a standardized
       calculation facilitating comparisons of alternative products.

   5. Acquisition and marketing costs can now be spread over five rather than ten years;
       thereby selling Riester pensions became more attractive for providers. Although there
       were no formal limits for such charges, the certification process imposed some soft
       restrictions on charges which could be interpreted as usury.

   6. These changes were accompanied by a modest government-sponsored public relations
       campaign; main advertizing efforts, however, were left to the providers of Riester
       products.

Demand for Riester pensions rose significantly in 2005 after these changes came into effect as
shown in Figure 2. Around 900,000 new policies – around four times as many as during the
whole of 2004 – were signed in the last quarter of 2005 alone. This upward trend continued
throughout 2008. By the end of 2008, a total of more than 12 million pension plans eligible for
subsidy support had been taken up. After 2008, the rate of increase flattened. This may have
been the result of three causes: the maximum contribution rate was reached in 2008 as shown
in Table 1; some socio-demographic strata may have reached saturation levels; and the
financial crisis resulting in very low or negative returns may have discouraged new households
from starting a Riester pension. While the increase in the number of contracts slowed down
after 2008 the overall number of contracts has continued to increase at a linear rate in the
ensuing period. At the end of 2009, about 40% of the households potentially eligible for the
subsidies held at least one Riester plan (Coppola and Gasche, 2011).

The dynamic development of the Riester Pensions occurred in parallel with the uptake of
occupational pensions. It has ocurred, however, is in contrast to an essentially flat development
of other unsubsidized private retirement savings arrangements as indicated in Figure 3.




                                                                                               8
Figure 3: Coverage by private and occupational pensions




Source: Own calculations on the basis of the SAVE Panel.



In 2006, Riester pensions overtook occupational pensions as the main instrument for funded

pension provision in Germany. Largely due to this development, the number of households

with no private supplemental pensions decreased from 73% in 2001 to about 45% in 2009, and

about a quarter of households now have at least two saving instruments for their old-age

provision as shown in Figure 4.




                                                                                        9
Figure 4: Number of private and occupational pension instruments




Source: Own calculations on the basis of the SAVE Panel.



4. Fiscal costs and savings

Riester pensions create direct fiscal costs in form of the means-tested basic and child subsidies
that are shown in columns (2) and (3) of Table 1, and in form of foregone tax revenue that
result from the exclusion of the allowable contribution levels displayed in the rightmost
column of the table. Figure 5 shows the level and rate or increase in both of these elements of
the fiscal costs from 2003 to 2010 when the total costs reached a level of €3.5bn, of which
about 80% are attributable to the means-tested direct subsidies. In comparison, costs for public
pension benefits (old age, disability and survivor pensions) were €225bn in 2010.




                                                                                              10
Figure 5: Fiscal costs of Riester pensions (€1000)

   4,000,000

   3,500,000

   3,000,000

   2,500,000
                                                                                     Direct benefit
   2,000,000                                                                         Tax deduction
                                                                                     Total costs
   1,500,000

   1,000,000

    500,000

           0
                2003    2004     2005     2006      2007   2008   2009   2010

Source: Deutsche Rentenversicherung (2011), p. 76



The fiscal costs shown in Figure 5 are the actual payment of subsidies or foregone income tax
revenue resulting from the new system. Since Riester subsidies can be claimed up to two years
after paying into the account, and tax losses typically occur the year after income generation, it
is not easy to match induced Riester saving in one year with the subsidies paid out in the same
year. In addition to a potential mismatch between years, there are the deeper questions of
causality and substitution which are addressed in Section 6.

Stolz and Rieckhoff (2008-2011) provide an attempt of such a matching, see Table 2. It does,
however, only include the direct subsidies, not the tax deductions. Total savings in the accounts
is composed of the matching subsidy and the own contribution by the individual on which the
subsidy is calculated. Assuming that these overall savings would not have been made without
the incentives of the subsidies, one Euro of subsidies (not including the value of the income tax
exclusion) induced about additional 2.2 Euros saving for old age, see column (4) which might,
under these strong assumptions, be interpreted as a measure of cost effectiveness of the subsidy
design.




                                                                                                      11
Table 2: Direct subsidies and associated saving in Riester plans (€1000)

               Direct subsidies           Total saving        Own contribution           Effectiveness
                     (1)                      (2)                   (3)                       (4)
2005               521,917                 1,762,749              1,240,832                   2.4
2006              1,134,339                3,635,886              2,501,547                   2.2
2007              1,445,688                4,834,565              3,388,877                   2.3
2008              2,543,300                7,815,500              5,272,200                   2.1
Source: Stolz and Rieckhoff (2008-2011) based on ZfA data.


As noted above, Table 2 does not include additional saving which may have been induced by
the tax deductability of Riester plan contributions. Another analysis, Gerber and Zwick (2010),
links the data from the Central Subsidies Agency (ZfA) with income tax data in order to
include the effects of tax deductions and compute a broader measure of subsidy rates that can
be converted into a similar measure of cost effectiveness. Since the linkage solves some, but
creates other time matching problems, the results are not fully comparable with Table 2 but
yield a similar result of a “cost effectiveness” of 1.9 Euros of new savings for each Euro of
subsidies across all households. It is substantially higher for households with children (e=2.4)
than for childless households (e=1.1).


5. Targeting success

Another dimension of program effectiveness is the ability of the subsidy design to reach the
targeted population. Riester pensions were specifically designed to help low-income earners
and families with children build up savings for retirement, a element of the German population
in which saving rates are typically low. The Central Subsidies Agency provides quarterly
uptake figures that are associated with a limited number of socio-economic characteristics.
Analyses by Stolz and Rieckhoff (2008-2011) show that individuals with low labor incomes,
women, families, and employees in the former East Germany are well represented among
                      5
subsidy recipients.

These data, however, are based on subsidized individuals and not on households, and they do
not reveal total household income, only those income components subject to means-testing.
Our analysis on targeting therefore uses the SAVE data set, a panel study of saving behavior by


5
 57.1% of beneficiaries were female and 42.9% male in the contribution year 2008. 24.4% of those receiving
subsidies were from the new federal states in eastern Germany, 75.6% from the former territory of West Germany.
Around 9.8 million people received a basic subsidy and 3.7 million people an additional child's subsidy (Stolz and
Rieckhoff, 2011).

                                                                                                               12
German households. Börsch-Supan et al. (2010) provide a detailed description of the SAVE
dataset. It contains longitudinal data on households' saving and asset choices, socio-
demographic characteristics, and psychosocial determinants of savings behavior, particularly
related to old-age provision.6 Thus far, the panel has been surveyed in 2001, 2003, and then
annually from 2005 through 2010. SAVE provides data at the level of the individual
respondent and the respondent's spouse (referred to in the following as household). In 2006, the
total sample size was about 3500 households. We restrict the analysis in this paper to those
households who have not yet retired.7 All descriptive statistics are weighted based on the
income and age distribution of the German Microcensus.8

Figure 6 shows the uptake of Riester pensions by categories of age. One would expect to find
differences that are related to age because as a result of the recent reforms the replacement rate
of the public pension system will slowly decline for future cohorts. Younger generations are
thus more strongly affected than older generations. In addition younger generations have a
longer period to accrue the subsidies of the new system and are more likely to have dependent
children and thus be eligible for the higher level of subsidies. One would therefore anticipate
higher participation rates among younger households relative to among older ones. This is
indeed what Figure 6 indicates.




6
  Essig (2005) and Schunk (2006) provide further details. We are grateful to the German Science Foundation
(DFG) for funding this data set.
7
  To be precise: the interview is conducted with the individual who knows best about the household's finances.
8
   As in all surveys that deal with sensitive topics such as household finances, item non-response to sensitive
questions is not ignorable (see Essig and Winter (2003) and Schunk (2006) for discussion and documentation). To
prevent biased inference based on an analysis of complete cases only, an iterative multiple imputation procedure
has been applied to the SAVE data (Schunk, 2008). All results in this paper use the fully imputed SAVE data.

                                                                                                             13
Figure 6: Uptake of Riester pensions by age group




Source: Own calculations based on SAVE 2003-2010, households eligible for subsidies. Brackets show 95%
confidence intervals. Weighted figures.

Figure 7 shows the strong positive relationship between the number of children and the
proportion of households with a Riester pension plan. The Riester subsidies increase linearly
with the number of children so it is not surprising that there is strong demand for Riester
products among parents with more than two children.




                                                                                                         14
Figure 7: Uptake of Riester pensions by number of children




Source: Own calculations based on SAVE 2003-2010, households eligible for subsidies. Brackets show 95%
confidence intervals. Weighted figures.


About 60% of households with two or more children – more than twice as many as among
childless households – had a Riester pension plan in 2010. Riester pension plans were
proliferating most markedly among households with more than 3 children. Figure 8 provides
significant evidence of the effectiveness of the system in enrolling families with children that
can be attributed to the large child subsidy since there is no comparable development in the
other private pension instruments:




                                                                                                         15
Figure 8: Private pension instruments by number of children in 2009




Source: Own calculations based on SAVE 2010, households eligible for subsidies. Brackets show 95% confidence
intervals. Weighted figures.


Reaching low-income households however has proven to be more difficult than eliciting
participation by families with children. Figure 9 shows that the proportion of households
holding private pension instruments increases with growing disposable household income. This
pattern is most apparent for occupational pensions. Only around 19% of households in the
lowest income bracket have taken up Riester pension plans, while almost a half of those in the
two upper income brackets indicate participation in the system. However, given the substantial
challenges in reaching low income groups for any type of retirement savings some success of
the system can be found in the fact that among low-income households, Riester pensions are
much more frequent than any other form of private pension provision. As a result, Riester
pensions are more equally distributed by income than occupational pensions or unsubsidized
private pension schemes.

All income groups have exhibited an increasing demand for supplemental pensions since 2002
as shown in Figure 10. Starting from an already lower initial level, the increase in percentage
points is least apparent in the lowest income bracket. This effect is less pronounced when
expressed in relative percentage terms. Particularly striking is the impressive growth of


                                                                                                         16
occupational pensions and unsubsidized private pension instruments among high income
households.



Figure 9: Private pensions by monthly household disposable income in 2009




Source: Own calculations based on SAVE 2001-2010, households eligible for subsidies. Brackets show 95%
confidence intervals. Weighted figures.




                                                                                                         17
Figure 10: Uptake of Riester pensions by quintiles of monthly household disposable income




Source: Own calculations based on SAVE 2001-2010, households eligible for subsidies. Brackets show 95%
confidence intervals. Weighted figures.
An important result from Figure 10 is the unbroken increase in the share of households with
Riester pension plans in the lowest income quintile since 2002. Low income earners actually
have a slightly higher percentage rate of increase in their uptake than the middle of the income
distribution. Hence, the jury is still out with regard to how well Riester pensions will actually
end up serving low-income households.


6. Displacement effects or crowding in?

As the earlier discussion of fiscal costs shows, Riester pensions are an expensive government
program.. The subsidies increase direct government spending and thus potentially reduce
aggregate national saving. In addition, the successful uptake of Riester pensions may have
simply displaced other saving, in particular saving within other types of private funded
pensions. The macroeconomic effect of subsidizing Riester pensions may thus be zero or even
negative.



                                                                                                         18
The papers by Corneo, Keese and Schröder (2009, 2010) and Pfarr and Schneider (2010, 2011)
provide econometric analyses which cannot refute the hypothesis that subsidizing Riester
pensions only produces displacement effects. Both papers, however, take strong implicit
assumptions in order to overcome the problem of a missing counterfactual (due to the design of
the Riester scheme, virtually everybody is eligible, so there is no natural control group to
compare with), e.g., that having a Riester pension and having other savings are independent
decisions.

Also we cannot provide an analysis which unambiguously isolates the causal effect of the
subsidies on total saving since most households are eligible, making cross-sectional analysis
difficult as ineligible households (e.g. certain groups of self-employed) have quite different
socio-economic characteristics. Comparisons over time are more credible however similarly a
clean counterfactual is not available. Evidence is thus more circumstantial than causal.

One way to address the issue is to ask households directly about the extent that the subsidies
stimulate new savings. Responses to these types of questions have been analysed by Coppola
and Reil-Held (2010). Responses to questions about changes in behavior may be subjective and
contain elements of wishful thinking or ex-post justification. Nevertheless, the results shown in
Figure 11 are rather unambiguous: only a minority of households says that they saved less in
total since starting to be enrolled in a Riester pension plan; most households respond that they
have saved more. Particularly striking is that a very large proportion of low-income households
indicated that they had saved more. The two upper quintiles of income provided similar
patterns of responses.




                                                                                              19
Figure 11: Change in total saving after being enrolled in a Riester plan




Source: Coppola and Reil-Held (2010) based on SAVE 2008, households with a Riester pension, weighted data.



As a less subjective piece of evidence, Figure 3 has shown that the increase of Riester pensions
was not accompanied by a decline in the prevalence of other pension instruments: over the time
period of their introduction occupational pensions also increased and unsubsidized pension
plans stayed essentially flat between 2004 and 2009. It is also noteworthy that the aggregate
household saving rate did not decline in the decade during which Riester pensions were
introduced, increasing from 9.4 percent of disposable income in 2001 to 11,4 percent in 2010.
The new pensions did not result in an increase in a rise in aggregate dis-saving either. Until the
financial crisis and its large-scale fiscal stimulus packages, government deficits declined.

Börsch-Supan, Reil-Held and Schunk (2007) provide an econometric analysis of supplemental
pensions, taking account of many socio-economic variables. They provide evidence on
displacement effects via two channels. First, they employ a bivariate regression model, in
which the decision to take up a subsidized Riester pension plan and the decision to enroll in
other unsubsidized private pension plans are modeled simultaneously. A negative correlation
between the two equations would indicate displacement. Second, they include competing


                                                                                                         20
motives for saving as explanatory variables. A negative coefficient on such variables would
also indicate displacement.

Table 3 presents selected results of two specifications. Specification A describes disposable
income as a set of four quintile indicators. Specification B employs a quadratic function of
disposable income. In both specifications, the first dependent variable, shown in columns 1 and
3, indicates whether a household has a Riester pension plan, while the second dependent
variable, shown in columns 2 and 4, indicates whether a household has an unsubsidized private
pension plan. All variables refer to the end of year 2005.

Table 3: Selected determinants of the demand for Riester and other private pension products
         (bivariate probit estimates)


                                                             Specification A             Specification B
                                                    Riester        Other private     Riester    Other private
                     Variable                                        pensions                     pensions
                                                       (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)

Saving motives:
Intention to buy real estate                      0.001           0.143            -0.001       0.147
                                                  (0.01)          (1.67)*          (0.01)       (1.71)*
Reason for saving: Buy real estate                -0.090          -0.057           -0.089       -0.058
                                                  (2.11)*         (1.39)           (2.08)**     (1.43)
Reason for saving: Provide for unforeseen events -0.096           -0.057           -0.086       -0.052
                                                  (1.44)          (0.86)           (1.28)       (0.79)
Reason for saving: Pay off debts                  -0.055          -0.041           -0.054       -0.043
                                                  (1.24)          (0.99)           (1.22)       (1.03)
Reason for saving: Old-age provision              0.229           0.694            0.218        0.691
                                                  (3.06)***       (7.87)***        (2.92)***    (7.86)***
Reason for saving: Holiday                        0.009           -0.068           0.012        -0.069
                                                  (0.18)          (1.49)           (0.25)       (1.51)
Reason for saving: Finance major purchases        0.042           0.039            0.035        0.037
                                                  (0.81)          (0.77)           (0.68)       (0.72)
Reason for saving: Finance (grand)child education -0.038          -0.091           -0.038       -0.094
                                                  (0.81)          (2.02)**         (0.80)       (2.09)**
Reason for saving: Inheritance                    -0.124          0.090            -0.128       0.090
                                                  (2.32)**        (1.80)*          (2.39)**     (1.80)*
Reason for saving: State subsidies                0.264           -0.015           0.269        0.008
                                                  (6.03)***       (0.38)           (6.13)***    (0.20)
Alternative instruments:
Other form of suppl. pension provision (dummy) 0.469              0.462            0.466        0.466
                                                  (6.27)***       (6.56)***        (6.25)***    (6.64)***

Mc-Fadden R²                                            0.137                            0.136
Rho [Chi²(1)]                                           0.055 [1.32]                     0.060 [1.54]
Number of observations                                     2255                             2255


Note: Absolute value of the z statistics in parentheses. Regression also includes a large set of socio-economic
control variables. * significant at 10% confidence interval, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%
Source: Börsch-Supan, Reil-Held und Schunk (2008).




                                                                                                            21
The regressions have a very satisfactory fit, here measured as McFadden’s R-squared, see the
lower part of Table 3. Moreover, the estimated model exhibits a positive correlation between
the two equations, or, more precisely, between the unobservables in the decision to take up a
subsidized Riester pension plan and the decision to enroll in unsubsidized private pension
plans. While the correlation is small and not statistically significant, it does not support the
hypothesis of a crowding out between Riester and unsubsidized private pension plans.

Table 3 shows a set of variables in the regression which reflect the importance of different
saving motives for respondents. We are specifically interested in three saving motives: the
acquisition of real estate, the wish to bequeath wealth, and pocketing state subsidies. First,
there is evidence pointing to a possible displacement effect between old-age provision and real
estate purchase. This is apparent when looking at households who report a particular interest in
saving for the purchase of real estate property. The more important this savings motive is, the
less likely respondents have taken up a Riester pension plan. A second significantly negative
coefficient is attached to the variable indicating a wish to save for a bequest. Our interpretation
is that the requirement for Riester plans to be paid out as an annuity acts as a disincentive for
households for whom making a bequest is an important saving motive.

In addition to Riester pension plans and unsubsidized private pension plans, occupational
pension plans and whole life insurance products have been very popular as instruments to
provide supplemental retirement income.9 The coefficient of a variable indicating the presence
of such instruments is statistically significant and positive: households which are already
covered by one of these alternative pension types are more likely to have a Riester pension
plan. One interpretation is that households who think ahead and invest in old-age provision at
all tend to use several instruments for this purpose. As opposed to saving for real estate
acquisition or saving for bequests, where we found substitution, this result is consistent with a
form of “crowding in” among pension products.


7. Filling the pension gap

The ultimate measure of success is the extent to which Riester pensions will fill the “pension
gap” created by the reduction of benefits provided by the pay-as-you-go financed public
pension system. Börsch-Supan and Gasche (2010) simulate pension payments from the public
system and pension payments from a Riester annuity for a typical employee saving exactly the
amounts required to obtain the maximum subsidy according to Table 4. Figure 12 shows the


9
    See German Federal Ministry for Labor and Social Affairs (2006)

                                                                                                22
policy-induced decline in public pension benefits and the increasing annuity from Riester
savings.

Figure 12: Benefits from public and Riester pensions (% of average earnings)




Source: Börsch-Supan and Gasche (2010).


Individuals retiring in 2008 had accumulated very little Riester savings since the program
started only in 2002. Individuals retiring later have an increasing time span to accumulate
Riester savings until an equilibrium will be reached in about 2047.

Although the combined pension benefits will be larger than the current public pension benefits
from about 2030 onwards, Figure 13 shows that the transitional generation will not be able to
fill the pension gap completely.




                                                                                           23
Figure 13: Filling the pension gap (% of average earnings)




Source: Börsch-Supan and Gasche (2010).


Actual saving for old age may be less than suggested by Table 1 since uptake is well below
100%, individuals may not save the full amount, or may interrupt contributions due to factors
such as unemployment or other episodes of financial distress. It may also be larger than the
rates suggested by Table 1 since individuals may have other old-age saving plans such as
unsubsidized individual account pension plans or occupational pensions.

Börsch-Supan, Essig and Wilke (2005) provide a simulation exercise based on actual
household data that sheds some light on this issue. They measure current financial wealth and
the current financial net saving rate for all households in the SAVE panel. Assuming constant
net saving rates and a real return of 2.8%, they compute financial wealth at retirement, and
convert it into a real annuity. This annuity is then compared to the pension gap.

On average, Germans have more than closed the emerging pension gap. More than two thirds
will be able to fill the gap between what they would have received in retirement income under
the old and new public systems. The coverage rate for this gap, (Riester annuity divided by
pension gap), is 120% for the average household. The distribution, however, is quite skewed.
Predictably, results are very different with respect to socio-economic characteristics, especially
income. While the median household will still be able to compensate for the the cuts in public
pensions, about 27% of the households represented by the SAVE panel will not be able to fill
the pension gap.

                                                                                               24
8. Conclusions

The most obvious lesson from the Riester pensions experience is that new forms of subsidized
savings need time before they are able to really take off. It took over ten years in the U.S.
before Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) were accepted by households in the upper 60
percent of the income distribution (Venti and Wise, 1990). In Germany, the Riester pension
plans have exhibited a more rapid and dynamic growth. Growth in the first few years was very
steep, then stalled, but rebounded after the 2005 legislative changes and continued through the
financial crisis. Overall, growth rates are much higher than those experienced in the U.S. One
reason maybe the direct subsidies, another the urgency of offsetting the benefits reductions in
the wake of the public pension reforms.

There are several explanations for the discontinuous development of Riester pensions. Poor
product design is likely the cause for the initially lower rates of acceptance.. Moreover, the
learning process regarding the need and way to invest in old-age provision took time, despite
heavy advertising. As people learn from their social environment, the pace of this development
depends on how widespread such pensions are in the population at large ("critical mass",
Ruprecht 2004), generating exponential growth until saturation is reached.

We cannot exactly identify whether the dynamic spread of Riester pensions is due to the
financial incentives, the availability of information, or the marketing efforts made by
government and providers, mainly insurance companies. However, it is striking that the
acceleration in Riester saving only kicked in after substantial simplifications had been made to
the scheme. Therefore, an important second lesson is to avoid complex savings plans which are
not immediately understood by customers. Further simplifications are possible without
jeopardizing the aims of the program (e.g., see Westerheide et al., 2010).

The target groups of the Riester reform in 2001 were mainly families with children and
individuals with low income. Among those, parents with more than one child seem to be the
group that was most easily reached. The evidence is less compelling for the other target group,
low-income households. While the trend increase is still unbroken, the level of uptake remains
low with just 25% in the lowest income quintile engaged in the system. A key lesson derived
from this is that high subsidies alone are not enough to reach low income households:
information and social acceptance appears to be a crucial element in reaching this group.
Coppola and Gasche (2011) find that the level of knowledge about the eligibility for the Riester
subsidies is directly related with the household’s income: households in the bottom quintile of



                                                                                             25
the income distribution have a higher probability to wrongly believe that they are not eligible
for the subsidies than households in the upper quintiles.

This insight is strengthened by the regression results of Börsch-Supan,. Reil-Held and Schunk
(2008) and Coppola and Reil-Held (2010): Households with higher levels of educational
attainment are, holding other characteristics like income and family size constant, more likely
to enroll in Riester pensions than households with financial respondents who have not
completed any vocational training. This is consistent with the broader experience indicating
that knowing future pension replacement levels correlates positively with enrolling in private
pension schemes. A fourth lesson, therefore, is that information and the knowledge about
arrangements relating to old-age pension provision are vital to achieving high take up rates.

While the SAVE data does not allow for a cleanly designed experiment, they provide
circumstantial evidence about possible displacement effects. First, households who desire to
purchase residential real estate are significantly less likely to have a Riester pension plan. The
clumsy withdrawal rules of the Riester regulations clearly do not provide these households
with sufficient liquidity in order to persuade them to make provision for old age alongside with
saving to acquire real estate property. We find similar evidence that stated bequest motives
displace Riester pension plans with their strict annuity rules. This however does not necessarily
indicate that these restrictions should be alleviated. On the contrary, they are needed since
Riester pensions are designed to fill the gap in public pension benefits after pension reform,
and these pay-as-you-go pensions are paid out as a life-long annuity.

The desire to purchase property and the wish to bequeath assets are saving motives which
appear to compete with taking up Riester pensions. Occupational pensions and whole life
insurance, however, are found to be complements rather than substitutes. This provides an
important fifth lesson. One interpretation is that households which think ahead and invest in
old-age provision tend to use several instruments for this purpose. In this sense, there are
“crowding in” effects of fostering retirement saving. While the subsidization of Riester
pensions are an expensive program, the net effect (i.e., additional savings created after
subtracting subsidies and reductions in other saving vehicles) appears to be clearly positive.

Sixth and finally, the ultimate measure of success is the extent to which Riester pensions will
fill the “pension gap” created by the reduction of benefits provided by the pay-as-you-go
financed public pension system. While, on average, Germans will be able to more than close
the evolving pension gap, the distribution is quite skewed. While the median household will



                                                                                                 26
still be able to compensate for the cuts in public pensions, about 27% of German households
will not be able to fill the pension gap.

Riester pensions have produced some interesting achievements although clearly they are not a
panacea to fully solve the challenges of adequate retirement income levels. While preventing
poverty in old age requires different instruments, this new pension instrument can be regarded
a success story for the middle of the income distribution in Germany. It has moved about
€9.4bn from consumption and/or other saving instruments not related to old-age provision into
savings sepecifically earmarked for old-age and has thus made the overall system of retirement
income more robust and stable. At the same, it has reduced the pressure on the younger
generations by permitting lower pay-as-you-go contribution rates compared to the pre-reform
situation. Whether this justifies the Riester scheme’s tax and subsidy costs of €3.5bn, equal to
1.5 percent of the total pay-as-you-go pension budget, is a judgment call.




                                                                                             27
References

Boeri, T., A. Börsch-Supan and G. Tabellini (2002): Would You Like to Reform the Pension
       System? The Opinions of European Citizens, American Economic Review 92: 396-401.
Börsch-Supan, A. (Ed.) (2003): Life-Cycle Savings and Public Policy: A Cross-National Study
      of Six Countries. Academic Press, London.
Börsch-Supan, A. (2004): Mind the Gap Incentives: The Effectiveness of Incentives to boost
      Retirement Savings in Europe. OECD Economic Studies 39: 111-144.
Börsch-Supan, A. and L. Essig (2005): Household saving in Germany: Results of the first
      SAVE study, in D. A. Wise (Ed.), Analyses in the Economics of Aging, 317-352, The
      University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Börsch-Supan, A., D. Schunk and A. Reil-Held (2007): The Savings Behaviour of German
      households: First Experiences with state-promoted Private Pensions. Mea-Discussion
      Paper 136-07. MEA – Mannheim Research Institute for the Economics of Aging,
      University of Mannheim.
Börsch-Supan, A., M. Coppola, A. Eymann, L. Essig and D. Schunk (2010): The German
      SAVE Study. Design and Results. MEA Study No. 6, MEA – Mannheim Research
      Institute for the Economics of Aging, University of Mannheim.
Börsch-Supan, A., and M. Gasche (2010): Kann die Riester-Rente die Rentenlücke in der
      gesetzlichen Rente schließen? Diskussionspapier Mai 2010, Mannheim Research
      Institute for the Economics of Aging, Mannheim University.
Bundesministerium für Arbeit and Soziales (2006): Renten- und Alterssicherungsbericht 2005,
      http://www.bmas.de, Berlin.
Commission for the Sustainable Financing of the German Social Security System (2004):
     Bericht der Kommission, German Federal Ministry for Health and Social Affairs,
     Berlin.
Coppola, M. and A. Reil-Held (2010): Jenseits staatlicher Alterssicherung: die neue regulierte
      private Vorsorge in Deutschland, in: Lutz Leisering (ed.), Die Alten der Welt. Neue
      Wege der Alterssicherung im globalen Norden und Süden, Campus, Frankfurt
Coppola, M. and M. Gasche (2011): Die Riester-Förderung – das unbekannte Wesen,
      Diskussionspapier Mai 2011, Mannheim Research Institute for the Economics of
      Aging, Mannheim University.
Corneo, G., M. Keese and C. Schröder (2009): The Riester Scheme and Private Savings: An
      Empirical Analysis Based on the German SOEP, Schmollers Jahrbuch 129 (2), 321-
      332.
Corneo, G., M. Keese and C. Schröder (2010): The Effect of Saving Subsidies on Household
      Saving - Evidence from Germany, Ruhr Economic Papers, No. 170
Deutsche Bundesbank (2002): Funded old-age provision and the financial markets. Monthly
      Report July 2002: 25-39, Frankfurt.
Disney, R., C. Emmerson and M. Wakefield (2001): Pension reform and saving in Britain,
      Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 17(1), 70-94.
Dünn, S. and S. Fasshauer (2003). Ein Jahr Riesterrente – Eine Übersicht aus Sicht der
      gesetzlichen Rentenversicherung. Deutsche Rentenversicherung 1-2.



                                                                                           28
Essig, L. (2005): Methodological aspects of the SAVE data set, Mea-Discussion-Paper 80-05,
       MEA – Mannheim Research Institute for the Economics of Aging, University of
       Mannheim.
Essig, L. and J. Winter (2003): Item nonresponse to financial questions in household surveys:
        An experimental study of interviewer and mode effects. Mea-Discussion Paper 39-03.
        MEA – Mannheim Research Institute for the Economics of Aging, University of
        Mannheim.
Gale W.J. and J.K. Scholz (1994): IRAs and household saving, American Economic Review,
      84, 1233-1260
Gerber, U. and M. Zwick (2010): Daten zur kapitalgedeckten Altersvorsorge – die Riesterrente,
       Deutsche Rentenversicherung, Heft 2/2010, S. 197 - 207
German Federal Ministry for Health and Social Security (2005): National Strategy Report on
     Old-Age Pension Provision, http://www.bmas.band.de/BMAS/Redaktion/Pdf/
     Publikationen/national-strategy-report-on-old-age-pension-provision.
Hoynes, H., M. Hurd and H. Chand (1998): Household Wealth of the Elderly under Alternative
      Imputation Procedures, in: D. A. Wise (Ed.), Inquiries in the Economics of Aging, 229-
      257, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Kennickell, A. B. (1998): Multiple Imputation in the Survey of Consumer Finances,
      Proceedings of the 1998 Joint Statistical Meetings, Dallas TX.
Kriete-Dodds, S. and D. Vorgrimler (2007): Staatliche Förderung der Riester-Rente für das
       Jahr 2002, Wirtschaft and Statistik 3/2007.
Lang, O. (2000): Steueranreize and Geldanlage im Lebenszyklus : empirische Analysen zu
      Spar- and Portfolioentscheidungen deutscher Privathaushalte. Baden-Baden : Nomos-
      Verlags-Gesellschaft.
Lusardi, A. (1999): Information, Expectations, and Savings for Retirement. In: Henry Aaron
       (Ed.), Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Washington, D.C.: Brookings
       Institution Press and Russell Sage Foundation, 1999, 81-115.
Lusardi, A. and O. Mitchell (2006): Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
       Retirement Wellbeing. Wharton School Discussion Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Madrian, B. and D. Shea (2001): The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
      Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 116(4): 1149-1187.
Pfarr, C. and U. Schneider (2010): Angebotsinduzierung und Mitnahmeeffekt im Rahmen der
        Riester-Rente: eine empirische Analyse, SOEPpapers on Multidisciplinary Panel Data
        Research n°341.
Pfarr, C. and U. Schneider (2011): Anreizeffekte und Angebotsinduzierung im Rahmen der
        Riester-Rente: Eine empirische Analyse geschlechts- und sozialisationsbedingter
        Unterschiede, Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 2011 12(1): 27–46
Ruprecht, W. (2004): Automatische Entgeltumwandlung in der betrieblichen Altersversorgung
      – eine Replik, Wirtschaftsdienst 10: 651-656.
Skinner, J. und R.G. Hubbard (1996), Assessing the Effectiveness of Saving Incentives,
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(4), 73-90.
Schunk, D. (2006): The German SAVE Survey: Documentation and Methodology. MEA-
      Discussion-Paper 109-06. MEA – Mannheim Research Institute for the Economics of
      Aging. University of Mannheim.

                                                                                             29
Schunk, D. (2008): A Markov Chain Monte Carlo Algorithm for Multiple Imputation in Large
      Surveys. Advances in Statistical Analysis, 92, 1, 101-114.
Schunk, D. and J. Winter (2007): The relationship between risk attitudes and heuristics in
      search tasks: A laboratory experiment. Münchener Wirtschaftswissenschaftliche
      Beiträge (VWL) 2007-9.
Sommer, Mathias (2007): Fiskalische Auswirkungen einer Erweiterung des Förderrahmens
     von Riesterrenten, MEA Discussion Paper 122-07, University of Mannheim.
Stolz, U. and C. Rieckhoff (2005): Aktuelle Ergebnisse der zulagengeförderten Altersvorsorge,
        Die AngestelltenVersicherung 9/05, 409-416.
Stolz, U. and C. Rieckhoff (2006): Zulagenzahlungen der zentralen Zulagestelle für
       Altersvermögen – Auswertungen für das Beitragsjahr 2003, RV-aktuell 08/06, 306-313.
Stolz, U. and Rieckhoff, C. (2008): Förderung der zusätzlichen Altersvorsorge für das
       Beitragsjahr 2005 durch die ZfA, RVaktuell 9/2008.
Stolz, U. and Rieckhoff, C. (2009): Beitragsjahr 2006: Erstmals mehr als eine Milliarde Euro
       Zulagenförderung durch die ZfA, RVaktuell 10/2009.
Stolz, U. and Rieckhoff, C. (2010): Beitragsjahr 2007: Zulagenförderung nochmals um mehr
       als ein Viertel gestiegen, RVaktuell 11/2010.
Stolz, U. and Rieckhoff, C. (2011): Förderung der Riester-Rente für das Beitragsjahr 2008 –
       Mehr als neun Millionen Personen mit Zulagen, RVaktuell 12/2011.
Venti S. and D. Wise (1990), Have IRAs increased U.S. Savings? Evidence from consumer
       expenditure surveys, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 661-98.
Westerheide, P., M.Feigl, L.Jaroszek, J.Leinert and A.Tiffe (2010): Transparenz von privaten
      Riester- und Basisrentenprodukten, Abschlussbericht zu Projekt Nr. 7/09, Zentrum für
      Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung, Mannheim.




                                                                                             30
