                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      EMPOWERING WOMEN THROUGH EDUCATION:
                           EVIDENCE FROM SIERRA LEONE

                                           Naci H. Mocan
                                           Colin Cannonier

                                        Working Paper 18016
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18016


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




We thank Deokrye Baek and Luiza Pogorelova for research assistance and Leyla Mocan for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Naci H. Mocan and Colin Cannonier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Empowering Women Through Education: Evidence from Sierra Leone
Naci H. Mocan and Colin Cannonier
NBER Working Paper No. 18016
April 2012
JEL No. I12,I15,I18,I21,I25,I28,J13,J18

                                            ABSTRACT

We use data from Sierra Leone where a substantial education program provided increased access to
education for primary-school age children but did not benefit children who were older. We exploit
the variation in access to the program generated by date of birth and the variation in resources between
various districts of the country. We find that the program has increased educational attainment and
that an increase in education has changed women’s preferences. An increase in schooling, triggered
by the program, had an impact on women’s attitudes towards matters that impact women’s health and
on attitudes regarding violence against women. An increase in education has also reduced the number
of desired children by women and increased their propensity to use modern contraception and to be
tested for AIDS. While education makes women more intolerant of practices that conflict with their
well-being, increased education has no impact on men’s attitudes towards women’s well-being.


Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2119 Patrick F. Taylor Hall
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu

Colin Cannonier
College of Business Administration
Belmont University
1900 Belmont Boulevard
Nashville, TN 37212-3757
USA
colin.cannonier@belmont.edu
Empowering Women through Education: Evidence from Sierra Leone


1. Introduction

       Individuals with more education command higher earnings in the labor market, and the

return to education is higher in developing countries (Psacharopoulos 1994, Schultz 2002).

Education has a positive impact on other outcomes as well, such as the health status of

individuals. More educated people are better producers of health; i.e. they are healthier in

comparison to those with less education (Chou, Liu, Grossman and Joyce 2010; Grossman

1972a, 1972b; Lleras-Muney 2005). In addition, an increase in education of a particular

generation has a positive impact on educational attainment of the next generation. Specifically,

an increase in mothers’ education raises the level of their offspring’s education (Currie and

Moretti 2003).

       The impact of education on well-being is also documented at the country level. For

example, education of the labor force, which is a measure of human capital in a country, is a

significant determinant of economic growth (Hanushek and Kimko 2000). Although low-

income countries struggle with low levels of human capital as a barrier to development, many

of these countries exhibit substantial discrepancies in education acquired by men vs. women.

For example, school life expectancy is 0.5 years higher for men compared to women in

countries where per capita income is less than $8,000.1 The difference in expected schooling is

about one year in favor of men among countries where per capita income is less than $4,000,

and it goes up to 1.4 years in countries where per capita income is less than $2,000.




1
  School life expectancy is the total number of years of schooling a child is expected to receive.
Information is based on education data obtained from UNESCO Institute for Statistics and income data
from the World Bank.

                                                  2
         Gender difference in education is not an isolated phenomenon. Similar differences

between men and women exist in developing countries in many other dimensions ranging from

life expectancy to participation in politics, to the propensity for being exposed to violence.2

Eradicating these inequalities is important for a number of reasons, ranging from human rights

to economic development. For example, drawing on Galor and Weil (1996), Lagerlöf (2003)

shows that long-run economic development in Europe is related to the long-term trend in

gender equality. Knowles et al. (2002) find that female schooling increases labor productivity

across countries. Schultz (2002) indicates that countries which have reduced the inequality of

educational attainment between men and women have grown faster. Furthermore, he argues

that developing countries should reallocate public education resources in favor of women on

the ground of efficiency, because social returns to education is higher for females than it is for

males.

         In this paper we use data from Sierra Leone to investigate whether education empowers

women.      Empowerment is usually understood as an exogenous change in the social or

institutional structure to provide opportunities that were not previously available. Examples

include changing the inheritance laws, providing property rights and voting rights, enacting

laws and implementing quotas to increase participation in the labor market and in politics (see

Duflo 2011 for a detailed discussion).


         We define empowerment as having the knowledge along with the power and the

strength to make the right decisions regarding one’s own well-being. Because of social norms


2
 Gender inequalities are determined by complex historical, economic, social and cultural factors. For
example, there is evidence for preference for sons in many developing countries such as China and India
where the ratio of newborn boys to girls is greater than one. However, the preference for sons is not
exclusively a developing country phenomenon. For example, Dahl and Moretti (2008) find evidence for
preference for sons in the U.S.

                                                  3
or a lack of economic power, women may feel obligated to submit to the wishes of others (e.g.

their husband or father) even though doing so would clearly decrease their well-being in some

circumstances. An example is the belief that the husband is justified in beating the wife if she

refuses to have sex. We argue that women are empowered internally when they can take

positions to protect their own well-being. In the example above, if a woman changes her belief

and declares that violence against women in the form of wife beating is not justified, we call

this an indication of empowerment.3 Another example is the attitudes towards the violent

practice of female genital mutilation (FGM), which is physically and psychologically harmful

to the woman affected. FGM is considered an extreme form of discrimination against women

as well as a human rights violation (World Health Organization 2008).4 If a woman who lives

in an FGM-practicing society alters her position on the appropriateness of the practice of FGM

as a social norm, and supports its abolition, we consider this an indication of empowerment.5

The general idea of this paper is similar to the one pursued by Jensen and Oster (2009) where

they investigated if access to cable TV modified women’s attitudes toward domestic violence,

preference for sons, and fertility.

        We exploit variations in schooling that were generated by an exogenous education

policy reform in Sierra Leone, implemented in 2001. The program increased access to primary

education, and its intensity varied between different districts of the country. We employ the


3
  Our argument is consistent with that of some sociologists, who long hypothesized that objective
inequalities between groups cannot be eliminated unless subjective beliefs about the legitimacy of these
inequalities are eradicated (Weber 1964 [1922]; Durkheim 1933 [1893]).
4
 United Nations has launched a program in 2007 involving the UNICEF, the UNFPA and other public
and private organizations to help stop the practice of FGM.
5
  It should be noted that male circumcision is a completely different practice than female genital
mutilation. Male circumcision is not harmful and it has medical benefits (World Health Organization
2010)

                                                   4
Sierra Leone Demographic and Health Survey, administered in 2008, to investigate the extent

to which exposure to enhanced educational resources had an impact on acquired schooling.

Using instrumental variables, we then estimate the impact of schooling on women’s

preferences regarding their own health and well-being. The identification strategy employed in

the paper is similar to that used by Duflo (2001) and Osili and Long (2008), in which

differences in program intensity between regions, and differences in the exposure to the

program across age cohorts are exploited. Specifically, individuals who were of the primary

school age (6 to 11 years) when the policy began in 2001 were exposed to the free and

compulsory primary education, while older individuals could not benefit from the program.


       We find that an exogenous increase in education triggers a change in attitudes that is

empowering for women.         One avenue through which education can modify individuals’

behavior is through access to information. For example, when a woman becomes literate she

can read and learn about the health risks of unprotected sex. Although we find evidence that a

switch from being illiterate to literate has an impact on women’s preferences in OLS

regressions, we cannot say with confidence that this is a causal effect because the impact does

not exist in instrumental variables regressions.      This is because of the weak relationship

between schooling and literacy in Sierra Leone.               Alternatively, education can change

preferences by influencing people’s time discounting (Becker and Mulligan 1997), which can

in turn impact behavior.    Education can also improve the bargaining power of women in the

household by increasing potential labor market earnings. The improved bargaining position

may help women to take positions which do not conflict with their well-being. Although we

cannot determine the particular channel through which education alters attitudes, we

demonstrate that there is a strong net effect of education.


                                                 5
        It should be noted that even if increased internal empowerment could be a necessary

condition to improve the well-being of women, it may not be sufficient to actually achieve a

tangible change in outcomes, at least in the short-run, if external obstacles remain. We find

indirect evidence on this when we analyze how education impacts men’s attitudes towards

women’s well-being. We also analyze the extent to which education alters women’s behaviors

such as the use of modern contraceptives, whether she is tested for AIDS, as well as her desired

number of children.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.               Section 2 provides some

background information on the educational system in Sierra Leone and the Free Primary

Education policy. Section 3 describes the data used in the analysis. Section 4 describes the

empirical strategy. Section 5 presents the results, and Section 6 is the conclusion.




2. Free Primary Education (FPE) Policy in Sierra Leone

    Sierra Leone is one of the poorest countries in the world. In 2010, per capita gross national

income was $340. About 70 percent of females and half of males of the country are illiterate,

and life expectancy at birth is 46 years. The population is about 5.5 million, and the fertility

rate is 5 births per woman. The civil war, which broke out in 1991 and lasted for about a

decade, killed at least 50,000 individuals (World Bank 2007).6 Even before the civil war,

children faced challenges in having access to education. For example, parents were responsible

for the payment of tuition and fees, teaching and learning materials and other expenses such as

textbook purchases and exam fees. One consequence of the civil war was the destruction of


6
 Although the civil war officially ended in January 2002, the war has come to an end in 2001 for all
practical purposes.


                                                   6
infrastructure, including schools. By the end of the war, 1,270 primary schools had been

destroyed, representing over 70 percent of all schools estimated to have been in existence

before the conflict started (International Monetary Fund 2001). As a result, more than half of

the primary schools had disappeared and this led to almost 70 percent of school-age children

being out of school (International Monetary Fund 2001).

    In 2001, Sierra Leone started implementing a policy of providing free primary education

(FPE) for all pupils in government-owned and government-assisted schools.7 Financed largely

from domestic public funds, donor contributions from international financial institutions and

foreign governments, the FPE was part of an overall universal primary education policy aimed

at constructing and rehabilitating basic education facilities as well as providing free access to

education. The specific goal was to increase basic education (comprising six years of primary

education and three years of secondary education) by making it free and compulsory.

         By far, this has been the largest education funding initiative to be undertaken in Sierra

Leone since its independence in 1961. During the period from 2001 to 2005, the government

committed almost 20 percent of its expenditures (equivalent to 4 percent of the GDP) towards

education. Almost half of all education expenditure was devoted to primary education (UNDP

2007). Consequently, the number of schools grew rapidly and by the end of 2005 there were at

least 4,300 primary schools, approximately 30 percent of which was newly constructed since

2001.

        Sierra Leone spans about 72,000 km squares (about 28,000 square miles, or roughly the

size of South Carolina). The country is divided into 14 districts (see Figure 1). With the

implementation of the FPE program, each district received new funding for education and the

7
 At least 95 percent of all recognized primary and secondary schools are either government-owned or
government-assisted (World Bank 2007).


                                                7
program was associated with a pronounced change in primary school enrollments. The number

of students doubled from 0.6 million to 1.3 million children between 2001 and 2004, and the

primary school gross enrollment rate exceeded 100 percent in 2004.8 In 2004, Sierra Leone

had the highest primary school enrollment rates amongst all Sub-Saharan countries (World

Bank 2007).



     3. Data


        We use data from the 2008 Sierra Leone Demographic and Health Survey (SLDHS).

The SLDHS is part of a broader program of demographic and health surveys conducted in other

developing countries. The SLDHS is a cross-sectional nationally representative household

survey and is the first of this kind in Sierra Leone.9 Interviews for the SLDHS were conducted

from April to June 2008.10 The data contain information for over 10,000 individuals who were

aged 15-49 (females) and 15-59 (males) in 2008.            Using the age reported in 2008 and the

reported birth dates, we identified individuals who were 8 to 11 years old in 2001. This

particular group was exposed to the FPE policy. We similarly identified those who were 15-21

years old in 2001. These individuals were beyond the primary school age during the


8
  Primary school gross enrollment rate for any given year is the number of students enrolled in primary
school expressed as a percentage of the population of primary-school-age children. In Sierra Leone, the
official primary school age ranges from 6 to 11 years. It is possible for the primary school gross
enrollment rate to be above 100 percent. This is because some of the enrolled may consist of older-aged
children who have returned to school after the war, pre-primary school-aged kids attending primary
school as well as repeaters.
9
  Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) have been conducted for more than 75 developing countries
since 1985 as repeated cross sections. In most of these countries, there are several waves of the survey.
In Sierra Leone, the 2008 DHS is the only one that is done so far.
10
  While funding for the survey came from a variety of international agencies, the collection, processing
and dissemination of the data were undertaken by Statistics Sierra Leone in collaboration with the
Ministry of Health and Sanitation, with technical support provided by ORC Macro International.

                                                   8
implementation of FPE and could not benefit from the policy. We provide more details on the

identification strategy in the next section.

        Because the district level information on the amount of funding is not available, we

impute funding received by each of the 14 districts by multiplying the total government

spending on the FPE program in 2004 (which was about 14 billion Le, or about $6 million at

the prevailing exchange rate) with the share of each district in local government development

grants. Information on the district-level share of local government development grants and

matching grants was for fiscal year 2006 (see UNDP 2007, p.79), while total funding allotment

for primary education came from the Government of Sierra Leone Budget and Statement of

Economic and Financial Policies for the financial year 2004. The resource variable per district

is the logarithm of funding received by the district per 100 teachers.

       We employ four variables as measures of women’s empowerment. As discussed in the

introduction, we adopt the definition of empowerment as one’s ability to make correct

decisions about the issues that impact one’s own well-being. We consider affirmative answers

to the following questions as being consistent with a woman’s well-being: (i) whether a wife is

justified in refusing to have sex when she is tired or not in the mood; (ii) whether a wife is

justified in refusing to have sex with her husband if she knows he has a sexually transmitted

disease (STD); (iii) whether female genital mutilation should be stopped as a custom. The

fourth question asks the respondent “whether a husband is justified in hitting or beating his

wife if she refuses to have sex with him.” If the answer of the woman to this question is in the

affirmative, we consider her beliefs being inconsistent with her well-being.

       We also gauge the preference towards fertility, measured by the number of desired

children. An alternative measure would have been the number of children ever born, but


                                                9
because we focus on young individuals (who are 15 to 28 years old in 2008) their fertility is

unlikely to be completed.      Furthermore, desired fertility is conceptually different from

completed fertility, where the latter may diverge from the former for a variety of reasons. Two

additional variables gauge whether the woman uses modern contraceptive methods and whether

she has ever been tested for AIDS.

       Column (2) of Table 1 displays the means and standard deviations of the full sample of

females who were either 8-11 or 15-21 in 2001. The information provided in the table pertains

to 2008 when the individuals were aged 15 to 28. Of this group, those who were 8 to 11 years

old in 2001 were exposed to the FPE. This is the “treatment” group, the descriptive statistics of

which are provided in column (3). Those who were 15 to 21 years old in 2001 constitute the

“control” group, listed in column (4).

       On average, women desire to have 4.7 children over their lifetime. The number of

desired children for women in the treated group is 4.2, while it is 4.9 for those who are not

exposed to the FPE program. The rate of modern contraceptive use is lower for those in the

treatment group, but this is likely because the average age in this group is lower (16.5) in

comparison to the average age in the control group (25.5). This is also the likely reason for the

difference in the rate of having been tested for AIDS between the two groups.

       The proportion of women who indicate that a wife is justified in refusing sex when she

is tired, is higher among the control group. The same is true for the question that asks whether

a wife is justified in refusing to have sex with her husband if he has a sexually transmitted

disease. It is somewhat puzzling that the proportion of affirmative answers is higher for the

control group which has less education. On the other hand, the proportion of married women is

larger in the control group. To the extent that married women have better information and

                                               10
experience on the issues raised by these two questions, it could be reasonable to have higher

proportion of affirmative answers among the control group. The proportion of women who

thinks that wife beating can be justified is lower in the treatment group, and the proportion of

women who thinks that female genital mutilation should be discontinued is higher among the

treatment group.

       Although the individuals who are exposed to the FPE are younger than those who are

not exposed, the former group has more schooling on average than the latter as expected (4.4

years vs. 2.1 years). The data set contains information on religious affiliation and ethnic

background. Islam and Christianity are the two dominant religions in Sierra Leone; and Temne

and Mende are the two largest ethnic groups. We also have information on whether the person

resides in an urban or rural area. The wealth of the person is measured by dummy variables

titled Wealth1, Wealth2 and so on, to indicate the wealth quintile to which the individual’s

household belongs. Total wealth is calculated using all household assets, including cars and

television sets, as well as dwelling characteristics such as flooring material, type of drinking

water source, toilet facilities.11 TV, Radio and Fridge indicate whether the household of the

individual has these consumer durables.      These variables are correlated with wealth.      In

addition, TV and radio may have a direct impact on attitudes because they may enable the

person to have access to information. For example, Jensen and Oster (2009) show that the

introduction of cable television into rural India has changed the reported acceptability of

domestic violence toward women and the preference for sons. Chong and la Ferrara (2009)

report that access to a particular TV channel, which has monopoly over soap operas (which


11
   For the details of the creation of this measure, see the DHS website at
http://www.measuredhs.com/data/Data-Quality-and-Use.cfm#CP_JUMP_5373 (accessed February 15,
2012).

                                               11
typically contain themes related to criticism of traditional values and female empowerment and

emancipation) is associated with increased divorce rates.

        The data set does not contain information on the region of birth, childhood place of

residence or the place of education. As a result, we cannot determine whether the individual

has received her education in a given region and then moved and was surveyed in 2008 while

living in a different region of the country. The basic assumption behind empirical analyses is

that individuals have received their education in the same region where they were interviewed

in 2008. However, later in the paper we identify those who have lived in the same residence

continuously since the school years. Using this sub-sample of individuals, who clearly have

not relocated since the elementary school age, we obtain similar results.




3. Empirical Strategy

          We first estimate the impact of the education policy on schooling acquired by women

using a specification depicted by Equation (1) below.


(1)                       Sijt = β0 + β1 FPECohorti + Xi Ω + γj + δt + εijt,

where Sijt stands for years of education (measured in 2008) of individual i, in region j, who was

born in year t. FPECohorti is a dichotomous indicator which takes the value of one if the

cohort of the individual was exposed to the Free Primary Education (FPE) policy, and zero

otherwise. The primary school age in Sierra Leone is 6-11. Those who were six years old in

2001 when the FPE policy started were 13 years old in 2008 when they answered the survey

questions. However, the minimum age of those who were part of the survey in 2008 is 15 and

these individuals were 8 years old in 2001. Therefore, we consider those individuals who were


                                                12
8 to 11 years old in 2001 (who were 15 to 18 in 2008) as part of the treatment group; and

FPECohort takes the value of one for these individuals. At the start of the policy in 2001,

those who were above the primary schooling age (e.g. those who were 12 or 13) were

nevertheless allowed to enroll in school. Because these older children have returned to school,

the primary school gross enrollment rate rose above 100 percent (World Bank 2007). Even in

2004, more than half of the children enrolled in the first grade of the primary school were older

than six years. This was true of the other grade levels of the primary school as well (World

Bank 2007). This means that children who were older than 11 years of age in 2001 could have

also benefitted from the program. Therefore, we chose as the control group those who were 15

to 21 when the implementation of the FPE started. This older group was not exposed to the

policy. The vector Xi includes attributes of the individuals such as religion, ethnic background,

residence in an urban area, and indicators of wealth. The equation includes district fixed-

effects γj, year of birth fixed effects δt, and a standard white noise error term εijt.12


      An alternative specification is depicted by Equation (2) where schooling is assumed to be

impacted not only by exposure to the treatment by the FPE, but also by the intensity of the

program.


(2)                     Sijt= φ0 + φ1(FPECohorti *Rj) + XiΨ + ξj + θt + υijt ,


where Rj represents per teacher spending allocated to district j.               As described in the

introduction, because of the devastation of the infrastructure during the civil war, there was


12
  Sierra Leone is divided into four main regions (East, West, North and South) comprising a total of 14
districts where one leader from each district has a seat in the country’s parliament. The design of the
SLDHS was done to take this district-level grouping into consideration. Figure 1 shows the division of
these districts according to regions.


                                                  13
significant damage to school buildings. While the government could not increase the number

of teachers at the end of the civil war in 2001, it started repairing damaged classrooms and

building new schools. The intensity of this effort, which differs between regions, measured as

log spending per 100 teachers in 2004, is represented by Rj.           Xi is a vector of personal

characteristics of the individual as before; ξj and θt represent region and year-of-birth fixed-

effects, respectively.


        To investigate the extent to which schooling had an impact on women’s preferences, we

estimate versions of Equation (3).


        (3)              Yijt= α0 + α1Sijt + XiΦ +μj + λt + τijt,


        where Yijt represents the response of individual i who was born in year t, and who

resides in district j to questions on health, sexual activity and husband-wife relations, shown in

Table 1. Sijt stands for the level of schooling of the individual; μj and λt represent region fixed-

effects and year-of-birth fixed-effects, respectively. Because unobservable characteristics of

the person, captured by the error term τijt, impact her preferences (Y) and because these

unobservables could be correlated with her level of schooling (S), Equation (3) is estimated

using instrumental variables, where schooling is instrumented by exposure to the FPE and

intensity of the program in the district (FPECohorti *Rj).




4. Results

        Column (1) of Table 2 displays the result obtained from estimation of equation (1),

where schooling is regressed, among other controls, on FPECohort, which is the dummy

variable that measures the individual’s exposure to the FPE program. The result indicates that

                                                   14
being a member of the birth cohort that was exposed to the program increases women’s

schooling by 0.5 years in comparison to the older cohorts that were not exposed to the program.

The specification displayed in column 2, based on equation (2) provides the same inference.

The advantage of this specification is that it allows for variation in resource allocation between

the districts and that year-of-birth fixed-effects are included. Column (3) reports the same

specification as in column (2) with the exclusion of all covariates other than (FPECohort * R).

The estimated impact of the program remains the same.

          The specification displayed in Column (2) of Table 2 is the basic first-stage regression

of the impact of the FPE program on schooling.         In Table 3A we provide the results of the

instrumental variables regressions where women’s behavior regarding using modern

contraceptives and testing for AIDS is analyzed, along with the analysis of their preferences

regarding physical violence against them, and the issues that impact their health.

          In each specification the primary variable of interest is the years of schooling, which is

instrumented by the interaction of the cohort exposure dummy and the education funding

received by the district of residence. The regressions employ sampling weights and standard

errors are clustered by year of birth and district. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3A show that an

additional year of education increases women’s propensity to use modern contraception by

about 12 percentage points and the propensity for being tested for AIDS by 11 percentage

points.     These are substantial impacts as the proportion of women who use modern

contraception in the sample is 17 percent, and 13 percent of the women in the sample has been

tested for AIDS. Column (3) of Table 3A demonstrates that an additional year of schooling

generates a decrease in the desired number of children by 0.34. The fertility rate in Sierra

Leone is 5 children per woman and the desired number of children in our sample is 4.7. Thus,


                                                 15
according to our estimate, the desired number of children of a woman who completes primary

schooling and receives six years of education will be 2 fewer children than the sample average

(or a total of 2.7 children). Whether this decrease in desired fertility would translate into an

actual decline in the number of children born depends on the interplay between the woman’s

and her husband’s preferences along with other social expectations and pressures. As we

demonstrate below, an increase in schooling for men does not translate into a significant

change in their preference for the desired number of children.

       Columns (4) to (7) of Table 3A present the results where we investigate the impact of

education on women’s attitudes regarding their own health and well-being. Columns (4) and

(5) display the results of the models where the dependent variable measures whether the

woman believes it is justified to refuse to have sex with the husband if the wife is tired (column

4), or if the husband has a sexually transmitted disease (column 5). In both cases, an increase

in schooling makes women more likely to answer in the affirmative, although the impact is not

statistically significant in case of the “refusing sex when tired” question. An increase in

education by one year increases a woman’s propensity by 11 percentage points to declare that a

wife is justified to refuse sex when the husband has an STD. At the sample mean this translates

into an increase in the attitude by 23 percent.

       Columns (6) and (7) of Table 3A present the results where the attitudes towards

physical violence against women are analyzed. Column (6) shows that one additional year of

schooling reduces women’s propensity to approve wife beating by about 10 percentage points.

About 36 percent of all women in the sample believe that wife beating is justified (see Table 1).

Thus, the result reported in column (6) represents a sizable impact on the attitudes regarding

acceptability of violence against women. Similarly, Table 1 shows that about only 30 percent


                                                  16
of women in the sample believe that female genital mutilation should be discontinued. An

increase in education by one year, triggered by the FPE program, increases women’s propensity

to declare that female genital mutilation should be stopped by about 9 percentage points

(column 7 of Table 3A). Running the models with no control variables provided very similar

results, as shown in Table 3B.

          In summary, the results demonstrate that an increase in schooling alters women’s

preferences in favor of protecting their own well-being. An increase in education makes

women more likely to declare that a woman is justified in refusing sex when there is a health

risk or when she is tired.          An increase in education also makes women more likely to

disapprove acts of physical violence against them.              These results indicate that education

empowers women.

Does Literacy Matter?

          In the SLDHS, literacy was evaluated based on the ability of the respondents to read a

sentence placed in front of them. We created a dummy variable, titled Literate, that takes the

value of one if the individual was able to read the whole sentence. We defined a second

variable, Literate2, which identifies those who could read the entire sentence as well those who

could read only parts of the sentence. This second variable identifies those who are literate or

are semi-literate. As shown in Table 1, 26 percent of the women in our sample is literate, and

32 percent is literate or semi-literate. This is consistent with the 30 percent literacy rate for

females who are 15 years of age and older in 2009, reported by the World Bank (UNESCO

Institute for Statistics 2011).13



13
     The literacy rate for men 15 and over was 53 percent in 2009.

                                                     17
          Table 4 presents the OLS results where all outcome variables are regressed on Literate.

The results are similar to those reported in Table 3A. Being literate is associated with a higher

probability of using modern contraception, a higher probability of having been tested for AIDS

and a smaller number of desired children. Literate women are more likely to agree with the

statement that a wife is justified in refusing sex if she is tired, or if the husband/partner has an

STD. Women who are literate are also less likely to indicate that wife beating is justified and

more likely to declare that female genital mutilation should be stopped. The same results are

obtained when we employed Literate2.14

          These OLS results may not represent the causal effect of literacy if unobserved factors

that are correlated with the likelihood of being illiterate are also related to women’s

preferences. Therefore, we ran the instrumental variables regressions reported in Table 3A,

replacing the schooling variable with Literate or Literate2 to investigate whether a switch from

being illiterate to literate (or a switch from being illiterate to being semi-literate or literate)

causes a change in women’s preferences. The results, which are not reported, show that the

coefficient of literacy is not significant in any of the seven regressions, regardless of whether

we use Literate or Literate2. Furthermore, this result seems to emerge because of the lack of

power in the first-stage regressions, where the F-values of the instrument are very low in each

regression.

          Because this result is somewhat surprising, we investigated the relationship between

reported schooling and literacy by exposure to the FPE program. Table 5 reports the average

literacy rate by education among those who are part of the control group (those who are not

exposed to the FPE program) as well as for those who are treated by the program. Among


14
     These results are not reported in the interest of space.

                                                       18
those with zero years of schooling, the literacy rate is essentially zero in both groups. Among

the group of women who have 1 to 3 years of schooling, the literacy rate is zero if they are part

of the control group (aged 21-28 in 2008), and about eight percent of this group is semi-literate

or literate. Of the women who have 1-3 years of education and who are part of the treatment

cohort (aged 15-18 in 2008), the literacy rate is 7.7 percent; and 38.5 percent of this group is

semi-literate or literate. The same pattern emerges among those with 4-6 years of schooling;

that is, the literacy rate is higher in the treatment group, but it is far less than 100 percent. The

fact that the literacy rate is extremely low among the control-group women who have some

primary education (1 to 6 years) may be attributable to the fact that some of these women went

to school during the civil war years and therefore it is likely that they did not receive high

quality instruction during those years. On the other hand, the FPE program started post-civil

war. Therefore women, who are part of the treatment cohort and who went to school under the

FPE program, are not impacted by the interruptions of the civil war. It is remarkable that less

than one-third (29.6 percent) of those who received 4-6 years of schooling under the FPE

program can read a complete sentence.15

       The literacy rates are 100 percent for those who have at least seven years of education.

This is true both in the control group and in the treatment group. This result is not because of

the effectiveness of the secondary school system. Rather, it is because of the fact that to enroll

in the secondary school, the student must take an exam, and those who are still illiterate after

having completed the 6th grade cannot plausibly pass the exam to qualify for the 7th grade.

       Taken together, these results indicate that an increase in schooling changes the attitudes

of women regarding the issues that matter for their well-being but that this effect is not due to

15
  Such poor education outcomes are common in developing countries. For example, Banerjee et al.
(2007) indicate that in India 44 percent of the children aged 7-12 cannot read a basic paragraph.

                                                 19
women’s improved reading ability due to increased schooling. The mechanism through which

education impacts attitudes is unclear. Education’s impact could be due to the exposure to

teachers/lectures even though such exposure does not significantly enhance literacy. It could

also be due to some other channel such as socialization experiences while in school; it could

also be the result of multiple influences.

The Impact on Men

   In this section we investigate the extent to which the increase in educational attainment due

to the FPE program has impacted men’s attitudes regarding women’s well–being. Table 6

displays the descriptive statistics for men. A comparison between men and women reveals an

interesting and surprising picture. For example, while 56 percent of women indicated that a

wife would be justified in refusing sex when she is tired (see Table 1), 68 percent of men

believe that such a refusal is justified. Similarly, the proportion who thinks that a wife is

justified in refusing sex if the husband has an STD is higher among men than women. Along

the same lines, the proportion of men who think that wife beating is justified is lower than the

proportion of women who think the same (0.23 vs. 0.36), and the proportion of individuals who

think that female genital mutilation should be discontinued is higher among men than women

(0.38 vs. 0.30) These are surprising findings because one would expect that the rate of support

for the statements in favor of women’s well-being would be higher among women. This

outcome, however, is not an artifact of the data we employ. It is consistent with a health report

on Sierra Leone (Statistics Sierra Leone and ICF Macro 2009) and could be a reflection of a

culture that fosters particular behavioral patterns for women and promotes a subservient

attitude to men.




                                                20
   Table 7 presents the instrumental variables regressions for men.           This table is the

counterpart of Table 3A, which presented the same information for women. Table 7 shows

that, as was the case for women, an additional year of schooling increases the propensity to use

modern contraception and the likelihood to have been tested for AIDS among men. On the

other hand, an increase in education on the margin (the mean years of schooling is 5 years

among men) has no impact on men’s attitudes towards women’s well-being.

Potential Migration

       The data set does not allow us to identify the district in which the individuals received

their education. There is, however, one question in the survey that asks individuals how long

(in years) they have been living in their current residence. For each individual we calculate the

number of years since they completed their schooling. If the number of years in the current

residence is greater or equal to the years since the highest grade completed, the individual has

not moved to another district since completing schooling. We call such people “non-movers.”

Note that the question about residence pertains to the location of the physical dwelling and not

to the city or the district of residence. This means for example, that a person who has

completed her schooling 10 years ago but lived in the same residence continuously for only 9

years is considered a “mover.” In reality this particular individual may have moved to another

residence in the same district -- thus her place of current residence and her place of schooling

may be the same. However, there is no way to distinguish between the cases in which the

move was to a new physical home and in which the move was to a new region. Put differently,

this crude measure forces us to classify anybody as a “mover” who has not lived in the current

place of residence longer than the number of years since schooling is completed. As a result,

we end up with those who definitely went to school in the same district as where they were


                                               21
surveyed in 2008, but we omit those who have moved to a different residence in the same

district. Consequently, we lose more than 1,000 observations, some of which are non-movers

who had to be classified as movers.

       The results obtained from this sample of “non-movers” are presented in Table 8 for

women. The point estimates of schooling are smaller in some cases in comparison to those

reported in Table 3A, but the main inference does not change.              Although the impact of

schooling on attitudes of women is not statistically significant at conventional levels for

questions regarding sexual relations in case of a sexually transmitted disease, education has a

statistically significant impact on questions pertaining to violence against women. Specifically,

an increase in education has a negative impact on the propensity to declare that wife beating is

justified and it increases the propensity to declare that female genital mutilation should be

eradicated.




5. Conclusion

        The impact of schooling on earnings is well-documented and an increase in education

improves health outcomes. These direct impacts of education on human capital and labor

productivity are important ingredients for economic development. Increased education can

produce other benefits for the individuals and the society by changing attitudes and

preferences.16 In this paper we investigate whether an increase in schooling changes women’s

preferences regarding the issues that are directly related to women’s well-being.




16
   For example, Dee (2004) finds that increased educational attainment improves civic engagement in
terms of voting behavior and support of free speech in the U.S.

                                                 22
        We use data from Sierra Leone where a substantial education program was started in

2001. The program provided increased access to education for children who were primary-

school age, but did not benefit children who were older. We exploit the variation in access to

the program generated by date of birth and the variation in resources between various districts

of the country. We analyze whether an increase in schooling, triggered by the program, had an

impact on women’s attitudes towards matters that impact women’s health and on attitudes

regarding violence against women.

       The household survey includes health-related questions on the acceptability of attitudes

such as whether a wife is justified in refusing to have sex if the husband has a sexually

transmitted disease, or whether a wife is justified in refusing sex when she is tired. It also

includes questions gauging attitudes towards violence against women such as whether beating a

wife is justified if she refused to have sex and whether the custom of female genital mutilation

should be eradicated. We also employ questions that involve health behaviors such as the use

of modern contraceptives and whether the person has been tested for AIDS, as well as the

desired number of children.

       We find that an increase in education changes women’s preferences. Specifically, an

additional year of schooling makes women more likely to declare that a wife is justified in

refusing sex when she is tired or when the husband has a sexually transmitted disease. The

same increase in schooling makes women more likely to disagree with the statement that wife

beating is justified and more likely to declare that the practice of female genital mutilation

should be stopped. These results indicate that education empowers women because an increase

in education makes women more intolerant of practices that conflict with their well-being. An




                                              23
increase in education also reduces the number of desired children and increases the propensity

to use modern contraception and to be tested for AIDS.

        We can determine a respondent’s literacy based on their ability to read a sentence as

asked in the survey. We find that a switch from being illiterate to being literate is not the

source of the change in attitudes. This is because an increase in education has no strong impact

on women’s literacy in Sierra Leone. Less than 40 percent of the individuals who have

completed 1 to 3 years of schooling under the new program (post 2001) are literate or semi-

literate.   It is unclear through which particular mechanism education alters women’s

preferences. The impact could be due to a variety of factors ranging from the influence of

teachers and peers as role models to socialization experiences in school. Nevertheless, an

increase in education has a causal effect on preferences, much like the causal effect of

education on health, although the exact mechanism remains also unclear in case of health

outcomes (Mocan and Altindag 2012; Chou, Liu, Grossman and Joyce 2010; Cutler and Lleras-

Muney 2010; Grossman 2008).

        Even though education empowers women so that they can voice preferences that are

aligned with their own well-being, whether or not this would translate into actual behavioral

change is unclear. This is because we also find that an increase in men’s education, triggered

by the program, does not alter men’s attitudes regarding women’s well-being. If men resist

change, it is unclear if women’s well-being would be improved in the short-run. At the same

time, it is also possible that a change in women’s preferences, detected in this paper, could

facilitate a change in men’s preferences over a period of time. Furthermore, much like the

transmission of human capital from mothers to daughters reported by previous research, it is

possible that the change in women’s preferences could have an impact on their daughter’s


                                              24
preferences. Regardless, these findings are potentially important for women’s well-being to the

extent that exogenous changes in the legal and political structure may not be effective in

improving women’s well-being if women themselves don’t believe that such changes are

necessary.




                                              25
                                            Figure 1

                         Sierra Leone divided by districts in 2004




Notes: The fourteen districts are as follows: Eastern region consists of Kailahun, Kenema and Kono;
Western region consists of the Western Urban Area (comprising mainly the capital Free Town) and the
Western Rural Area; Northern region consists of Bombali, Kambia, Koinadagu, Port Loko and Tonkolili
and the Southern region comprises Bo, Bonthe, Moyamba and Pujehun.

Source: Sierra Leone Demographic and Health Survey 2008 Report
                                          Table 1
           Summary Statistics: 2008 SLDHS Sample (Individual Level Data) - Females
                                                                                           Treated   Control
                                                                                            group     group
Variables              Variable Definition                                        All       (Ages     (Ages
                                                                                           8-11 in   15-21 in
                                                                                            2001)     2001)
                                                                                  Mean      Mean      Mean
                                                                                  (std)      (std)     (std)
                                                 (1)                               (2)        (3)       (4)
Desired number of                                                                 4.700     4.200     4.948
                       Number of children desired
  children                                                                       (2.116)   (2.113)   (2.074)
Modern                 Equals one if respondent uses modern
                                                                                 0.172      0.082     0.217
  contraceptives       contraceptives, zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent has ever been tested for
Tested for AIDS                                                                  0.131      0.054     0.170
                       AIDS, zero otherwise
Wife justified in      Equals one if respondent thinks a wife is justified in
  refusing sex when    refusing to have sex with her husband when she is         0.559      0.499     0.589
  tired                tired or not in the mood, zero otherwise
Wife justified in      Equals one if respondent thinks a wife is justified in
  refusing sex with    refusing to have sex with a husband who has a             0.485      0.443     0.507
  STD husband          sexually transmitted disease, zero otherwise
Wife beating           Equals one if respondent thinks that wife beating is
  justified in         justified if she refuses to have sex with husband, zero   0.357      0.260     0.406
  refusing sex         otherwise
Stop female            Equals one if respondent thinks the practice of
  genital mutilation   female genital mutilation should be discontinued,         0.296      0.371     0.259
                       zero otherwise
                                                                                  2.863     4.389     2.107
Schooling              Years of schooling completed
                                                                                 (3.966)   (3.481)   (3.976)
                       Equals one if respondent is able to read all of a
Literate                                                                         0.257      0.436     0.169
                       sentence, zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent is able to read all of a
Literate2                                                                        0.319      0.576     0.193
                       sentence or some parts of a sentence, zero otherwise
                                                                                 22.521    16.548    25.482
Age                    Age in years
                                                                                 (4.473)   (1.171)   (1.669)
Employed               Equals one if employed, zero otherwise                     0.662     0.458     0.762
Married                Equals one if married, zero otherwise                      0.558     0.209     0.731
                       Equals one if respondent’s household has a radio,
Radio                                                                            0.604      0.620     0.596
                       zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent’s household has a
Fridge                                                                           0.083      0.104     0.073
                       refrigerator, zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent’s household has a
TV                                                                               0.129      0.151     0.119
                       television, zero otherwise
Urban                  Equals one if resides in an urban area, zero otherwise    0.383      0.451     0.349
                       Percentage of respondents within the first wealth
Wealth 1(poorest)                                                                0.177      0.148     0.192
                       quintile

                                                       27
                                             Table 1 (concluded)
                         Percentage of respondents within the second wealth
Wealth 2 (poorer)                                                                0.168   0.150     0.177
                         quintile
                         Percentage of respondents within the third wealth
Wealth 3 (middle)                                                                0.195   0.182     0.202
                         quintile
                         Percentage of respondents within the fourth wealth
Wealth 4 (richer)                                                                0.215   0.225     0.209
                         quintile
                         Percentage of respondents within the fifth wealth
Wealth 5 (richest)                                                               0.245   0.295     0.220
                         quintile

Religion
                         Equals one if belong to Christian religion, zero
Christian                                                                        0.216   0.258     0.195
                         otherwise
Islam                    Equals one if belong to Islam, zero otherwise           0.773   0.730     0.794
                         Equals one if belong to another religion, zero
Other religion                                                                   0.011   0.012     0.011
                         otherwise

Ethnicity
                         Equals one if belong to Temne ethnic group, zero
Temne                                                                            0.367   0.331     0.385
                         otherwise
                         Equals one if belong to Mende ethnic group, zero
Mende                                                                            0.307   0.329     0.296
                         otherwise
                         Equals one if belong to another ethnic group, zero
Other ethnicity                                                                  0.326   0.340     0.319
                         otherwise
Observations                                                                     2,727    950      1,777
                         Funding for primary education in the district
Education Resources
                         measured as the logarithm of funding per 100             Mean=1.294, Std=0.637
(R)
                         teachers in 2004. (N=14)
The descriptive statistics are calculated using sample weights from the SLDHS.




                                                         28
                                              Table 2
                       The Impact of the FPE Program on Schooling - Females
                                                               (1)             (2)             (3)
                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                       Years of Schooling
           FPE Cohort                                        0.521**
                                                             (0.238)
           FPE Cohort * R                                                   0.706***         0.700***
                                                                             (0.204)          (0.236)
           Christian                                       0.918***         0.905***
                                                            (0.212)          (0.211)
           Temne                                             -0.294          -0.332
                                                            (0.245)          (0.246)
           Mende                                              0.265           0.254
                                                            (0.243)          (0.248)
           Urban                                           0.980***         0.925***
                                                            (0.208)          (0.206)
           Married                                        -2.111***        -2.155***
                                                            (0.219)          (0.222)
           Employed                                       -0.761***        -0.763***
                                                            (0.166)          (0.172)
           Radio                                           0.323**          0.302**
                                                            (0.139)          (0.138)
           Fridge                                          1.234**          1.255**
                                                            (0.539)          (0.537)
           TV                                               0.611*           0.610*
                                                            (0.334)          (0.325)
           Wealth 1                                         -0.325*          -0.298
                                                            (0.188)          (0.190)
           Wealth 2                                          -0.019          -0.024
                                                            (0.185)          (0.188)
           Wealth 4                                        0.656***         0.649***
                                                            (0.193)          (0.196)
           Wealth 5                                        1.535***         1.526***
                                                            (0.355)          (0.359)
           District fixed-effects                              Yes             Yes             Yes
           Year-of-birth fixed-effects                         No              Yes             Yes
           Observations                                       2,661           2,661           2,661
           R-square                                           0.445           0.452           0.281
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the birth-year & district level. Statistical levels of significance:
 * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. The FPE cohort consists of those born during the
period 1990 to 1993. Those who are born between 1980 are 1985 in the control group. FPE Cohort *R is the
product of the FPE Cohort dummy and the logarithm of district-level funding allocated for primary school
education for every 100 teachers in 2004. Regressions are weighted by sample weights from the SLDHS.




                                                        29
                                             Table 3A
       The Impact of Schooling on Preferences – Instrumental Variables Regressions – Females
                                     (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)
                                                                      Dependent variable:
                                  Modern         Tested        Desired        Wife       Wife                Wife         Stop
                                 contracep      for AIDS       number justified in justified                beating      Female
                                   -tives                          of      refusing        in              justified     Genital
                                                               children sex when refusing                      in       Mutilation
                                                                              tired    sex with            refusing
                                                                                         STD                  sex
                                                                                       husband
       Schooling                 0.118**        0.112***       -0.340*        0.043    0.107**             -0.095*        0.088*
                                  (0.053)        (0.036)       (0.183)      (0.043)     (0.054)            (0.056)        (0.047)
       Christian                   -0.033         -0.032        -0.030       -0.036     -0.079               0.072         0.085
                                  (0.058)        (0.042)       (0.204)      (0.050)     (0.066)            (0.060)        (0.054)
       Temne                        0.037         0.054*         0.036        0.014    0.083**               0.031        -0.014
                                  (0.041)        (0.031)       (0.140)      (0.035)     (0.040)            (0.042)        (0.041)
       Mende                       -0.054          0.039         0.011    -0.111***     -0.053              -0.034        -0.038
                                  (0.042)        (0.036)       (0.176)      (0.037)     (0.049)            (0.041)        (0.042)
       Urban                      -0.096*        -0.068*         0.080       -0.046     -0.090               0.063         0.028
                                  (0.053)        (0.040)       (0.248)      (0.051)     (0.066)            (0.066)        (0.059)
       Married                      0.153       0.238***        -0.173        0.052      0.168              -0.090         0.100
                                  (0.115)        (0.083)       (0.421)      (0.102)     (0.121)            (0.122)        (0.105)
       Employed                  0.111**         0.079**        -0.095       -0.028      0.030              -0.034         0.033
                                  (0.048)        (0.033)       (0.184)      (0.042)     (0.052)            (0.050)        (0.039)
       Radio                     -0.045**         -0.023         0.051        0.024     -0.020               0.035        -0.041
                                  (0.022)        (0.022)       (0.123)      (0.026)     (0.031)            (0.031)        (0.028)
       Fridge                     -0.154*         -0.102         0.279       -0.022     -0.076               0.065        -0.016
                                  (0.085)        (0.062)       (0.291)      (0.061)     (0.091)            (0.095)        (0.080)
       TV                           0.021         -0.063         0.058        0.032     -0.076              -0.014        -0.053
                                  (0.061)        (0.053)       (0.209)      (0.068)     (0.064)            (0.059)        (0.052)
       Wealth 1                     0.006          0.008         0.093     0.071**       0.063              -0.038        -0.028
                                  (0.032)        (0.032)       (0.179)      (0.036)     (0.044)            (0.044)        (0.032)
       Wealth 2                    -0.012          0.019         0.262        0.059      0.034               0.033        -0.035
                                  (0.026)        (0.027)       (0.191)      (0.041)     (0.042)            (0.038)        (0.027)
       Wealth 4                    -0.042         -0.050         0.044        0.007     -0.061              -0.023        -0.057
                                  (0.038)        (0.039)       (0.194)      (0.043)     (0.053)            (0.054)        (0.052)
       Wealth 5                    -0.091         -0.117         0.095       -0.021     -0.123               0.047        -0.114
                                  (0.090)        (0.076)       (0.350)      (0.086)     (0.108)            (0.101)        (0.092)
       District FE                   Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes                 Yes           Yes
       Birth year FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes                 Yes           Yes
       First stage (F-stat.)      12.041          11.362        12.041      12.819      12.221             11.762         12.041
       Observations                 2,661          2,615         2,661        2,624      2,640               2,655         2,661
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the birth-year*district level. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1,
** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. The sample comprises the FPE cohort (those born during the period 1990 to 1993) and those born
during the period 1980 to 1985. Instrument: interaction of FPE cohort and R, where R is calculated as the logarithm of total funding allocated for
primary school education for every 100 teachers in each district in 2004. Regressions are weighted by sample weight from the SLDHS.




                                                                    30
                                             Table 3B
       The Impact of Schooling on Preferences – Instrumental Variables Regressions – Females
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)
                                                                       Dependent variable
                                    Modern         Tested        Desired     Wife        Wife                Wife          Stop
                                   contracep      for AIDS       number justified justified                 beating       Female
                                     -tives                         of         in          in              justified      Genital
                                                                 children refusing refusing                    in         Mutilati-
                                                                              sex      sex with            refusing         on
                                                                             when        STD                  sex
                                                                             tired     husband
        Schooling                  0.137**        0.130***       -0.357*     0.053      0.111*             -0.106*        0.096*
                                   (0.065)         (0.043)       (0.204)    (0.051)     (0.067)            (0.059)        (0.050)
        District FE                  Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes                Yes            Yes
        Birth year FE                Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes                Yes            Yes
        First stage (F-stat.)       7.561           7.149         7.561      7.783       7.439              7.463          7.561
        Observations                2,721           2,675         2,721      2,678       2,694              2,710          2,721
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the birth-year*district level. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, **
indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. The sample comprises the FPE cohort (those born during the period 1990 to 1993) and those born during
the period 1980 to 1985. Instrument: interaction of FPE cohort and R, where R is the logarithm of total funding allocated for primary school
education for every 100 teachers in each district in 2004. Regressions are weighted by sample weight from the SLDHS.




                                                                     31
                                               Table 4
                  The Impact of Literacy on Preferences – OLS Regressions – Females
                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                                  Dependent variable:
                        Modern           Tested           Desired         Wife        Wife                 Wife            Stop
                       contracep-       for AIDS        number of justified in justified                  beating         Female
                         tives                           children       refusing        in              justified in      Genital
                                                                       sex when    refusing              refusing         Mutilati-
                                                                          tired    sex with                 sex             on
                                                                                      STD
                                                                                   husband
  Literate               0.165***       0.105***        -0.573*** 0.114*** 0.107***                      -0.097***        0.164***
                          (0.030)        (0.025)          (0.099)        (0.033)    (0.029)                (0.029)         (0.030)
  Christian              0.056**        0.056***        -0.286***        -0.012       0.005                 -0.004        0.151***
                          (0.024)        (0.015)          (0.085)        (0.025)    (0.033)                (0.024)         (0.027)
  Temne                    0.007           0.024            0.108         0.003       0.051               0.058**          -0.031
                          (0.027)        (0.021)          (0.117)        (0.032)    (0.032)                (0.030)         (0.036)
  Mende                   -0.019        0.074***           -0.081     -0.103***      -0.031                -0.056*         -0.012
                          (0.029)        (0.029)          (0.137)        (0.036)    (0.042)                (0.032)         (0.037)
  Urban                   -0.003           0.020           -0.174        -0.022      -0.001                 -0.015        0.094***
                          (0.021)        (0.018)          (0.135)        (0.032)    (0.033)                (0.037)         (0.033)
  Married               -0.069***          0.022         0.422***        -0.021     -0.047*               0.093***       -0.059***
                          (0.023)        (0.020)          (0.102)        (0.029)    (0.026)                (0.028)         (0.022)
  Employed               0.040**           0.007            0.112       -0.048*      -0.039                  0.031         -0.014
                          (0.018)        (0.016)          (0.106)        (0.027)    (0.032)                (0.024)         (0.024)
  Radio                   -0.017           0.004           -0.036         0.029       0.007                  0.007         -0.023
                          (0.016)        (0.015)          (0.110)        (0.023)    (0.026)                (0.024)         (0.023)
  Fridge                  -0.023           0.031           -0.079         0.015       0.037                 -0.041          0.074
                          (0.036)        (0.034)          (0.134)        (0.043)    (0.050)                (0.032)         (0.046)
  TV                     0.081**          -0.006           -0.125         0.061      -0.009                -0.072*         -0.006
                          (0.037)        (0.031)          (0.188)        (0.062)    (0.061)                (0.043)         (0.042)
  Wealth 1                -0.030          -0.029            0.177        0.059*       0.031                 -0.009        -0.055**
                          (0.023)        (0.023)          (0.167)        (0.035)    (0.038)                (0.039)         (0.027)
  Wealth 2                -0.012           0.021            0.230         0.060       0.037                  0.029         -0.035
                          (0.023)        (0.022)          (0.186)        (0.041)    (0.041)                (0.036)         (0.028)
  Wealth 4                 0.022           0.018           -0.168         0.029       0.002               -0.079**         -0.009
                          (0.020)        (0.020)          (0.150)        (0.035)    (0.039)                (0.035)         (0.038)
  Wealth 5                0.061*           0.044          -0.344*         0.025       0.023                -0.085*         -0.008
                          (0.032)        (0.036)          (0.192)        (0.056)    (0.052)                (0.048)         (0.050)
  District FE               Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes                    Yes            Yes
  Birth year FE             Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes                    Yes            Yes
  Observations             2,637           2,591            2,637         2,602       2,617                  2,631          2,637
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the birth-year*district level. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates
p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. The sample comprises the FPE cohort (those born during the period 1990 to 1993)
and those born during the period 1980 to 1985. Literate is a dummy variable to indicate literacy of the person. Regressions are
weighted by sample weight from the SLDHS.




                                                                   32
                               Table 5
Percentage of Literate and Semi-literate Females by Completed Schooling and
                        Exposure to the FPE Program.
                             Control Group              Treated Group
                        (Not exposed to the FPE      (Exposed to the FPE
                                Program)                   Program)
                                      Literate or               Literate or
                          Literate                   Literate
 Education                           Semi-literate             Semi-literate
                            (%)                        (%)
                                          (%)                      (%)
 0 years                    0             0.8           0            0
 1 to 3 years               0             8.3          7.7         38.5
 4 to 6 years               5.6           30.4        29.6         74.7
 Greater than 7 years      100            100         100           100




                                     33
                                           Table 6
                       Summary Statistics: 2008 SLDHS Sample - Males
                                                                                           Treated    Control
                                                                                            group      group
Variables              Variable Definition                                        All       (Ages    (Ages 15-
                                                                                           8-11 in     21 in
                                                                                            2001)      2001)
                                                                                  Mean      Mean       Mean
                                                                                  (std)      (std)      (std)
                                                 (1)                               (2)        (3)        (4)
Desired number of                                                                 4.438     4.122      4.687
                       Number of children desired
  children                                                                       (2.938)   (2.731)    (3.070)
Modern                 Equals one if respondent uses modern
                                                                                 0.228      0.072     0.350
  contraceptives       contraceptives, zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent has ever been tested for the
Tested for AIDS                                                                  0.070      0.024     0.101
                       AIDS virus, zero otherwise
Wife justified in      Equals one if respondent thinks a wife is justified in
 refusing sex when     refusing to have sex with her husband when she is         0.683      0.616     0.736
 tired                 tired or not in the mood, zero otherwise
Wife justified in      Equals one if respondent thinks a wife is justified in
 refusing sex with     refusing to have sex with a husband having an STD,        0.578      0.521     0.623
 STD husband           zero otherwise
Wife beating           Equals one if respondent thinks that wife beating is
 justified             justified if she refuses to have sex with husband, zero   0.231      0.239     0.225
 in refusing sex       otherwise
Stop female            Equals one if respondent thinks the practice of
  genital mutilation   female genital mutilation should be                       0.375      0.338     0.404
                       DISCONTINUED, zero otherwise
                                                                                  4.956     5.283      4.700
Schooling              Years of schooling completed
                                                                                 (4.678)   (3.547)    (5.392)
                       Equals one if respondent is able to read all of the
Literate                                                                         0.471      0.572     0.392
                       sentence, zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent is able to read all of the
Literate2              sentence or some parts of the sentence, zero              0.566      0.730     0.437
                       otherwise
                                                                                 21.582    16.555     25.528
Age                    Age in years
                                                                                 (4.733)   (1.171)    (1.858)
Employed               Equals one if employed, zero otherwise                     0.705     0.525      0.845
Married                Equals one if married, zero otherwise                      0.237     0.005      0.419
                       Equals one if respondent’s household has a radio,
Radio                                                                            0.653      0.632     0.669
                       zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent’s household has a
Fridge                                                                           0.101      0.112     0.092
                       refrigerator, zero otherwise
                       Equals one if respondent’s household has a
TV                                                                               0.160      0.144     0.172
                       television, zero otherwise
Urban                  Equals one if resides in an urban area, zero otherwise    0.440      0.472     0.414
                       Percentage of respondents within the first wealth
Wealth 1(poorest)                                                                0.166      0.166     0.167
                       quintile
                                                       34
                                            Table 6 (Concluded)
                        Percentage of respondents within the second wealth
Wealth 2 (poorer)                                                                0.160   0.153   0.166
                        quintile
                        Percentage of respondents within the third wealth
Wealth 3 (middle)                                                                0.160   0.148   0.169
                        quintile
                        Percentage of respondents within the fourth wealth
Wealth 4 (richer)                                                                0.209   0.219   0.201
                        quintile
                        Percentage of respondents within the fifth wealth
Wealth 5 (richest)                                                               0.304   0.314   0.297
                        quintile

Religion
                        Equals one if belong to Christian religion, zero
Christian                                                                        0.223   0.208   0.234
                        otherwise
Islam                   Equals one if belong to Islam, zero otherwise            0.776   0.792   0.763
                        Equals one if belong to another religion, zero
Other religion                                                                   0.001   0.000   0.003
                        otherwise

Ethnicity
                        Equals one if belong to Temne ethnic group, zero
Temne                                                                            0.386   0.354   0.411
                        otherwise
                        Equals one if belong to Mende ethnic group, zero
Mende                                                                            0.383   0.278   0.287
                        otherwise
                        Equals one if belong to another ethnic group, zero
Other ethnicity                                                                  0.331   0.368   0.302
                        otherwise
Observations                                                                     896     404     492
The descriptive statistics are calculated using sample weights from the SLDHS.




                                                         35
                                               Table 7
         The Impact of Schooling on Preferences – Instrumental Variables Regressions – Males
                                      (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)
                                                                        Dependent variables
                                   Modern        Tested for        Desired       Wife       Wife               Wife         Stop
                                  contracep        AIDS            number     justified justified             beating      Female
                                    -tives                             of          in         in             justified     Genital
                                                                  children refusing refusing                     in        Mutilati
                                                                                  sex     sex with           refusing        -on
                                                                                 when       STD                 sex
                                                                                 tired    husband
       Schooling                  0.069***        0.048***          -0.131      -0.037     -0.059              -0.024        0.011
                                   (0.026)         (0.015)         (0.216)     (0.056)     (0.049)            (0.039)      (0.031)
       Christian                    0.053           -0.003          -0.005       0.097    0.170**              -0.017      0.141**
                                   (0.049)         (0.035)         (0.312)     (0.075)     (0.076)            (0.057)      (0.059)
       Temne                       -0.008           -0.022           0.418      -0.058     0.105*               0.016       -0.019
                                   (0.047)         (0.027)         (0.256)     (0.050)     (0.056)            (0.045)      (0.054)
       Mende                        0.022           -0.040           0.137      -0.069     -0.025               0.048       -0.028
                                   (0.055)         (0.040)         (0.213)     (0.045)     (0.054)            (0.043)      (0.055)
       Urban                       -0.004           -0.072           0.528       0.000      0.060               0.082        0.052
                                   (0.065)         (0.045)         (0.390)     (0.122)     (0.109)            (0.079)      (0.075)
       Married                     -0.018           0.065*           0.721      -0.023     -0.112              -0.112       -0.036
                                   (0.063)         (0.038)         (0.473)     (0.117)     (0.113)            (0.090)      (0.067)
       Employed                   0.178***         0.121**           0.015      -0.045     -0.109              -0.011        0.046
                                   (0.065)         (0.050)         (0.476)     (0.134)     (0.123)            (0.087)      (0.072)
       Radio                       -0.007            0.030           0.070       0.028      0.007              -0.021       -0.010
                                   (0.036)         (0.023)         (0.233)     (0.043)     (0.056)            (0.047)      (0.047)
       Fridge                       0.057         0.179***           0.216      -0.070    -0.147**             -0.054       -0.050
                                   (0.043)         (0.040)         (0.235)     (0.089)     (0.075)            (0.078)      (0.059)
       TV                          -0.029            0.009          -0.280       0.009      0.088               0.078       -0.034
                                   (0.065)         (0.056)         (0.327)     (0.074)     (0.075)            (0.074)      (0.077)
       Wealth 1                    -0.031            0.018           0.521      -0.093     -0.085              -0.054       -0.039
                                   (0.054)         (0.035)         (0.442)     (0.078)     (0.085)            (0.077)      (0.070)
       Wealth 2                    -0.008           -0.001         0.677*       -0.034      0.023               0.016       -0.054
                                   (0.049)         (0.038)         (0.363)     (0.071)     (0.079)            (0.067)      (0.069)
       Wealth 4                    -0.005           -0.049        -0.797**       0.037      0.048              -0.039       -0.031
                                   (0.049)         (0.036)         (0.384)     (0.071)     (0.075)            (0.067)      (0.063)
       Wealth 5                    -0.124        -0.159***          -0.337       0.147      0.183               0.017       -0.002
                                   (0.076)         (0.061)         (0.670)     (0.136)     (0.133)            (0.117)      (0.109)
       District FE                   Yes              Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes                 Yes          Yes
       Birth year FE                 Yes              Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes                 Yes          Yes
       First stage (F-stat.)       12.145           11.736         12.145        9.145     10.499             11.240        12.145
       Observations                  883              723             883         859        863                 879          883
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the birth-year*district level. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, **
indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. The sample comprises the FPE cohort (those born during the period 1990 to 1993) and those born during
the period 1980 to 1985. Instrument: interaction of FPE cohort and R, where R is the logarithm of total funding allocated for primary school
education for every 100 teachers in each district in 2004. Regressions are weighted by sample weight from the SLDHS.




                                                                     36
                                              Table 8
       The Impact of Schooling on Preferences – Instrumental Variables Regressions – Females
                                     (Sample of Non-Movers)
                                     (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)
                                                                       Dependent variables
                                  Modern          Tested        Desired       Wife         Wife                Wife          Stop
                                 contracep       for AIDS       number justified in justified                 beating       Female
                                   -tives                           of      refusing         in              justified      Genital
                                                                children sex when        refusing                in         Mutilati
                                                                              tired     sex with             refusing         -on
                                                                                           STD                  sex
                                                                                         husband
       Schooling                  0.055*           0.043*       -0.227*       0.005        0.054             -0.064**        0.051*
                                  (0.032)         (0.023)       (0.126)      (0.028)      (0.037)             (0.030)       (0.029)
       Christian                   0.004            0.035       (0.098)       0.031       (0.013)               0.048       0.100**
                                  (0.039)         (0.025)       (0.161)      (0.038)      (0.054)             (0.038)       (0.040)
       Temne                      (0.001)           0.025         0.117       0.060      0.091**                0.030       (0.026)
                                  (0.033)         (0.027)       (0.135)      (0.045)      (0.042)             (0.039)       (0.039)
       Mende                      (0.006)           0.009         0.031    -0.138***      (0.012)             (0.043)       (0.043)
                                  (0.040)         (0.035)       (0.187)      (0.043)      (0.055)             (0.051)       (0.049)
       Urban                      (0.064)         (0.024)         0.040      (0.004)      (0.049)               0.052         0.025
                                  (0.040)         (0.032)       (0.218)      (0.051)      (0.061)             (0.053)       (0.054)
       Married                     0.000            0.065         0.324      (0.049)       0.073                0.006       (0.006)
                                  (0.064)         (0.051)       (0.308)      (0.067)      (0.079)             (0.076)       (0.065)
       Employed                   0.056*            0.015         0.045     -0.069*       (0.025)               0.011       (0.013)
                                  (0.033)         (0.025)       (0.139)      (0.037)      (0.044)             (0.036)       (0.036)
       Radio                      -0.038*         -0.036*         0.086       0.032       (0.010)             (0.001)       (0.035)
                                  (0.021)         (0.019)       (0.143)      (0.031)      (0.033)             (0.031)       (0.033)
       Fridge                     (0.070)         (0.036)         0.026       0.039     -0.107**              (0.035)         0.094
                                  (0.061)         (0.034)       (0.182)      (0.052)      (0.055)             (0.044)       (0.080)
       TV                          0.054          (0.058)         0.141       0.068        0.021                0.043       (0.045)
                                  (0.058)         (0.040)       (0.248)      (0.069)      (0.068)             (0.057)       (0.064)
       Wealth 1                   (0.022)         (0.031)         0.218       0.047       (0.020)            -0.108**       (0.007)
                                  (0.030)         (0.031)       (0.194)      (0.044)      (0.055)             (0.049)       (0.037)
       Wealth 2                   (0.017)         (0.001)       0.481**       0.005        0.009              (0.029)         0.004
                                  (0.031)         (0.029)       (0.201)      (0.045)      (0.053)             (0.042)       (0.031)
       Wealth 4                   (0.010)         -0.056*         0.237       0.030       (0.070)             -0.099*       (0.011)
                                  (0.042)         (0.033)       (0.235)      (0.049)      (0.056)             (0.055)       (0.052)
       Wealth 5                   (0.034)         (0.018)         0.007      (0.011)      (0.107)             (0.023)       (0.002)
                                  (0.071)         (0.060)       (0.328)      (0.083)      (0.096)             (0.068)       (0.084)
       District FE                  Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes                  Yes           Yes
       Birth year FE                Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes                  Yes           Yes
       First stage (F-stat.)      13.628           13.026        13.628      14.283       13.186               13.364        13.628
       Observations                1,612            1,589         1,612       1,585        1,600                1,608         1,612
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the birth-year*district level. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, **
indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. The sample comprises the FPE cohort (those born during the period 1990 to 1993) and those born during
the period 1980 to 1985. Instrument: interaction of FPE cohort and R, where R is the logarithm of total funding allocated for primary school
education for every 100 teachers in each district in 2004. Regressions are weighted by sample weight from the SLDHS.



                                                                     37
                                    References

Banerjee, Abhijit, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo and Leigh Linden. 2007. “Remedying
       Education: Evidence from Two randomized Experiments in India.” The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 122:3, pp. 1235-64.

Becker, Gary S. and Casey B Mulligan. 1997. “The Endogenous Determination of Time
       Preference.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112:3, pp. 729-758.

Chong, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. 2009. “Television and Divorce: Evidence from
      Brazilian NOVELAS,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7:2-3, pp.
      458-68.

Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce. 2010. "Parental Education
      and Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan." American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2:1, pp. 33–61.

Currie, J. and E. Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s education and the intergenerational transmission
        of human capital: evidence from college openings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        Vol. 118, pp. 1495-1532.

Cutler, D. and A. Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding Differences in Health Behaviors by
        Education.” Journal of Health Economics, 29, pp.1-28.

Dahl, Gordon B. and Enrico Moretti. 2008. “The Demand for Sons.” Review of Economic
       Studies, 75: 4, pp. 1085-1120.

Dee, Thomas S. 2004. “Are There Civic Returns To Education?” Journal of Public
       Economics, volume 88, issue 9-10, pp. 1697-1720.

Duflo, Esther. 2001. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction
       in Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic
       Review, 91:4 pp. 795-813.

Duflo, Esther. 2011. “Women's Empowerment and Economic Development.” NBER
       Working Paper. No: 17702.

Durkheim, Emile, 1933. The Division of Labor in Society. New York: MacMillan

Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 1996. “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth.” American
       Economic Review, 86:3, pp. 374-87.

Grossman, Michael. 1972a. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
      Journal of Political Economy, 80:2, pp. 223-255.


                                        38
Grossman, Michael. 1972b. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
      Investigation. New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
      Economic Research.

Grossman, M. 2008. “The Relationship between Health and Schooling.” Eastern Economic
      Journal, 34:3, pp. 281-92.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Dennis Kimko. 2000. “Schooling, Labor Force Quality, and the
      Growth of Nations.” American Economic Review, 90:5, pp. 1184-1208.

International Monetary Fund. 2001. Republic of Sierra Leone Interim Poverty Reduction
        Strategy Paper. Freetown: Sierra Leone.
        http://www.imf.org/external/np/prsp/2001/sle/01/063101.pdf (Accessed July 19,
        2010).

Jensen, Robert and Emily Oster. 2009. “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women's
       Status in India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124:3, pp. 1057-1094.

Knowles, Stephen, Paula K. Lorgelly, and P. Dorian Owen. 2002. “Are Educational Gender
      Gaps a Brake on Economic Development? Some Cross-Country Empirical
      Evidence.” Oxford Economic Papers, 54:1, pp. 118-149.

Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter. 2003. “Gender Equality and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of Economic
       Growth, 8:4, pp. 403-26.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality
       in the United States.” Review of Economic Studies, 72:1, pp. 189-221.

Mocan, Naci and Duha Altindag, 2012. “Education, Cognition, Health Knowledge and
      Health Behavior.” NBER working paper No: 17949

Osili, Una Okonkwo and Bridget Terry Long. 2008. “Does female schooling reduce
       fertility? Evidence from Nigeria.” Journal of Development Economics, Volume 87,
       pp. 57-75.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1994. “Returns to investment in education: A global update.”
       World Development, 22:9, pp. 1325-1343.

Schultz, T. Paul. 2002. “Why Governments Should Invest More to Educate Girls.” World
       Development, 30:2, pp. 207-225.

Statistics Sierra Leone and ICF Macro. 2009. Sierra Leone Demographic and Health Survey
         2008: Key Findings. Calverton, Maryland, USA: SSL and ICF Macro.
         http://www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pdf/SR171/SR171.pdf (Accessed April 17, 2012)



                                        39
UNDP. 2007. Sierra Leone Human Development Report. Freetown: UNDP.
    http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/nationalreports/africa/sierraleone/sierraleone_nhdr_20
    071.pdf (Accessed July 22, 2010)

UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2011. Global Education Digest 2011: Comparing
     Education Statistics Across the World. UNESCO, Montreal: UIS.
     http://www.uis.unesco.org/Library/Documents/global_education_digest_2011_en.pd
     f (Accessed April 17, 2012)

Weber, Max. 1964 [1922]. The Sociology of Religion. Boston: Beacon.

World Bank. 2007. Education in Sierra Leone: Present Challenges, Future Opportunities
      United Nations. African Human Development Series. World Bank: Washington,
      D.C.
      http://www.sierraleoneportal.net/rainbow/Portals/_EduSL/Documents/CSR_eBook%
      20(Sierra%20Leone).pdf (Accessed July 15, 2010).

World Health Organization. 2008. Eliminating Female Genital Mutilation: An Interagency
      Statement. Department of Reproductive and Health Research. World Health
      Organization: Geneva, Switzerland.
      http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/csw/csw52/statements_missions/Interagency_S
      tatement_on_Eliminating_FGM.pdf (Accessed April 17, 2012)

World Health Organization. 2010. Manual for early infant male circumcision under local
      anaesthesia. World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland.
      http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241500753_eng.pdf (Accessed
      April 17, 2012)




                                       40
                                             Appendix 1

                        Preference questions as appearing in the SLDHS

1.   If you could go back to the time you did not have children and could choose exactly the
     number of children to have in your whole life, how many would that be? Or for those with no
     living children, the following question was asked: If you could choose exactly the number of
     children to have in your whole life, how many would that be?

2.   Is a wife justified in refusing to have sex with her husband when she is tired or not in the
     mood?

3.   Have you ever used any (any of the contraceptive methods)?

4.   I don’t want to know the results, but have you ever been tested to see if you have AIDS?

5.   Husband and wives do not always agree in everything. If a wife knows her husband has a
     disease that she can get during sexual intercourse, is she justified in refusing to have sex with
     him?

6.   Sometimes a husband is annoyed or angered by the things that his wife does. In your opinion,
     is a husband justified in hitting or beating his wife in the following situations: if she refuses to
     have sex with him? (Other situations were given to the respondent as well)

7.   Do you think that this practice (female genital cutting) should be continued, or should it be
     stopped?




                                                  41
