                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SALES TAXES AND INTERNET COMMERCE

                                             Liran Einav
                                            Dan Knoepfle
                                          Jonathan D. Levin
                                           Neel Sundaresan

                                        Working Paper 18018
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18018


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




The research in this paper is part of an existing and ongoing data-sharing relationship between the
Stanford researchers and eBay Research Labs, of which Neel Sundaresan serves as its director. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18018.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Liran Einav, Dan Knoepfle, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sales Taxes and Internet Commerce
Liran Einav, Dan Knoepfle, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neel Sundaresan
NBER Working Paper No. 18018
April 2012
JEL No. D12,H20,H71,L81

                                            ABSTRACT

We estimate the sensitivity of Internet retail purchasing to sales taxes using data from the eBay
marketplace. Our first approach exploits the fact that seller locations are revealed only after buyers
have expressed interest in an item by clicking on its listing. We use millions of location "surprises"
to estimate price elasticities with respect to the effective sales tax. We then use aggregated data to
estimate cross-state substitution parameters, and substitution between offline and online purchases,
relying on the variation in state and local sales taxes, and on changes in these rates over time. We
findsubstantial sensitivity to sales taxes. Using our item-level approach, we find a price elasticity
of around-2 for interested buyers. Using our aggregate approach, we find that a one percentage point
increasein a state's sales tax increases online purchases by state residents by just under two percent,
but decreasestheir online purchases from home-state retailers by 3-4 percent.


Liran Einav                                        Jonathan D. Levin
Stanford University                                Stanford University
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall                                     579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                            Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER                                           and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu                                jdlevin@stanford.edu

Dan Knoepfle                                       Neel Sundaresan
Stanford University                                eBay Research Labs
Department of Economics                            2065 Hamilton Avenue
579 Serra Mall                                     San Jose, CA 95125
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                            nsundaresan@ebay.com
knoepfle@stanford.edu
1         Introduction
Internet retail amounts to well over a hundred billion dollars annually in the United States
and accounts for a growing share of overall retail commerce (US Census Bureau, 2011). The
majority of internet transactions occur across state lines, with striking tax consequences.
While online sellers located in a particular state must collect sales tax on in-state sales,
states currently cannot compel out-of-state sellers to collect tax on sales to state residents.
Instead, resident consumers are obligated to pay an equivalent use tax, but enforcement
is su¢ ciently lax that cross-state internet sales generally go untaxed.1 As a result, even
conservative guesses about purchasing elasticities suggest that taxes may play a signi…cant
role in shaping the geography and dynamics of online retail trade.
        Recently, the tax treatment of internet commerce has generated considerable attention.2
Sales and use taxes account for more than 30% of state tax revenues. Foregone taxes on
internet sales could amount to $10 billion a year, and this number is likely to grow (Maguire,
2011). Nevertheless, empirical evidence that might inform a discussion about internet tax-
ation remains rather limited, despite some notable e¤orts that we discuss below (Goolsbee,
2000a; Smith and Brynjolfsson, 2000; Alm and Melnik, 2005; Scanlan, 2007; Hortacsu et al.,
2009; Ellison and Ellison, 2009; Goolsbee et al., 2010; and Anderson et al., 2010).
        We provide some fresh evidence using data from eBay’s online marketplace. In the United
States, eBay’s marketplace accounts for a signi…cant fraction of internet retail commerce,
roughly $30 billion annually. The marketplace is large and diverse, with millions of buy-
ers and a huge array of sellers and product categories. We take advantage of this size and
diversity to observe buyers choosing across sellers located in di¤erent states, with corre-
spondingly di¤erent tax treatments and changes in those treatments over time, in order to
    1
     Varian (2000) provides useful background on the tax treatment of internet commerce. A key Supreme
Court decision in 1992 found that, absent explicit federal legislation, the Commerce Clause does not allow
states to compel sellers without presence (or “nexus”) in the state to collect use tax on sales to state
residents (Quill Corp. v. North Dakota (91-0194), 504 U.S. 298 (1992)). About half of the states with use
taxes ask taxpayers to report use tax obligations on individual income tax returns, but this e¤ort is largely
unsuccessful. Less than two percent of taxpayers report any use tax in states with this type of self-reporting
(Manzi, 2010).
   2
     As an indication of popular interest, a Google News search for internet OR online OR e-commerce
"sales tax" returned more than a thousand articles published in the …rst two months of 2012. Many of
these articles discuss internet sales taxes in relation to state budgets.



                                                      1
estimate the e¤ect of sales taxes on purchasing behavior. Although our data is limited to
a single platform, its overall market share is su¢ ciently robust that our analysis hopefully
provides insight extending more broadly across online retail.
   Our estimates rely on three sources of sales tax variation. The …rst is the di¤erence,
for online buyers, between in-state purchases that are taxed and out-of-state purchases that
are not. Of course, a direct comparison of intrastate and interstate purchase propensities
may understate the e¤ect of taxes if consumers have preference for their “home state”goods
or sellers. One way to address this is to use variation across states in sales tax rates, and
compare the relative intrastate purchase propensity across low tax and high tax states.
Thankfully, there is considerable rate variation: as of January, 2010, state sales taxes ranged
from zero (in Alaska, Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire, and Oregon) to seven percent
or more (California, Indiana, Mississippi, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and Tennessee). The
variation becomes even greater after accounting for county and local sales taxes. Figure 1
shows the cross-sectional variation in sales and use tax rates by state and county. Finally, a
third source of identifying variation comes from the frequent changes in state and local tax
rates. Figure 2 shows states and counties in which there was a change in the sales tax rate
during 2008-2010.
   We use these three sources of variation to estimate the e¤ect of sales taxes along di¤erent
decision margins. Our …rst approach exploits the fact that most consumers shopping on
eBay only observe a seller’s location, and hence the relevant sales tax treatment, after they
click on a listed item. We use data from millions of location “surprises”to estimate the tax
sensitivity of purchasing conditional on being interested in a given item. This approach allows
us to control tightly for the preferences of buyers and the desirability of items located in
di¤erent states. Following this “micro”approach, we estimate an average tax-price elasticity
of around -2, conditional on being interested in an item. We also use search and purchase
histories following adverse tax surprises to trace out substitution patterns.
   Our second approach uses more aggregated data on sales from one location to another. It
is closer to earlier work on internet tax sensitivity, so that our main contribution is improved
data and the use of tax changes as well as cross-sectional di¤erences in tax levels. We
consider an econometric speci…cation based on a constant elasticity (CES) model of online


                                               2
purchasing that allows us to map tax sensitivities into substitution parameters governing
choices between online goods, and the choice to purchase online. Using di¤erent sources of
tax variation, we estimate that a one percentage point increase in a state’s sales tax leads
to an increase of just under 2 percent in online purchasing, and a 3-4 percent decrease in
the volume of online purchases from home-state sellers. We connect these estimates to our
item-level “surprise” elasticities using a simple accounting framework that accounts for the
e¤ect of taxes on consumer search patterns.
    Existing work on sales taxes and internet commerce dates back to the in‡uential work
of Goolsbee (2000a,b). Using data from a 1997 Forrester Research survey, Goolsbee looked
at whether respondents in high-tax areas were more likely to have made an online purchase.
He estimated that up to 24 percent of online purchasers would not have purchased online
if internet transactions were taxed. Later studies by Alm and Melnik (2005) and Scanlan
(2007) performed a similar exercise using questions in the 2001 Current Population Survey.
The former estimates a tax sensitivity only a fourth as large as that of Goolsbee, while the
latter suggests there is minimal tax sensitivity in low tax jurisdictions but very substantial
sensitivity in high tax areas. Apart from pre-dating the widespread use of the internet, one
limitation of these studies is that the data is very coarse; the authors e¤ectively project a
yes/no indicator of e-commerce participation on home-state sales tax and household charac-
teristics.
    Other studies have taken a more targeted approach using data for a particular retailer or
product. Ellison and Ellison (2009) examine detailed data on the sale of computer memory
modules by a retailer located in California. Using price search data, they estimate that
consumers searching for certain memory modules are highly price-sensitive, with price elas-
ticities on the order of -50 and tax-price elasticities on the order of -10. They also use data
on the retailer’s distribution of sales across states to estimate how sales vary with (o- ine)
tax rates. They …nd that states with a one percentage point higher tax rate have almost 6%
more purchases from the retailer, but caution that their controls may not adequately isolate
tax e¤ects from other cross-state di¤erences. Smith and Brynjolfsson (2001), Anderson et
al. (2010) and Goolsbee et al. (2010) also …nd relatively high tax sensitivities for speci…c
types of products, namely online books, clothing, and cigarettes.


                                              3
    Finally, in an interesting paper that relates closely to the …rst half of our analysis in
Section 3, Hortacsu, Martinez-Jerez, and Douglas (2009) use a sample of eBay transactions
collected between February and May 2004 to estimate a gravity model of cross-state trade
‡ows. They focus mainly on the relationship between trade volume and distance, but one
of their speci…cations accounts for the sales tax on home-state transactions. Their results
indicate that, holding online expenditures …xed, a one percentage point increase in state
sales tax decreases same-state online purchases by 10% or more, about twice the magnitude
of the e¤ect we estimate. We discuss their estimates in more detail below.



2     Individual Responses to Tax “Surprises”
Our …rst approach to estimating consumer sensitivity to online sales tax takes an item-level
empirical approach. We exploit a particular feature of the search process on eBay, namely
that buyers observe seller locations and the sales tax they will be charged only after they
click on an item listing. Prior to clicking on a listing, buyers may have an expectation as to
whether the seller is located in their same state, in which case sales tax is due, or not, in
which case the transaction is e¤ectively tax-free. Only after clicking the listing, however, can
the buyer observe the seller location and eventually the exact sales tax. In what follows, we
use data on consumer browsing sessions to identify millions of these “surprises”and estimate
an average item-level sensitivity to sales tax.


2.1    Research Design

Consumers shopping on eBay see items displayed on listings pages, which they can reach by
browsing the site or entering search queries. Figure 3(a) displays a typical listings page. Each
listing contains a thumbnail picture of the item, a short description, its price (or the current
high bid if the sale is by auction), and the time until the listing expires. By default, listings
are ranked by relevance (determined by eBay’s “best match”algorithm); users also can sort
listings by price or expiration date. Seller location (and hence sales tax) is not displayed
and is not factored into the sort order unless buyers explicitly specify a local search, which
is very uncommon. Indeed, the only information about sellers on a listings page are ‡ags

                                                  4
indicating that particular sellers are “top rated”.
   Potential buyers click on listings to learn more or make a purchase. A click reveals an
item page (Figure 3(b)) that contains more details, including the seller’s location (shown in
the bottom right corner of Figure 3(b)). In principle, this is enough to determine if tax will
be due, but buyers can also click on the “shipping and payment”tab where many sellers list
more detailed tax information, and tax information is displayed after the buyer initiates a
purchase and before it is con…rmed.
   The idea of our research design is to compare buyers who arrive at the same item page,
some of whom are located in the same state as the seller (and would be charged tax) and
some of whom are not. In this way we compare like-minded buyers considering the same
item, only with di¤erent tax-inclusive prices. Of course, for sales tax to matter, at least some
consumers must take note of it. Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) and Ellison and Ellison
(2009) have made the point that sales taxes often may not be as salient as retail prices, and
we have seen in our own research (Einav et al., 2011) that eBay consumers appear not to
fully internalize shipping fees, which if anything are displayed more prominently than taxes.
For this reason, tax price sensitivity may understate retail price sensitivity.


2.2     Data

We assemble detailed browsing and purchasing data for several hundred thousand items
available on eBay. We start with the set of all items listed between January 1 and December
31, 2010. From this universe, we select all items that were o¤ered at a posted price with
at least ten available units, by sellers who use eBay’s “tax table” application. We focus on
listings with a relatively large available quantity so that we can observe multiple purchases
for each item (almost all transactions on eBay are single unit purchases) and avoid any
potential issues that might arise from listings selling out after one or a few purchases. We
focus on sellers who use the tax table so we can be con…dent of their tax collection practices.
The tax table is used by retailers who list signi…cant numbers of items: it allows a seller to
enter the tax rate it wishes to charge buyers in states where it has nexus, and the seller can
apply this rate easily to all its listings.
   We sort through trillions of user interaction events to identify, for each item, all page

                                               5
views by logged-in eBay users during the observation period.3 We restrict attention to users
located in the United States. We use the respective ZIP codes of the buyer and seller to
determine the applicable sale tax. We assume that for an in-state sale, the seller charges the
combined state and local sales tax in its own ZIP code, while for out-of-state sales no tax is
charged.4 We also calculate the great-circle distance between the centroids of the buyer and
seller ZIP codes. Finally, for each page view we determine if the user subsequently purchased
the item during the browsing session.
       Table 1 presents summary statistics for the items in the data. We report statistics
only for those items that had at least one qualifying purchase because in the …xed-e¤ects
speci…cations we use below, items with zero purchases provide no identifying information
and hence are dropped from the analysis. The resulting data consist of 275,020 listed items
posted by 10,347 di¤erent sellers. The average base price of these items is $37. The average
combined state and local sales tax in the seller’s ZIP code is just under 8%. We observe an
average of around 25 page views for each item. This gives us a total of 6,796,691 page views.
Overall, for the average item in our sample, about one in …ve of these page views results in
a purchase.


2.3       Consumer Tax Sensitivity

We estimate consumer sensitivity to sales tax using a …xed-e¤ects logit model of the purchase
decision. Let k index the items, and i index the viewers of each item. We assume that

                                                                  exp (uik )
                                 Pr(i buys k j i views k) =                    ;                           (1)
                                                                1 + exp (uik )

where
                    uik =    k   + log(1 +    ik )   + g (dik ) + 1fstate i = state kg:                    (2)
   3
     We focus on logged-in users so we can reliably identify each consumer’s location, and discard observations
with incomplete or ambiguous location information. Note that we require that the user logged in prior to
having viewed the item in that browsing session, to eliminate the concern that users might log in speci…cally
to complete a particular purchase. Also, if a user viewed a sample item in a given browsing session and then
viewed that same item in the subsequent session, we only use the data from the …rst session. We do this to
simplify the analysis, as it allows us to consider a cross-section of encounters for each item.
   4
     In the event that some sellers charge tax in more than one state, or adjust the local tax to re‡ect the
precise location of in-state buyers, this will introduce some measurement error in the “e¤ective tax rate”we
use below in our regressions.

                                                        6
       Here the …rst term     k   is a …xed e¤ect that captures each item’s general desirability,
including its pre-tax price.5 The second term is the e¤ect of the relevant tax rate              ik ,   which
is equal to the combined sales tax in the item’s ZIP code if i is a same-state buyer, and zero
otherwise. We include the distance between the buyer and seller, denoted dik , as a control
to account for the possibility that buyers may prefer nearby items, for instance because they
expect faster shipping or have more trust in local sellers.
       Our …rst speci…cation includes only these …rst three terms. In this speci…cation, the
primary source of variation in        ik   is between in-state buyers who are taxed and out-of-state
buyers who are not, holding …xed their physical distance to the item. One concern, however,
is that buyers may prefer in-state items even controlling for distance. Such “border e¤ects”
are common in the international trade literature (Anderson, 2011), and appear in Hortacsu
et al.’s (2009) eBay study. Focusing on consumers who already have clicked on an item
should rule out many obvious examples of home-state preference (e.g. Nebraska residents
preferring Cornhuskers t-shirts), but any residual preference might bias an estimate of
toward zero. In our preferred speci…cation, we include a dummy variable indicating whether
the buyer is located in the same state as the item. With this control, the tax parameter
is identi…ed from di¤erences in the same-state “avoidance” of buyers in high and low tax
states.
       The estimates are reported in Table 2. The …rst column reports our initial speci…cation
with no home-state preference dummy. The second column is our preferred speci…cation. To
translate the reported estimate of the tax coe¢ cient            into an approximate price elasticity,
one needs to multiply it by one minus the purchase rate, or by approximately 0.79.6 With
that in mind, our preferred speci…cation yields an approximate tax-price elasticity of -2.
That is, for every one percentage point increase in the sales tax (one percent increase in the
post-tax price), purchasing decreases by about two percent. A viewer charged a 5% sales
tax is about 6% more likely to purchase than an equivalent viewer facing an 8% sales tax,
and 10% less likely to purchase than one who is charged no sales tax.
   5
      To see how this works, let pk denotes the retail price and suppose that uik = ak + log (1 + ik ) pk +
g (dik ) + 1fstate i = state kg: De…ning k = ak + log pk yields equation (2).
    6
      The elasticities reported are computed at the margin corresponding to the average purchase probability
for items in our sample.



                                                      7
       One reaction to this estimate is that, for retail items in a highly competitive marketplace,
demand appears to be surprisingly inelastic. There are at least two reasons, however, to be
cautious of this interpretation. First, it is very plausible that buyers pay less attention to
the sales tax than to the retail price. Second, we are focusing on the response of buyers who
already have identi…ed and expressed interest in these items. If the primary e¤ect of a retail
price increase is to cause buyers not to click on the item in the …rst place, the relevant price
elasticity for the sellers of these items could be considerably larger (i.e. more negative).7
       The results in Table 2 on the e¤ects of distance and home-state preference are also
interesting. There is a clear and consistent relationship between distance and the probability
of purchase. All else equal, a consumer who is 250 kilometers from an item is about 3% more
likely to purchase than one who is 1000 kilometers from the item. One possible explanation is
shipping time: the closer the item, the less delay a buyer may expect. For a small fraction of
the items (just under 15%), shipping cost may also be a factor because rather than charging a
‡at shipping fee (typical on eBay), the seller charges a calculated rate based on the distance.
       The presence of these variable shipping rate items also provides a useful opportunity to
look at the salience of “add-on” prices. In column (c), we allow the e¤ect of distance to
vary depending on the type of shipping fee. Consumers are twice as sensitive to distance
when it a¤ects the shipping fee. To interpret the magnitude of the coe¢ cient, we observe
that the average variable rate shipping fee increases by around $0.56 for every doubling in
distance. If we take the distance coe¢ cient for ‡at shipping rate items to be a base preference
for distance and interpret the additional sensitivity for calculated shipping rate items as a
price response, this suggests that for a typical item in the sample, the $0.56 increase in the
shipping fee from a doubling of distance reduces the probability of purchase by around 1.4%.
For a good priced at $43 (which is our sample average, calculated shipping included), a $0.56
increase in the shipping fee corresponds to a price elasticity of about -1.1.8
       Finally, the estimates in Table 2 suggest a substantial home-state preference. Controlling
for distance to an item, consumers are about 10% more likely to buy if the seller is located
   7
     Dinerstein, Einav, Levin and Sundaresan (in progress) explore the relationship between prices and con-
sumer search behavior using variation in prices that arises due to the timing of retail price posting.
   8
     This elasticity estimate is about half of our estimated tax elasticity. This appears reasonable given that
calculated shipping rates, unlike ‡at shipping rates, depend on distance in a non-transparent way.



                                                      8
in the same state. The positive e¤ect is consistent with the results in Hortacsu et al. (2009)
and in our Table 5, but perhaps more surprising given that we are focusing only on interested
buyers. It may be useful in thinking about this e¤ect to consider how it is identi…ed. Note
that we can group the second and fourth terms in our logit speci…cation, equation (2), as
1fstate i = state kg [ + log (1 +           k )],   where   k   is item k’s combined state and local sales
tax. By comparing buyers located similar distances from an item but on either side of the
state border we can identify the combined e¤ect                  +   log (1 +   k ).   We estimate this to be
close to zero on average (i.e.          + log(1 + )             0). The variation in individual item tax
rates then allows us to identify , so that            falls out as an intercept. Identifying , however,
requires some extrapolation because nearly all the items have a combined tax rate between
…ve and ten percent. As a result, our home-state preference estimate varies a bit across
speci…cations, although it appears in all cases to be substantial.


2.4     Heterogeneity in Tax Sensitivity

Our baseline results yield an average tax-price elasticity for a wide range of retail items. We
also can take advantage of the rich data by splitting the sample and comparing purchasing
behavior for goods in di¤erent retail categories or at di¤erent price points. Such an exer-
cise is interesting in part because not many studies have been able to provide reliable and
comparable price elasticity estimates for large numbers of retail goods.9
    Table 3(a) reports separate estimates for the six largest product categories in our sam-
ple. We estimate the largest elasticity for electronics (-4.3), followed by sporting goods
(-3.3). Three other categories (cell phones, computers, and clothing) are estimated to have
a tax-price elasticity of about -2. The “home and garden” category is an exception, as we
estimate essentially no tax sensitivity. Although the estimates are not su¢ ciently precise to
be de…nitive, the results generally conform to the intuitive idea that price sensitivity might
be greater in more “commodity” type product categories than in categories with greater
    9
      One exception is the marketing literature that uses grocery-store scanner data to estimate price elastic-
ities for a variety of goods. For instance, a well-cited paper by Hoch, Kim, Montgomery and Rossi (1995)
reports average own-price price elasticities for eighteen categories of goods sold at Dominick’s grocery stores.
They lie in a remarkably narrow range, from -0.79 to -2.59.




                                                        9
product di¤erentiation.10
       Table 3(b) splits the sample based on the retail prices of the sample items. The estimated
tax coe¢ cient is larger in magnitude for more expensive items, which also have a lower
purchase rate. Translated into tax-price elasticities, we …nd the elasticity of the cheapest
items (selling for less than 6 dollars) to be just under -1.5, compared to -2.7 for items that
are priced at $24 or more. One hypothesis is that taxes are more salient for the expensive
goods because their dollar e¤ect is larger and perhaps noticed by more consumers. The
di¤ering estimates could also re‡ect di¤erences in the retail price elasticities, which also
would be interesting because it is not a priori clear that demand should be more elastic for
more expensive items.11
       In addition to exploring di¤erences across items, we also considered the possibility that
di¤erent buyers would be systematically more or less sensitive to taxes. In particular, we
looked separately at experienced and inexperienced buyers, using a segmentation developed
by eBay that correlates roughly with the number of past purchases a buyer has made. To our
surprise, we found only very minor di¤erences in tax sensitivity across buyers with di¤erent
amounts of experience, and no di¤erences that were statistically signi…cant.


2.5       Substitution E¤ects

Our …nal exercise in this section uses the tracking allowed by the clickstream data to inves-
tigate whether buyers who receive a “tax surprise”are likely to substitute to an alternative
item. To do this, we rely on the same set of user-item observations as in the analysis above,
but for each user, track whether he or she subsequently purchased a di¤erent item, and
if so, the characteristics of this purchase.12 We use this expanded data to investigate the
generalized response of browsing consumers who receive an adverse price shock. We view
  10
     One may notice that the estimated home-state e¤ect varies substantially across product categories.
Recall, however, our discussion in the end of the previous section, which makes it clear why this estimate is
mechnically (and negatively) a¤ected by the estimated tax elasticity.
  11
     To the extent that the higher price re‡ects a higher optimal mark-up, one might expect more expensive
goods to be less price elastic. On the other hand, if elasticities re‡ect search costs, it is plausible that buyers
might exert more search e¤ort for more expensive goods, making them more price-elastic.
  12
     Here, “subsequently” means subsequently in the same browsing session, where a session is de…ned (by
eBay) as a string of events from the same user in the same browser. A session ends if 30 minutes pass without
an event.



                                                        10
this exercise as interesting in its own right, but also as a way to validate that the tax e¤ect
documented above is capturing a behavioral response and is not merely a statistical anomaly.
   The top panel of Table 4 reports the results of a series of logit regressions. Each column
corresponds to a di¤erent outcome variable, but the regressors are identical and associated
with the original page view in Table 2. The positive tax coe¢ cients in columns (a), (b), (d)
and (e) suggest signi…cant substitution: individuals who receive a negative tax surprise are
noticeably more likely to purchase a di¤erent item subsequently in the session, more likely to
purchase an item from a di¤erent seller, and more likely to purchase an item from a di¤erent
seller that is in the same product category as the original item. The negative tax coe¢ cient
in column (c) is also interesting. The estimate indicates that consumers who receive a large
negative tax surprise are less likely to purchase some other home state item (which should
also have a high tax) than consumers who receive smaller tax surprises.
   These results are consistent with the idea that when users experience a negative tax
surprise, their response is not simply to avoid the original purchase, but to keep searching
and perhaps buy a similar item from a di¤erent seller. In the bottom panel of Table 4, we
attempt to hone in on the substitution e¤ect by relating subsequent purchasing to whether
a consumer purchased the original item. We report two types of results based on linear
probability models. In the top row we regress an indicator for a subsequent purchase on an
indicator for whether or not the consumer purchased the original item. There is little raw
correlation between the two purchase decisions. In the bottom row, we report the results
from an instrumental variables speci…cation in which we use the location regressors from
Panel A as instrumental variables to identify a causal e¤ect of purchasing the …rst item on
the decision of whether or not to make a di¤erent purchase. Here we …nd relatively clear
and strong substitution e¤ects. Indeed, the estimated e¤ect is surprisingly large (probably
too large): purchasing the …rst good essentially eliminates the chance some later good is
purchased.




                                              11
3     Aggregate Responses to Sales Taxes
The item-level tax sensitivity estimates reported above have the advantage of coming from
a well-controlled research design, but they are also a step removed from the relevant policy
questions, which concern changes in tax rates or tax treatment at the state or national level.
In this section, we pursue a second approach that brings us closer to a direct estimate of the
policy-relevant parameters. We use aggregated data on trade ‡ows to estimate the e¤ect of
sales taxes on online purchasing shares, and on the overall volume of online purchases. As
we explain below, we rely on a di¤erence-in-di¤erences strategy which exploits the variation
in sales tax rates to identify cross-state substitution in online purchases, while making use
of tax changes over time to identify the overall e¤ect on online purchases.


3.1    Data and Preliminary Evidence

We construct measures of online trade ‡ows using all eBay.com transactions during the years
2008-2010, excluding Autos and Real Estate. We aggregate these data in two ways.
    Our …rst dataset consists of annual state-to-state trade ‡ows. Observations in this dataset
are at the ijt level, where i represents the buying state, j the selling state, and t the year.
We de…ne the applicable tax rate for state i in year t to be the (population weighted) average
combined state and local tax rates for state residents, with the average taken across state
resident-months.
    Our second dataset, which we use to look at overall online purchasing, groups eBay
transactions into total monthly purchase counts by county and by ZIP code. Observations
in this dataset are at the it level, where i indexes the buying county or ZIP code and t
the month. In this case, the applicable tax rate for ZIP i in month t is the combined state
and local sales tax for residents in that ZIP-month, and for the county it is the (population
weighted) average combined state and local tax rates for county residents.
    We use the data on state-state trade ‡ows to look at the propensity of state residents to
make online purchases out of state, relative to their overall online purchasing and the quantity
and general attractiveness of goods available from di¤erent locations. To see roughly how
this approach works, let sij denote the share of state i’s online purchases that are from sellers


                                               12
located in state j. Let sj denote the overall share of eBay purchases that are from sellers in
state j. With this notation, the ratio sij =sj captures state i’s relative preference for state
j goods, and a natural way to look for tax sensitivity is to relate the relative preference of
state i buyers for home-state sellers, that is, sii =si , to the state’s applicable tax rate.
   Figure 4 presents a …rst-pass analysis. For each state, we calculate the share of state
purchases that were home-state purchases and divide this by the state’s share of overall
eBay sales. We then plot this measure against the state’s average sales tax. We construct
purchasing and sales shares using sales counts rather than transaction value; the plot looks
very similar using value shares. Two points are immediately apparent. First, all …fty states
exhibit a home bias in purchasing, i.e. sii =si > 1. Second, consumers in high tax states do
notably less home-state purchasing, consistent with tax shifting purchases out of state. Of
course, this analysis doesn’t account for potentially confounding factors such as state size
(intrastate distance) or the distance to states with attractive goods, but we will see below
that adding more detailed controls leaves the basic relationship intact.
   The second question of interest is whether sales taxes increase overall online purchases,
presumably due to substitution away from taxed o- ine (local) purchases. This question is
more challenging with a purely cross-sectional approach. Intuitively, while the overall share
of eBay purchases made from Iowan sellers might be a reasonable proxy for the share of
purchases that Iowans should make from these sellers, absent any home-state preference or
sales taxes, it is less obvious that the overall online (or eBay) purchasing by residents of
other states should be a good proxy for that of Iowans, absent any incentive from sales tax
di¤erences. Indeed, Figure 5 provides a simple plot of each state’s per-capita eBay purchases
against the state’s average sales tax. The raw correlation is negative, indicating that high
tax states generally do less eBay purchasing, a surprising correlation unless other factors
apart from taxes are at work.
   One way to address this is to control better for cross-state di¤erences. Roughly speaking,
this is the approach taken by Goolsbee (2000a,b), Alm and Melnik (2005), Scanlan (2007),
and in the …rst half of Ellison and Ellison (2009), all of whom regress some statistic of
online purchasing on home sales tax and a set of controls. Nevertheless, one may worry
that even relatively rich covariates will not su¢ ce to control for underlying heterogeneity in


                                                13
preferences, prices, or patterns of retail behavior or internet use across states. With this in
mind, we also report results that rely on the variation in tax rates caused by changes at the
state and local level (shown in Figure 2).


3.2       Sales Taxes and Cross-State Substitution

We start by considering the relationship between taxes and cross-state purchasing patterns.
As is common in empirical studies of trade ‡ows, we work with a CES representation of
consumer demand (Anderson, 2011). We think of each state as having a representative
buyer and selling a single composite good. Let i index buyer locations and j index “goods”,
or equivalently seller locations. Let qij denote the quantity purchased by state i from state
j, and let pij denote the unit price including any sales tax.
       With the CES representation, the quantities qij solve, for each i,

                                          X                          1         1
                                                                                                              X
                             max                   qij =   ij                                s.t.                     pij qij   wi :               (3)
                           qi1 ;:::;qiJ       j                                                                   j



Here wi is i’s expenditure on online retail goods, the                                              ij   are preference parameters, and              is
the elasticity of substitution. The CES demands are

                                                                                    1
                                                                             pij    ij
                                                                qij =                        wi ;                                                  (4)
                                                                              Pi1

where Pi is the CES price index for online goods.13 Assuming that this general demand
structure applies in each period t, and taking logs, we have:


                       log qijt = ait             log pijt + (1                ) log     ijt             (1   ) log Pit + log wit .                (5)

       This expression will be the basis for our estimates of cross-state substitution in re-
sponse to the sales tax on in-state purchases. To this end, we express prices as pijt =
(1 +     ijt ) pjt ,   where pjt is the base price on goods sold from location j, and                                                  ijt   is the ap-
                                                   X                     1     1=(1      )
  13
       The CES price index is Pi =                          ij pij                           : The one property of this price index we will
                                                       j
use is that @ log Pi =@ log pij = xij , where xij = pij qij =wi is the expenditure share of location i consumers
devoted to location j goods.



                                                                              14
plicable sales tax. Suppose that in addition we can write the preference parameter                   ijt   as
                       1=(1   )
 ijt   = h1fi=jg dij              jt ,   where h captures same-state purchasing preference, dij is the
distance between location i and j, and              jt   is the general attractiveness of location j goods.
With these assumptions, purchases by state i from state j at time t can be expressed as:


                    log qijt = ait + bjt         log(1 +       ijt )   + log (dij ) + h1fi = jg:           (6)


       We estimate the model as a Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood regression using our data
on annual state-to-state eBay trade ‡ows.14 In this speci…cation, the combined term log(1+
 ijt ) + h1fi   = jg is identi…ed by the relative propensity of buyers to purchase in-state, after
controlling for distance and the attractiveness of each state’s products. More narrowly, the
tax e¤ect       is identi…ed by di¤erences in the home bias of states with low and high sales
tax rates. One di¤erence with the earlier individual-level approach, however, is that without
item-level …xed e¤ects, we control less well for particular idiosyncrasies in the types of goods
that buyers in certain states might favor.
       Table 5 reports the results from four speci…cations with progressively tighter controls.
In column (a), we allow for buyer state by year …xed e¤ects (ait ’s in the above equation)
and seller state …xed e¤ects (assuming bjt = bj ). In columns (b) and (c), we relax the
latter assumption and allow for seller state by year …xed e¤ects. In each of the …rst two
speci…cations, we use both cross-sectional and time series variation in tax rates to identify
the e¤ect of tax rates. In the remaining speci…cations reported in columns (d) and (e),
we replace our distance and same-state controls with …xed e¤ects for each state pair (cij
dummies), and rely solely on the time series variation in tax rates. In column (d) observations
remain aggregated to the year level, while in column (e) we disaggregate to monthly purchase
counts and tax rates.
       Our main interest is in the parameter                given by the estimated tax coe¢ cient, which
is similar across speci…cations, ranging from -3.6 to -5.9. The interpretation is that a one
percentage point increase in a state’s sales tax rate will be associated with a roughly 5%
decrease in online home-state purchases. This calculation holds …xed the total online ex-
  14
    Here we follow common practice in the empirical trade literature (Anderson, 2011), which is to use a
count speci…cation rather than a log-linear regression model.


                                                          15
penditure; as we discuss below, the reduction in online same-state purchases will be o¤set
if a sales tax increase shifts purchasing from o- ine to online. Note that although the point
estimates are fairly stable across speci…cations, the estimates are not terribly precise: taking
column (b) as our benchmark speci…cation, the standard error is 2.3, and the 95% con…dence
interval is -1.3 to -10.4.
       The other coe¢ cient estimates in Table 5 are also of interest, in part because they are
quite similar to those reported in Hortacsu et al. (2009). As in their paper, we …nd that
trade drops o¤ with distance: state i’s purchases fall by roughly 7% as the distance to the
selling state doubles. There is also a substantial home state e¤ect: after controlling for the
adverse tax consequences of home state purchases, intrastate trade is about 75% higher than
would be expected based on distance alone. As a comparison, Hortacsu et al. (Table 3,
Model III) reported estimates that imply a doubling of distance reduces trade by about 5%
and …nd an almost identical same-state excess trade of 75%.15 Interestingly, the estimated
distance e¤ects for eBay purchasing are substantially smaller than what is estimated in
many similar gravity-type regressions (including estimates for purchasing on MercadoLibre,
a South American platform, also reported in Hortacsu et al. (2009)).


3.3       Sales Taxes and Online-O- ine Substitution

The results reported in the previous section speak to the e¤ect of sales tax on the geographic
distribution of online trade, holding …xed total online spending. In this section, we consider
the e¤ect of sales tax on the overall propensity to shop online.
       We start with a simple log-log representation of consumer demand for online purchases,


                                       log Qit =    it        log Pit =P it ;                                  (7)
  15
     There are some minor di¤erences between speci…cations. One is that Hortacsu et al. measure interstate
distance as the great circle distance between state capitals and intrastate distance as the population weighted
distance between the two most populous cities in the state, whereas we measure distance as the average eBay
transaction distance with the distance of each transaction computed using the distance between buyer and
seller ZIP codes. As noted in the introduction, their paper also includes state sales tax in one set of regressions
(Table 7, Models II and III). Their estimated tax e¤ects are not directly comparable to ours, as they do
not account for county and local taxes, use indicators for integer state tax levels instead of a continuous
regressor, and interact tax rate with distance. To …rst approximation, their estimated tax e¤ect is rather
larger than ours, at least 10, and perhaps 20.



                                                         16
where Qit are counts of total online purchases by consumers in location i at time t,                         it

captures local preferences and overall consumption,                   is the price elasticity, and Pit and
P it are, respectively, online and o- ine price indices.16 Making the assumption that “own-
location”purchases comprise only a small share of online purchases, but essentially all o- ine
                                                        1
purchases, we can write Pit =P it = (1 +         it )       Rit , where Rit represents the relative online-
to-o- ine prices before sales tax is imposed.
       For our econometric model, we further assume that both the general level of online
demand       it   and the pre-tax relative prices Rit can be decomposed into a location-speci…c
component, a time component, and e¤ects that are captured by observed covariates. So we
have
                               log Qit = ai + bt + Zit + log(1 +             it ):                          (8)

Implicit in this speci…cation is an assumption that targeted changes in state or local sale
tax are passed through fully to consumers. Suppose that instead sellers absorb a constant
proportion of tax increases, say, 1         . Then the coe¢ cient on log (1 +         it )   would be   =     .
Either way, the estimated coe¢ cient will capture the e¤ective response of online purchases to
a tax change, but in the latter case the coe¢ cient cannot be interpreted purely as a demand
elasticity, but instead as the combined e¤ect of (o- ine) price changes and substitution.
       We start by attempting to use only cross-sectional variation, using county-level counts
of eBay purchases during 2010. In Panel A of Table 6 we report speci…cations that use
cross-state and within-state variation in county-level tax rates, with and without a rich set
of county-level controls (see the notes to Table 6 for details). The estimated tax e¤ect is
imprecise and varies greatly across speci…cations, indicating the di¢ culty of constructing
suitable controls for local purchasing propensities.
       In Panel B, we consider an alternative matching approach. We restrict attention to the
roughly 35% of counties that lie on state boundaries, and match adjacent counties that lie
on two sides of a state border. We then re-run our regression speci…cation with …xed e¤ects
for each border pair. Unfortunately, the estimates are imprecise, vary across speci…cations,
  16
    Note that, for consistency with the previous section, one can think of Pit as the CES price index and Qit
as the CES aggregator of online consumption. In estimation, however, we will use overall purchase counts
as our measure of Qit .



                                                        17
and often have the “wrong”sign.
       Our preferred approach, therefore, is to rely on within-locality tax changes. In this
speci…cation, we include …xed e¤ects for each locality and each month, so that identi…cation is
based on changes in county-level or ZIP-level purchasing following a tax change as compared
to the average change over that same time period for other localities that did not experience
a tax change. The results are reported in Panel C of Table 6. Columns (a)-(c) report county-
level purchasing speci…cations, and columns (d)-(f) show ZIP-level results. The estimated
tax e¤ect now has the expected sign, is estimated with some precision, and is quite similar
across the di¤erent levels of aggregation.
       Our baseline estimate of    (or alternatively of       if one favors the imperfect pass-through
interpretation) is around 1.8, meaning that a one percentage point increase in sales tax
increases online purchasing by 1.8%. In comparison, Goolsbee’s (2000a) baseline estimated
elasticity using cross-sectional variation in tax rates was 2.3, increasing to 3.4 with the
addition of more sophisticated controls. The elasticity for memory modules reported in
Ellison and Ellison (2009), again identi…ed o¤ cross-sectional variation in state tax rates, is
even higher, roughly 6 or 7.17 While our estimate appears to be somewhat small relative to
those reported previously, it nonetheless implies substantial e¤ects of sales taxes on online
trade. Given an average combined tax rate of about 7 percent, it suggests that sales tax
e¤ects might be responsible for boosting online purchasing by 10% or more.


3.4       Combined E¤ects of Sales Tax Changes

So far we have considered the two margins of substitution— online-o- ine and online cross-
state— separately. To think about the possible e¤ect of changes in sales taxes, or changes in
the current legal regime, it is useful to combine the e¤ects. To do this, we combine our model
of overall online purchasing (equation (7)) with our model of how online spending is distrib-
uted (equation (5)), noting that in the latter we can represent overall online expenditure wi
  17
     The estimates in Ellison and Ellison concern di¤erences in purchasing from their California retailer by
residents of high and low tax states, and hence combine online-o- ine and cross-state substitution e¤ects. To
the extent that each state represents only a small share of online sales, however, their number should re‡ect
mainly online-o- ine substitution.




                                                     18
as Pi Qi .18
       Now, consider the e¤ect of an increase in state i’s sales tax            i,   which under the current
legal regime will be applied to both o¤-line and in-state online purchases. To the extent that
state i represents a relatively small share of both online demand and sales, we can assume
that this will have no direct e¤ect on either online (pre-tax) prices or on i’s online price
index Pi , and let’s assume for simplicity that o- ine sellers fully pass through the tax to
consumers.19 Then we have
                                               @ log Qi
                                                                 ; 20                                        (9)
                                            @ log(1 + i )
and, using the fact that @ log wi =@ log(1 +          i)     ,

                                        @ log qij
                                                            1fi = jg + .                                   (10)
                                     @ log(1 + i )

So, if we consider a one percentage point decrease in state sales tax (such as occurred in
California on July 1, 2011), our baseline estimates suggest roughly a 1.5-2% decrease in online
purchases by state residents, and a corresponding decrease in cross-state online purchases,
but a 3-4% increase in online purchases by state residents from home-state sellers.
       A more sophisticated analysis might relax either the “small-share” assumption, or the
“full pass-through” assumption.            To see that the former is not particularly important,
suppose we maintain the pass-through assumption, and let xii = (pii qii ) =wi denote the
share of online expenditure that state i devotes to home-state purchases. With CES de-
mand, @ log Pi =@ log(1 +       i)   = xii ; so if xii is not trivial, an increase in        i   will a¤ect on-
line (post-tax) prices as well as o- ine prices. Instead of the expressions above, we have
  18
      Note that for this connection to be tight, then as noted in footnote 16 above, we need to interpret Qit
in the overall online demand model as the CES aggregate of online consumption, not as a count of online
purchases as we did in our empirical implementation.
   19
      Note that more generally, if pij = 1 + i 1fi=jg pj , and sellers do not change pre-tax prices in response
to a change in i , then under our CES speci…cation @ log Pi =@ log(1+ i ) = (pii qii ) =wi = xii . The assumption
that xii 0 is a reasonable approximation for most states. Using expenditure shares for eBay, the median
state has xii = 0:03, and only two states (CA and NY) have xii > 0:10 (see Appendix Table A1, column
(k)).
   20
      Note that i       log (1 + i ) for low tax rates, so the semi-elasticity with respect to the tax rate
@ log Qi =@ i is approximately equivalent to @ log Qi =@ log(1 + i ), the elasticity with respect to the tax
multiple (1 + i ).




                                                       19
@ log Qi =@ log(1 +   i)   = (1    xii ), and

                               @ log qij
                                          =     1fi = jg + + (           ) xii .                 (11)
                            @ log(1 + i )

To see that this makes little di¤erence, note that for most states xii < 5% and even for
California xii is only 0.21, so that @ log Qi =@ log(1 +    i)   is still 1:8 0:79 = 1:4.
   The pass-through assumption is potentially more relevant, particularly if one were to
consider a large structural change such as imposing a requirement that sales tax be collected
on all interstate online sales. While considerable caution should be placed on such a large
extrapolation from the environment generating our estimates, a back-of-the-envelope calcu-
lation is interesting. As of January 1, 2010, the population-weighted average sales tax in
the United States was about 7.3%. Taken literally, our estimates imply that if that tax rate
were applied to all interstate online transactions, and online prices responded in the same
way that o- ine prices do to the tax changes in our data, overall online purchasing would
fall by about 12%.
   To see why pass-through might be relevant, however, suppose that the (relatively small)
sales tax changes in our data did not a¤ect retail prices, but that in response to a major
legislative shift, online sellers would adjust prices. If, for instance, prices fell so that retailers
absorbed half of the 7.3% online tax increase, we would expect only a 6.2% fall in online
purchases and a 3.65 percentage point fall in seller margins. If current margins are 30%,
online seller pro…ts would fall by about 18%, so such a change could have a considerable
impact on online retailers.


3.5     Reconciling the Individual and Aggregate Estimates

Our individual-level estimates of tax sensitivity in Section 2, and our aggregate estimates
in Section 3 are based on somewhat di¤erent data samples and research designs, but more
importantly they focus on conceptually distinct consumer responses to sales taxes. In this
section, we clarify the distinction and show how one can link the estimates in Section 2 and
3 by considering the relationship between sales taxes and page views.
   Some simple accounting is useful here. Let Kj denote the set of items available in location


                                                  20
j, and (with some notational abuse) let qik denote the number of purchases of item k by
location i buyers. Now, suppose we decompose each qik into the number of page views by
location i buyers and the conversion rate on these views, so that qik          vik zik .
      It follows that the total purchases of location j items by location i buyers can be written
as:
                                          X              X
                                  qij =          qik =          (vik zik ) ;                (12)
                                          k2Kj           k2Kj

and the purchase elasticity with respect to the location i sales tax is

                  @ log qij    X vik zik @ log vik    X vik zik @ log zik
                             =                      +                       :               (13)
               @ log (1 + i ) k2K qij @ log (1 + i ) k2K qij @ log (1 + i )
                                   j                                     j




Thus, the purchase elasticity is equal to the sum of a (weighted) views elasticity and a
(weighted) conversion elasticity. To the extent that sales taxes a¤ect consumer searching
and browsing patterns, we should expect the e¤ects of sales taxes on conversion rates to be
di¤erent from the e¤ects on aggregate purchasing.
      To take this one step further, we collected data on user search, focusing on searches
for which eBay’s default search parameters and sort order were used; these represent all
but a small minority of searches. For each search, we extract the buyer’s location and the
locations of items appearing on the …rst page of the search results. Under these default
settings, eBay does not select or sort resulting items by location or e¤ective tax rate. While,
as noted earlier, eBay does not surface information on item location in its search results
display (Figure 3(a)), one may expect buyers to vary in the eBay searches they do as a result
of underlying di¤erences in tastes and incentives. For instance, a user in Montana could be
more likely to search for snowshoes and a user in California more likely to search for sandals,
than vice versa. Furthermore, a consumer in Montana may search for and purchase a laptop
at her local big box retailer, paying no sales tax, while a similar consumer in California would
choose to search for laptops on eBay.
      Using these data, we estimate the aggregate speci…cation from Table 5, column (b), where
the dependent variable is a count of the number of times an item from state j appeared in
a search by a user in state i. Despite eliminating the possibility for the buyer or eBay’s


                                                    21
algorithm to arti…cially impose location constraints, there is a signi…cant e¤ect of distance;
the estimated distance elasticity is -0.067 (standard error 0.006). That is, as may be expected,
there is positive sorting within the same state toward local sellers because of a geographic
match between product demand and product supply; California sellers are more likely to list
sandals whereas Montana sellers are more likely to list snowshoes.21
       In addition, using the same speci…cation we also …nd a signi…cant tax e¤ect associated
with search results, with an estimated tax-price elasticity of -3.58 (standard error 1.59).
Searches by buyers in high-tax states are more likely to show items listed in other states,
relative to searches by buyers in low-tax states. This estimated tax e¤ect, combined with the
micro-level estimated conversion elasticity of about -2, yields an overall tax-price elasticity
of about -5.6, similar to our baseline estimate of -5.9 (Table 5, column (b)).
       We should note that the speci…cations of columns (a), (b), and (c) of Table 5 partially
rely on cross-sectional variation in the in-state purchasing propensity across buyers from
the lower and higher sales tax rates. Unobserved heterogeneity across buyers from di¤erent
states could confound these estimates. The speci…cations in columns (d) and (e) of Table 5,
which solely rely on within-state variation in tax rates over time, address this concern. In
these speci…cations the estimated tax-price elasticities of -4.7 (yearly data) and -3.6 (monthly
data) are smaller than the baseline estimate of -5.9 but larger than the conversion elasticity
of -2 estimated from our micro-data. Relying on these estimates, this suggests that the
behavioral e¤ect of sales taxes on the demand side through buyer search behavior and the
supply side through seller listing behavior yields a tax-price elasticity of around -2, similar
in magnitude to the e¤ect on conversions. This exercise is consistent with the hypothesis
that online buyers respond to taxes by changing both their browsing behavior and their
purchasing decisions, and helps explain why we obtain somewhat lower tax responsiveness
in our estimates of conversion rates than in our estimates of overall purchasing.
  21
    Both the distance and tax e¤ect are driven entirely by what buyers search for and what items are
available. for example, looking within searches that have the same search query (e.g., “iphone 4”) we
estimate no distance or tax e¤ects, con…rming that eBay’s algorithms are not responsible for the patterns
we see.




                                                   22
3.6       Retailer Locations and Tax Sensitivity

Our analysis has focused largely on consumer behavior, but an interesting avenue for future
research is to explore how sales tax treatment a¤ects online sellers’decisions about where to
locate. Amazon, for instance, has assiduously avoided establishing tax presence in California
and other large states.22 More generally, the current structure of sales taxes creates a trade-
o¤. Locating close to demand reduces transportation costs and may boost demand if buyers
prefer nearby or “home-state”sellers, but it also means collecting more sales tax.
       To see how this plays out based on our estimates, imagine a seller moving across the
border from Oregon into California in 2010. Our results in Table 5 model (b) imply a
roughly 40% decrease in California sales due to sales taxes, but a large and o¤setting increase
in demand (75%) due to the “home-state” e¤ect, netting an overall increase of about 5%.
This takes the estimated same-state e¤ect at face value in computing the counterfactual; if
the same-state e¤ect partly re‡ects a less speci…c “nearness”preference, the tax e¤ect might
be the important one, at least for sellers located near state borders. Figure 6 provides some
preliminary evidence on this. It shows the number of sellers located at di¤erent distances
from borders between states with large tax di¤erentials (of at least 5 percentage points).
Consistent with retailer tax sensitivity, seller density is greater on the “low tax”side of the
border.



4        Conclusions
Internet sales taxes have been the subject of considerable attention since the beginning of
internet commerce. This paper has used detailed data from eBay to o¤er some new evidence
on how sales taxes a¤ect online browsing and purchasing behavior. Using a research design
based on individual-level “tax surprises”, we found that purchases by interested buyers fall
by roughly two percent for every one percentage point increase in the sales tax charged by
the seller. To the extent that consumers pay less attention to taxes than to base prices, this
estimate also can be interpreted as providing an informative lower bound on the average
  22
    As we were writing this paper, Amazon agreed to collect sales taxes on California sales starting in
September, 2012, and appears to be reaching similar deals with other states.



                                                  23
price elasticity for interested buyers.
   As a second and complementary approach, we have investigated the relationship between
aggregate online trade ‡ows (on eBay) and sales taxes. Using the considerable cross-state
variation in sales tax rates as a source of identi…cation, we estimated that, holding …xed the
overall online spending of state residents, a one percentage point increase in a state’s sales
tax leads to a 3-6 percent decrease in online purchasing from home-state sellers. We also
used changes in state and local sales taxes over time to estimate the overall e¤ect of sales
taxes on online purchasing. We …nd an elasticity of online purchasing with respect to sales
tax of around 1.8, a substantial sensitivity but only about half the magnitude reported by
Goolsbee (2000a). Combining these estimates, a one percentage point increase in a state’s
sales tax leads to an increase of just under 2 percent in online purchasing from other states,
and a 3-4 percent decrease in online purchasing from home-state sellers.
   Our results are subject to some important caveats, particularly if one hopes to extrapolate
to counterfactual regimes suggested in current policy debates surrounding internet taxation.
One caveat is that the estimates come from a single online platform, which may not be fully
representative of all of online retail trade. Some of the major policy changes being considered
also could have considerable e¤ects on seller pricing and location decisions, which we have
discussed to some extent but are mostly outside the scope of this analysis.



References
 Alm, James and Mikhail Melnik (2005). “Sales Taxes and the Decision to Purchase Online.”
    Public Finance Review 33(2), 184-212.

 Anderson, Eric, Nathan Fong, Duncan Simester, and Catherine Tucker (2010). “How Sales
    Taxes A¤ect Customer and Firm Behavior: The Role of Search on the Internet.”
    Journal of Marketing Research 47(2), 229-239.

 Anderson, James E. (2011). “The Gravity Model.” Annual Review of Economics 3.

 Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft (2009). “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
     Evidence.” American Economic Review 99(4), 1145-1177.

 Dinerstein, Michael, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin and Neel Sundaresan (2012). “Consumer
     Search, Pricing and Platform Design in Online Markets,”in progress.


                                              24
Einav, Liran, Theresa Kuchler, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan (2011). “Learn-
    ing from Seller Experiments in Online Markets.” Unpublished manuscript, Stanford
    University.

Ellison, Glenn and Sara Ellison (2009). “Tax Sensitivity and Home State Preferences in
     Internet Purchasing.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2), 53-71.

Goolsbee, Austan (2000a). “In a World without Borders: the Impact of Taxes on Internet
    Commerce.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2), 561-576.

Goolsbee, Austan (2000b). “Internet Commerce, Tax Sensitivity, and the Generation Gap.”
    Tax Policy and the Economy 14. James Poterba ed., MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.

Goolsbee, Austan, Michael Lovenheim, and Joel Slemrod (2010). “Playing with Fire: Ciga-
    rettes, Taxes and Competition from the Internet.” American Economic Journal: Eco-
    nomic Policy 2(1), 131-154.

Hoch, Stephen J., Byung-Do Kim, Alan L. Montgomery and Peter E. Rossi (1995). “Deter-
    minants of Store-Level Price Elasticity.”Journal of Marketing Research 32(1), 17-29.

Hortacsu, Ali, F. Asis Martinez-Jerez, and Jason Douglas (2009). “The Geography of Trade
    in Online Transactions: Evidence from eBay and MercadoLibre.” American Economic
    Journal: Microeconomics 1(1), 53-74.

Maguire, Steven (2011). “State Taxation of Internet Transactions.” Congressional Research
   Service Report R41853, available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41853.pdf.

Manzi, Nina (2010). “Use Tax Collection on Income Tax Returns in Other States.” Policy
   Brief, Research Department, Minnesota House of Representatives.

Smith, Michael D., and Erik Brynjolfsson (2001). “Consumer Decision-Making at an Inter-
    net Shopbot: Brand Still Matters.” Journal of Industrial Economics 49(4), 541–558.

U.S. Census Bureau (2011). “E-Stats Report.” Available at http://www.census.gov/econ/estats.
     Accessed February 26, 2012.

Varian, Hal R. (2000). “Taxation of Electronic Commerce.” Harvard Journal of Law and
    Technology, 13(3), 639-652.




                                          25
Figure 1: Cross Sectional Variation in Sales Tax Rates




                                                                               h




 Map shows the sales tax rate in each county as of January 1, 2010 (in the middle of our observation period of 2008-2010). The (population weighted) average tax
 rate in the United States that day was 7.25% with a (population weighted) standard deviation of 1.74% (for population, we use the 2000 census).
Figure 2: Time Series Variation in Sales Tax Rates




                                                                               h



 Map shows the number of changes in sales tax rate in each county during our observation period (2008-2010). During this period, 35.6% of the United States
 population has been exposed to at least one change in tax rate (31.6% to at least one tax rate increase; 4.1% to at least one tax rate decrease). Conditional on a
 change, the (population weighted) average change (in absolute values) was 0.73% with a (population weighted) standard deviation of 0.38% (for population, we
 use the 2000 census).
Figure 3(a): Screenshot of a typical eBay search result page




                                                                                   h



 This is a screenshot of eBay search results (for a query that searched for “hat”). The key thing to notice is that the details about the seller, and especially about his
 location, are not provided on this page.
Figure 3(b): Screenshot of a particular item listing




This is a screenshot of the listing page (the first item from the list presented in Figure 3(a)). The seller location is now presented on the right.
Figure 4: The Relationship between In-State Purchasing and Sales Tax Rate




 Figure presents the relationship between in-state purchasing rate and the state’s (population weighted) sales tax rate. The in-state purchasing rate is the ratio
 between the state’s purchasing share of the state’s sales to the state’s overall purchasing share. Purchasing and sales are computed as the number of transactions
 (not their value) on eBay during our observation period (2008-2010).
Figure 5: The Relationship between Per-Capita Online Purchases and Sales Tax Rate




 Figure presents the relationship between the state’s per-capita number of purchases on eBay during our observation period (2008-2010) and the state’s
 (population weighted) average sales tax rate.
Figure 6: Patterns of Seller Locations Near State Borders

                                                          0.024
                                                                     Low Tax Side of the Border         High Tax Side of the Border
                                                          0.023
                Number of Sellers per Population in ZIP




                                                          0.022


                                                          0.021


                                                           0.02


                                                          0.019


                                                          0.018
                                                                  -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                                                             Distance to State Border (km)

 Figure presents kernel densities (Gaussian kernel, 5 km bandwidth) of the seller location on both sides of state borders. Data covers all users on eBay who sold at
 least one item in 2010. Y-axis is measured as the number of sellers in each 5-digit ZIP divided by the ZIP population in 2010. Distance from state border is
 measured (in km) between the ZIP centroid to the nearest point on the state border. Data used for the figure covers all border ZIP codes that are near borders that
 are associated with state sales tax difference of at least 5 percentage point (1,906 ZIPs around 14 state borders).
Table 1: Item-Level Data – Summary Statistics




                                                              N               Mean         Std. Dev            p25           p50           p75

  Item List Price ($)                                     275,020             36.95         164.98             6.22         12.99         29.99
  Item Sales Tax1                                         275,020             7.96%         1.40%             7.00%         8.25%         8.88%

  Logged-In Users Viewing Item                            275,020              24.7           55.6               4             9            23
  In-State Users Viewing Item                             275,020               1.8           5.0                0             0            2

  Purchase Rate (Purchases / Views)                       275,020             0.21            0.17             0.08          0.17          0.33
  Average Viewer Distance2                                275,020             1,939           732             1,409         1,842         2,469

  Table shows summary statistics for 275,020 items listed on eBay by 10,347 distinct sellers between January 1, 2010 and December 31, 2010. The data cover
  6,796,691 page views, each by a different user.
  1 The item sales tax is the combined state and local tax in the seller's ZIP code as of April 1, 2010.
  2 Throughout, distances are measured as the great-circle distance between the centroids of the user ZIP code and the seller ZIP code, in kilometers.
Table 2: Item-Level Estimates of Tax Sensitivity


                                                                                    Dependent variable: 1 if item purchased
                                                                                  All items             All items          By rate type1
                                                                                      (a)                   (b)                 (c)

                              log(1+effective tax)                                 -1.160                -2.601                -2.277
                                                                                   (0.093)               (0.501)               (0.504)

                              log(distance)                                        -0.028                -0.028                -0.025
                                                                                   (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.002)

                              Same state Dummy                                                            0.121                 0.096
                                                                                                         (0.041)               (0.042)

                              log(distance)*Calc. rate Dummy                                                                   -0.026
                                                                                                                               (0.004)

                              Fixed Effects                                         Item                  Item                  Item
                              No. of distinct items                               275,020               275,020               275,020
                              No. of page views                                  6,796,691             6,796,691             6,796,691
                              Mean of Dep. Variable                                 0.215                 0.215                 0.215


Table shows coefficient estimates from a conditional logit regression where the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the viewing user purchased the item during the
browsing session and zero otherwise. Each observation reflects a distinct page view by a distinct user. The mean purchase probability is shown at the last raw of
the table, and the tax-price elasticity is the estimated coefficient (at the first row) multiplied by (1-purchase rate).
1 Items can be listed as “flat shipping rate” or as “calculated shipping rate.” In the latter case, the shipping cost of the item (paid by the buyer) is increasing in the

shipping distance.
Table 3(a): Item-Level Estimates of Tax Sensitivity by Category

                                                                      Dependent variable: 1 if item purchased
                                   Electronics          Cell Phones          Computers              Clothing         Home & Garden Sporting Goods
                                        (a)                  (b)                  (c)                   (d)                  (e)                   (f)

  log(1+effective tax)                -5.33                -2.79                -2.73                 -2.19                 0.27                 -3.86
                                      (1.75)               (1.44)               (1.38)                (1.89)               (1.67)                (2.19)

  log(distance)                       -0.03                -0.03                 -0.04                -0.02                -0.03                 -0.03
                                     (0.006)              (0.005)               (0.004)              (0.008)              (0.006)               (0.009)

  Same state Dummy                     0.31                 0.13                 0.11                  0.13                -0.07                  0.22
                                      (0.15)               (0.12)               (0.12)                (0.16)               (0.13)                (0.17)

  Fixed Effects                       Item                  Item                 Item                 Item                  Item                 Item
  No. of distinct items              24,013                42,188               45,640               16,489                28,034               12,263
  No. of page views                 733,753               701,155              707,973              677,031               929,767              468,955
  Mean of Dep. Variable               0.200                0.274                 0.292                0.132                0.166                 0.144

As in Table 2, the table shows coefficient estimates from a conditional logit regression where the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the viewing user purchased the
item during the browsing session and zero otherwise. Each observation reflects a distinct page view by a distinct user. The mean purchase probability is shown at
the last raw of the table, and the tax-price elasticity is the estimated coefficient (at the first row) multiplied by (1-purchase rate).
Table 3(b): Item-Level Estimates of Tax Sensitivity by Price Level

                                                     Dependent variable: 1 if item purchased
                                         < $6                  $6-12                 $12-24                 > $24
                                          (a)                    (b)                   (c)                    (d)

  log(1+effective tax)                   -2.00                  -2.15                 -2.72                 -3.25
                                        (1.04)                 (1.06)                (1.02)                 (0.91)

  log(distance)                         -0.03                  -0.03                  -0.02                 -0.03
                                       (0.004)                (0.004)                (0.004)               (0.003)
  Same state Dummy                       0.07                   0.09                  0.15                   0.16
                                        (0.09)                 (0.09)                (0.08)                 (0.08)

  Fixed Effects                          Item                  Item                   Item                   Item
  No. of distinct items                68,339                62,830                 58,997                 84,854
  No. of page views                   1,030,448             1,109,980              1,414,700              3,241,563
  Mean of Dep. Variable                  0.27                   0.24                  0.20                   0.16

As in Table 2, the table shows coefficient estimates from a conditional logit regression where the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the viewing user purchased the
item during the browsing session and zero otherwise. Each observation reflects a distinct page view by a distinct user. The mean purchase probability is shown at
the last raw of the table, and the tax-price elasticity is the estimated coefficient (at the first row) multiplied by (1-purchase rate).
Table 4: Substitution Patterns

                                                                                 Dependent variable: 1 if … during subsequent session
                                                                                                  Bought from a diff. Bought from a diff.      Bought from a diff.
                                                        Bought any other      Bought from a
                                                                                                 seller but in the same seller, in the same    seller, in the same
                                                             item             different seller
                                                                                                          state          broad category         narrow category
                                                              (a)                   (b)                   (c)                    (d)                   (e)

Panel A. Reduced form effects
log(1+effective tax)                                          1.48                  1.95                 -3.28                  1.86                  1.59
                                                             (0.42)                (0.45)                (1.22)                (0.50)                (0.63)
log(distance)                                                0.016                 0.021                -0.017                 0.024                  0.024
                                                            (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.005)               (0.002)                (0.002)
Same state Dummy                                            -0.103                -0.142                 0.348                -0.124                 -0.104
                                                            (0.035)               (0.037)               (0.105)               (0.042)                (0.052)
Fixed Effects                                                 Item                  Item                  Item                  Item                  Item
No. of distinct items (estimation sample)                   205,314               192,435                54,821               168,638               121,789
No. of page views                                          6,348,623             6,217,586             2,831,003             5,834,658             4,830,520
Mean of Dep. Variable (in estimation sample)                 0.228                 0.211                 0.114                 0.190                 0.165
Mean of Dep. Variable (in original sample)                   0.178                 0.153                 0.023                 0.120                 0.075
Fraction bought the original item (in est. sample)           0.181                 0.176                 0.162                 0.173                 0.170


Panel B. Substitution estimates (linear prob. models)
Original item was bought (OLS)                               0.021                -0.005                -0.013                -0.032                 -0.056
                                                            (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.001)                (0.001)
Original item was bought (IV)                               -0.692                -0.853                -0.072                -0.782                 -0.579
                                                            (0.091)               (0.094)               (0.064)               (0.083)                (0.073)

In Panel A we report conditional logit regressions similar to those in Table 2, except that the dependent variable reflects outcomes from the user’s browsing
session that follows the original page view that got him into the sample. All the right-hand-side variables apply to the original page view, as in Table 2. Note also
that the estimation sample shrinks for some of the narrower outcomes that lead us to drop items for which subsequent outcomes do not vary (they are all zero).
In Panel B we use linear probability models to estimate the direct effect of whether the original item was bought or not on the same subsequent outcomes used in
Panel A. We first report an OLS estimate (with item fixed effects), and then report an IV estimate, in which the regressors from Panel A are used as instruments (so
that the results reported in Table 2 can be thought of as similar to the first stage).
Table 5: Estimates of Online State-to-State Flows


                                                                  Dependent variable: Number of state-to-state purchases

                                            (a)                       (b)                       (c)                        (d)                          (e)

log(1+effective tax)                      -5.556                    -5.878                    -4.234                     -4.743                       -3.642
                                          (1.932)                  (2.327)                   (2.237)                    (3.377)                      (1.795)

log(distance)                             -0.104                    -0.104                   -0.105                         --                          --
                                          (0.008)                  (0.007)                   (0.006)

Same state Dummy                           0.537                    0.560                     0.988                         --                          --
                                          (0.146)                  (0.149)                   (0.367)

log(distance) * Same state                                                                   -0.105
                                                                                             (0.085)
                                                                                                                 Buyer State * Year, Buyer State * Month,
                                   Buyer State * Year, Buyer State * Year,            Buyer State * Year,
Fixed Effects                                                                                                   Seller State * Year,   Seller State * Month,
                                      Seller State     Seller State * Year            Seller State * Year
                                                                                                               Buyer-Seller State Pair Buyer-Seller State Pair
N                                          7,500                    7,500                     7,500                      7,500                       90,000

    Table shows results from a Poisson regression where the dependent variable is the number of sales from state i to state j, using a panel data of three years
    (2008-2010); data is aggregated to the yearly level for columns (a)-(d) and the monthly level for column (e). Standard errors are computed using a
    state-level block bootstrap with 50 replications. The distance variable is measured at the (I,j) state-pair level by computing the average distance over all
    transactions between a seller ZIP from state i and a buyer ZIP from state j.
Table 6: The Effect on Overall Online Purchasing
Panel A: Identification off cross-sectional variation
                                             Dependent variable: Number of purchases in county during 2010
                                           (a)                  (b)                 (c)                   (d)
log(1+effective tax)                      -2.10                0.45                -5.14                 -0.55
                                         (0.39)               (0.24)              (2.31)                (1.14)
Fixed Effects                           None                   None                   State                   State
Other controls                        Population                All1                Population                 All1
No. of Obs. (Counties)                   3,050                 3,037                     3,050                3,037

Panel B: Identification off matched counties across state borders
                                            Dependent variable: Number of purchases in county during 2010
                                           (a)                 (b)                 (c)                   (d)
log(1+effective tax)                     -0.045              0.416               -1.547                -0.681
                                        (0.575)             (0.550)             (7.775)               (3.283)
Fixed Effects                        Border pairs2          Border pairs2       State, Border pairs2 State, Border pairs2
Other controls                        Population                All1                Population               All1
No. of Obs. (Counties)                   1,116                 1,111                     1,116                1,111

Panel C: Identification off within-locality changes in sales tax
                                                            Dependent variable: Number of monthly purchases during 2010
                                                         County-level                                                    ZIP-level
                                         (a)                 (b)                  (c)                (d)                    (e)              (f)
log(1+effective tax)                     1.82               1.999                1.788              1.762                 1.936             1.719
                                       (0.855)             (0.658)              (0.687)            (0.881)               (0.584)           (0.603)
                                                          County,              County,                                    ZIP,              ZIP,
Fixed Effects                      County, Month                                                 ZIP, Month
                                                        Month x Region      Month x Division                          Month x Region   Month x Division

No. of Obs. (Locality-month)           109,872             109,872              109,872           1,386,828             1,386,828         1,386,828

Table shows results from a Poisson regression where the dependent variable is total of eBay purchases in the county over 2010 (Panels A and B) or every month
(Panel C). Panel C uses data from January 2008 to December 2010. Standard errors are computed by a county-level block bootstrap with 50 replications.
1 County-level controls include population, average income, gender (% female), race (% white, black, Asian), education (% high school, some college, college,

graduate degree), age (% 0-9. 10-17, 18-29, 30-49, 50-69), and variables associated with internet connectivity (residential broadband connections, % living in
college housing, % working in info industry, % institutionalized).
2 Border pairs fixed effects use matched pairs of adjacent counties on each side of a state border.
Table A1: Summary Statistics for State-Level Data
                                              Combined Tax   Per-Capita                      Purchase to Sales Share of State Sales Made   Share of National Sales    In-State    In-State Expenditure
 State   Population (‘000)   State Tax Rate                               Per-Capita Sales
                                                 Rate        Purchases                            Ratio            to State Residents      Made to State Residents   Preference           Share
 (a)            (b)               (c)             (d)            (e)            (f)                 (g)                    (h)                       (i)                 (j)               (k)
 AK             710              0.00            1.82          278.0           871.4               0.32                  0.72%                     0.10%                7.46             0.77%
 AL            4,780             4.00            8.62          419.3           595.1               0.70                  2.42%                     0.98%                2.47             3.64%
 AR            2,916             6.00            8.47          484.0           620.2               0.78                  1.42%                     0.69%                2.07             1.49%
 AZ            6,392             5.60            8.10          607.8           601.5               1.01                  3.74%                     1.90%                1.97             3.84%
 CA           37,254             8.25            9.11          833.6           668.8               1.25                  19.00%                   15.17%                1.25             20.55%
 CO            5,029             2.90            7.43          666.8           664.1               1.00                  2.72%                     1.64%                1.66             3.29%
 CT            3,574             6.00            6.00          702.2           703.6               1.00                  2.36%                     1.23%                1.92             2.88%
 DE             898              0.00            0.00          830.4           674.5               1.23                  0.85%                     0.36%                2.33             1.33%
 FL           18,801             6.00            6.69          734.0           667.7               1.10                  8.97%                     6.74%                1.33             9.83%
 GA            9,688             4.00            6.91          514.0           560.0               0.92                  4.24%                     2.43%                1.74             5.75%
 HI            1,360             4.00            4.36          410.7           719.5               0.57                  1.65%                     0.27%                6.05             1.80%
  IA           3,046             6.00            6.00          745.4           741.5               1.01                  2.39%                     1.11%                2.15             2.49%
 ID            1,568             6.00            6.02          598.0           680.9               0.88                  1.13%                     0.46%                2.47             1.14%
  IL          12,831             6.25            8.52          689.0           684.8               1.01                  6.36%                     4.32%                1.47             7.42%
 IN            6,484             7.00            7.00          709.4           723.5               0.98                  4.21%                     2.25%                1.87             4.61%
 KS            2,853             5.30            7.19          593.2           737.5               0.80                  2.24%                     0.83%                2.71             2.38%
 KY            4,339             6.00            6.00          595.7           725.4               0.82                  2.59%                     1.26%                2.05             2.98%
 LA            4,533             4.00            8.83          269.2           521.5               0.52                  1.47%                     0.60%                2.47             2.10%
 MA            6,548             6.25            6.25          648.5           674.5               0.96                  3.88%                     2.07%                1.87             4.70%
 MD            5,774             6.00            6.00          548.4           698.4               0.79                  2.90%                     1.55%                1.88             4.15%
 ME            1,328             5.00            5.00          768.7           810.6               0.95                  1.73%                     0.50%                3.46             1.51%
 MI            9,884             6.00            6.00          753.1           666.8               1.13                  6.55%                     3.64%                1.80             6.62%
 MN            5,304             6.88            7.28          664.8           689.0               0.96                  3.73%                     1.72%                2.17             4.05%
 MO            5,989             4.23            7.56          627.0           695.0               0.90                  3.58%                     1.83%                1.95             3.92%
 MS            2,967             7.00            7.00          291.4           485.4               0.60                  1.13%                     0.42%                2.67             1.28%
 MT             989              0.00            0.00          524.7           794.7               0.66                  1.28%                     0.25%                5.04             1.21%
 NC            9,535             5.75            7.82          593.2           612.6               0.97                  4.06%                     2.76%                1.47             4.15%
 ND             673              5.00            6.34          482.4           803.2               0.60                  0.73%                     0.16%                4.63             0.88%
 NE            1,826             5.50            6.74          719.1           718.6               1.00                  1.60%                     0.64%                2.50             2.34%
 NH            1,316             0.00            0.00         1027.0           774.4               1.33                  1.75%                     0.66%                2.66             1.87%
 NJ            8,792             7.00            7.00          913.8           660.0               1.38                  5.65%                     3.92%                1.44             6.14%
 NM            2,059             5.00            6.83          308.8           592.2               0.52                  0.73%                     0.31%                2.34             1.02%
 NV            2,701             6.50            7.90          648.6           634.7               1.02                  1.60%                     0.86%                1.87             1.67%
 NY           19,378             4.00            8.49          846.6           665.7               1.27                  9.50%                     8.01%                1.19             10.98%
 OH           11,537             5.50            6.82          785.5           701.4               1.12                  7.29%                     4.43%                1.65             8.17%
 OK            3,751             4.50            7.75          401.7           644.5               0.62                  1.82%                     0.74%                2.48             2.57%
 OR            3,831             0.00            0.00          842.4           759.4               1.11                  2.85%                     1.58%                1.81             3.01%
 PA           12,702             6.00            6.35          791.6           755.4               1.05                  7.91%                     4.91%                1.61             8.18%
  RI           1,053             7.00            7.00          885.9           669.9               1.32                  1.05%                     0.46%                2.31             1.06%
 SC            4,625             6.00            7.05          543.7           583.0               0.93                  2.13%                     1.23%                1.73             2.33%
 SD             814              4.00            5.82          414.7           707.3               0.59                  0.65%                     0.16%                3.91             0.72%
 TN            6,346             7.00            9.42          575.9           688.2               0.84                  3.57%                     1.78%                2.00             3.88%
 TX           25,146             6.25            8.16          417.5           549.1               0.76                  7.34%                     5.13%                1.43             9.11%
 UT            2,764             4.70            6.69          856.3           617.3               1.39                  2.93%                     1.16%                2.53             3.52%
 VA            8,001             4.00            5.00          490.1           704.9               0.70                  3.15%                     1.92%                1.65             3.59%
 VT             626              6.00            6.17          675.9           841.3               0.80                  1.17%                     0.21%                5.67             0.88%
 WA            6,725             6.50            8.91          674.1           805.7               0.84                  3.79%                     2.21%                1.71             3.89%
 WI            5,687             5.00            5.42          691.4           703.9               0.98                  4.98%                     1.92%                2.59             5.85%
 WV            1,853             6.00            6.00          498.5           789.0               0.63                  1.30%                     0.45%                2.87             1.58%
 WY             564              4.00            5.25          388.7           837.8               0.46                  0.38%                     0.11%                3.53             0.39%

Population is based on 2000 census. Tax rates are as of January 1, 2010. Per-capita purchases and sales are multiplied by an undisclosed factor. In-state
preference (column (j)) is the ratio of column (h) to column (i).
