NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECTORIAL WAGES AND
THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE

Joshua Aizenman

Jacob A. Frenkel

Working Paper No. 1801

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1986

An earlier version of this paper was presented at a Conference on
The Foreign Exchange Rate in Inflation and Stabilization, sponsored
by the Aron and Michael Chilewich Chair in International Economics
at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, June 2-3, 1985. We
wish to acknowledge helpful comments by Elhanan Helpman. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in
Economic Fluctuations and International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1801
January 1986
Sectorial Wages and the Real Exchange Rate

ABSTRACT

Consider a multi—sector economy subject to an exogenous demand shock

that alters the equilibrium structure of relative prices. How should the
structure of sectorial wages adjust in response to such a shock? This
question is addressed in the context of a multi—sector model of an open—

economy producing internationally tradable and non—tradable goods. In order
to focus on intersectorial wage structure without abandoning the competitive
neoclassical paradigm we assume that workers differ from each other in their

absolute and relative skills. Such differences result in equilibrium wage
differentials which are affected by the exogenous real shock. Cost of
negotiations result in labor market contracts which set nominal wages in

advance of the realization of the stochastic shocks. The analysis provides
formulae for the optimal sectorial wage—indexation rules. The optimal rules
alter both the absolute and the relative structure of sectorial nominal

wages. We examine the dependence of the optimal wage adjustments on the
degree of heterogeneity of the skill distribution and on the degree to which
the economy is open to international trade; we also study the effects of
various shocks and policies on the real exchange rate, real wages and the
distribution of income.

Joshua Aizennian

Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
(312)962—7260

Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street

Chicago, IL 60637
(312)962—8253

Consider a multi—sector economy subject to an exogenous demand shock that

alters the equilibrium structure of relative prices. How should the structure of
sectorial wages adjust in response to such a shock? General equilibrium analysis
since the classic article by Stolper and Samuelson (19141) has clarified the equi-

librium relation between commodity and factor prices for an economy in which
factors of production are fully mobile among sectors and factor returns are fully
flexible. This analysis has been extended to situations in which factor mobility
is limited (e.g. Jones (1971), Mayer (19711) and Mussa (19714)) and factor rewards
are rigid (e.g. Brecher (19714), Heiprnan (1977), Johnson (1965) and Neary (1980)).

In these studies the labor force is assumed to be homogeneous and, therefore,
labor mobility ensures that wages per worker are equalized across sectors. In
practice, however, the labor force is likely to be heterogeneous since the relative skills of workers are not the same. The dissimilarities among workers result

in equilibrium intersectoral wage differentials. With heterogeneous workers real
shocks call for differential adjustments of sectorial wages.

In this paper we address the question of how should sectorial wages be
adjusted in response to exogenous shocks when the labor force is heterogeneous.In

order to conform with stylized facts we assume that in the short—run wages are
governed by wage contracts. The economy produces tradable and non—tradable goods

and is assumed to be "small" so that it is a price taker in the world market for
tradable goods. In order to focus on the intersectoriaj. wage structure without

abandoning the competitive neoclassical paradigm, we assume that workers differ
from each other in their absolute and relative skills. Such differences result in

an equilibrium intersectorj.al wage differentials. In modelling the distribution
of skills we adopt the formulation suggested by Rosen (1978) and applied by Mussa

(1982b). In addition, we allow for labor—market contracts according to which
nominal wages are set in advance of the realization of the stochastic shocks. As

2

in

Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977), this labor—market convention reflects the cost

of negotiations and results in some short—run stickiness of nominal wages. This
short—run stickiness impacts on resource allocation and imposes welfare cost. The
main purpose of our analysis is to provide formulae for the differential sectorial
wage adjustment which reduces (or even nullifies) the undersirable effects of this

stickiness. The formulae may be viewed as policy rules for sectorial wage indexa—

tion or, alternatively, as characteristics of optimal sectoral wage contracts.
The key difference between the conventional analysis of optimal wage indexation
and

ours is that the conventional analysis is conducted within a one—sector model

with homogeneous labor whereas ours is conducted
heterogeneous
demand

labor. As a result in our framework exogeneous shocks to aggregate

call for adjustments of both absolute
The

output,

within a multi—sector model with

and the relative wages.

formal model is outlined in section I which specifies the supply of

the employment of labor and private and government demands. Section II

provides the solution of the model for the intermediate run —— a run during which
all wage contracts can be renegotiated and wages are flexible. In this context we
determine the equilibrium values of the real exchange rate the level of output and

sectorial real wages consequent on an exogenous change in aggregate demand for
domestic goods. Section III provides the corresponding solution of the model for

the short run during which wages are given by the prevailing labor—market contracts.

It is shown that an important factor underlying the short—run conse-

quences of changes in aggregate demand is the accompanying nominal exchange rate
policy. The main contribution of the paper is contained in section IV. There, we
provide the

attainment

precise optimal nominal—wage rules necessary for the simultaneous
of the undistorted equilibrium relative arid absolute sectorial wages

and resource allocation. In this context we examine the dependence of the wage
adjustment formulae on the degree of heterogeneity of the distribution of relative

3

skills and on the degree to which the economy is open to international trade.

Finally, section V contains concluding remarks. The paper is followed by an
Appendix that examines the impact of the changes in aggregate demand on the
distribution of income in the short run and in the long run.

I. The Model

In this section we outline the building blocks of the model. These
building blocks contain a specification of the supply, including an analysis of

the factors determining the levels of commodity output and labor input, and a
specification of the demand.

The economy is assumed to produce two classes of goods: tradables, XT, and

non—tradables, XN, using linear homogenous production functions. We adopt the
specific—factor model of Jones (1971), Mussa (19711) and Mayer (19711). In that

model each sector is assumed to employ factors of production that are sector—
specific and are immobile across sectors. The production functions are

XT = XT(LT)
(1)
=

XN(LN)

where LT and LN denote, respectively, labor services used in producing tradeable
and non—tradable goods. The marginal product of labor is assumed to be positive

and diminishing, and we suppress the specific factors in the formulation of the
production functions.
In order to have a meaningful analysis of intersectoriaJ. wage structure, we

adopt a formulation suggested by Rosen (1978) and applied by Mussa (1982b)

14

according to which workers differ in their skills. The transformation between LT

and LN reflects the assumption that the relative skills of workers in producing

the various commodities are not the same. Figure 1 motivates the argument. Let
the skills of the 1th worker be such that his labor services per unit of time of
employment in the tradable goods sector are L, and his labor services per unit of

time of employment in the non—tradable goods sector are L1. The skills of each
worker can be represented in Figure 1 by a given point. Thus, point a indicates

that worker A provides L labor services if employed in the tradable goods
sector, and L if employed in the non—tradable goods sector. Each worker in the
economy is represented by a point in Figure 1. Accordingly, point b corresponds

to worker B whose relative skills are more appropriate for the production of
tradable goods. The allocation of workers between sectors is determined by the
relative intersectorial wages. Wages per unit of labor services in the tradable
and the non—tradable goods sectors are denoted by WT and WN, respectively. If the

wage ratio is (WN/WT), then each worker i whose productivity ratio, (L/L),
exceeds the wage ratio (like worker B) will prefer employment in the tradable
goods sector, and each worker whose productivity ratio falls short of the given

wage ratio (like worker A) will prefer employment in the non—tradable goods
sector. Marginal workers whose productivity ratio coincide with the wage ratio

(like worker C) will be indifferent as to the sector of employment. The given
wage ratio is associated with a given intersectoral allocation of employment. The

supply of labor services to the non—tradable goods sector, LN, is the sum of the
labor services of all workers whose productivity ratio (L/L) is smaller than the
wage ratio (WN/WT). Analogously, LT is the sum of the labor services provided by

the workers whose productivity ratio (L/L) exceed the given wage ratio. In the
subsequent discussion we will refer to LN and LT as the supply of labor provided

to the two sectors. This supply is measured in units of labor services rather

4

b

'C

LLL

Figure

L

1: Relative Skills of Labor and the Wage Ratio.

5

than number of workers.1 To each and every wage ratio, (WN/WT), corresponds an
allocation (LT/LN)o. The set of possible allocations defines a labor
tion function according to which

(2)

LT = LT(LN)

The labor transformation function is shown in Figure 2. Its slope at each point
is the productivity ratio of the marginal workers. For a marginal worker who is
represented by point a in Figure 1 ,

the productivity ratio, L/L, equals the wage

ratio (WN/WT). Thus, the slope of the labor transformation function at the

intersectorial allocation of labor,

and L, is the wage ratio. In
terms of Figure 2, this allocation is represented by point A0 at which the slope
of the labor transformation function is (WN/WT)o. This relation implies that
equilibrium

dLT

(3)

The wage ratio which determines the allocation of labor and, thereby, the
level of production is uniquely related to the relative price of the final goods.
Specifically, profit maximization requires that the wage in each sector equals the
value of the marginal product of labor. Thus,

W

N
T

Equations (3) and

(ax/aL)
PN
N
N
T

T

T

() implythat

in equilibrium,

dL

(ax /3L )

dLN

(axT/LT)

P

\
\

. (WNJw)

L

LN

Figure 2: The Labor Transformation Function.

6

Taking the logarithmic derivatives of (5), expressing in terms of elasticities and

denoting the percentage change in the amount of labor services employed in the
non—tradable goods sector by N' yields

(6)

=

N

TO

An analogous expression can be obtained for ZT the percentage change in the
amount of labor services employed in the tradable goods sector. In equation (6),

q denotes the percentage change in the real exchange rate,

N and

denote the (absolute values of the) elasticities of the marginal products of labor

in the two sector with respect to labor services employed in producing non—
tradable goods, and 0 denotes the (absolute value of the) elasticity of labor
services employed in the production of non—tradable goods with respect to the wage

ratio; thus 0= —dlog L/dlo (WN/WT). Since in equilibrium along the labor transformation function in Figure 2 the wage ratio equals dLT/dLN, it follows that 8
measures the elasticity of LN along the labor transformation function. When the
relative skills of all workers are the same the elasticity of the labor transformation function is infinite and the schedule in Figure 2 becomes a straight line.
The larger the difference in the relative skills of different workers the smaller
is 0 and the larger is the curvature of the labor transformation function.

In the subsequent analysis we examine the effects of disturbances on the

equilibrium of the short run and the intermediate run. We define the length of
the run in terms of the degrees of nominal wage flexibility and intersectorial
labor mobility. Thus, the short run is defined as the run during which nominal
wages are given by labor contracts; the intermediate run is defined as the run
during which nominal wages are flexible but the distribution of relative skills is

7

given. Therefore, in the intermediate run workers are mobile between sectors
subject to the labor transformation function of Figure 2.2

The expression in equation (6) provides the link between the real exchange

rate and the amount of labor services employed in the non—tradable goods sector
or, more precisely, the link between the percentage changes in these variables.
This, together with the definition of 0, provides the link between the real ex-

change rate q and the wage ratio. In order tofind the corresponding levels of
output we note that equations (1) and (2) define the economy's production pos-

sibilities frontier. This frontier embodies the considerations underlying the
labor transformation function.3

The private sector's demand for non—tradable goods, DN

,

is

assumed to be

a positive function of the real exchange rate, T'N' and of real wealth,
Thus,

(7)

DN(p

,

V)

The private demand for tradable goods, DT, can be represented by an analogous
function except that a rise in the real exchange rate is presumed to lower the

demand. Government demands for the two goods are denoted by GN and GT. The
subsequent analysis focuses on the adjustment of the economy to exogenous shocks

to aggregate demand. These shocks may arise from either an exogenous change in
private—sector wealth that impacts on aggregate demand, or from a change in the
level and composition of government spending.

8

II. Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate and Real Wages: The Intermediate Run
In equilibrium the demand for non—tradable goods must equal the supply. On

the other hand differences between the demand and the supply for tradable goods
are reflected in the current account of the balance of payments. In this section
we determine the intermediate—run equilibrium adjustment of the real exchange rate

and of the sectorial real wages. These solutions provide the benchmark for the
analysis in section IV in which we determine optimal short—run policies.

11.1 The Real Exchange Rate

In specifying the equilibrium in the non—tradable goods sector it is convenient to start with the intermediate run during which nominal wages are flexible. Equilibrium in the non—tradable goods market requires that

(8)

, v)

GN +
N

—

xN(P)
N

In order to analyse the effects of exogenous shocks on the equilibrium real exchange rate, we differentiate equation (8) logarithmically and, denoting by lower

case letters the percentage change of a variable from its initial (pre—shock)
equilibrium value yields

(9)

where

+

A

[q + v]

x(q)

and X=(1—A) are the relative shares of government and private sectors

demands for non-tradable goods in total demand. In equation (9)

and q

denote the percentage change in government spending, private wealth, the output of

non—tradable goods and the real exchange rate, respectively, and

denotes the

9

elasticity

of the demand with respect to the real exchange rate. The formulation

of (9) also assumes a unitary elasticity of demand with respect to wealth.

Equation (9) can also be written in an alternative and more useful way.
First, li-s right—hand side can be expressed in terms of the

corresponding changes

in labor input. Thus, using the production function,

(10)

where

x(q)

denotes the elasticity of output of the non—tradable goods with respect

to labor input. Second, the left-hand—side of equation (9) can be decomposed into
terms

that

involving

direct changes in demand and terms which reflect indirect changes

are induced by changes in the real exchange rate.

(exogeneous) changes in demand for

(11)

Using

(9?)

We denote the direct

non—tradable goods by p, where

P=Ag+ Av
equations (6) and (10), we can express equation (9) as -

+

Aq =

1

To

Finally, solving for the equilibrium real exchange rate (or more precisely the
percentage change thereof) yields

(12)

________
nN+nT+/0)

+x

10

Equation (12) expresses the equilibrium real exchange rate as a function of the
exogenous shock to the demand for non-tradable goods,

ij

, and

the key parameters.

For example, a rise in the demand for non-tradable goods, induced by an exogenous

rise in government spending or by an exogenous rise in private sector wealth (a
positive iv),

lowers q. The fall in q is smaller the higher is 8N——t1e elas-

ticity of non—tradable goods output with respect to the input of labor, and the

higher is A-—the relative share of private sector's demand in total demand for
non—tradable goods. Likewise, the fall in q is larger the higher are

and

the (absolute values of the) elasticities of the marginal products of labor with
respect to the employment of labor services in the non—tradable goods sector. The

fall in q depends on the magnitude of the elasticity of the labor transformation
function. The higher the value of 0 the smaller the decline in q.

11.2 Sectorial Wages
The product wage in each sector (WN/PN and WT/PT) equals the corresponding

marginal product of labor. Therefore, the percentage change in the product wages

(wN_pN and wTpT) are —rNN and nTZN. We can use equation (6) for ZN and obtain
equations (13) and (1!) as the elasticities of the sectorial product wages with
respect to the real exchange rate:

(13)

(114)

wNpN

_______

1>0

WT_PT = _______
q

1<0

Thus, a rise in the real exchange rate raises the product wage in the non—tradable

goods sector and lowers the product wage in the tradable goods sector. The absolute values of these elasticities are higher the higher is the value of 0. In

the extreme case with 0=0 the product wage does not change in response to
changes in the real exchange rate.
In order

to find the effects of

changes in the real exchange rate on the

real wage in terms of the consumption basket (henceforth the consumption wage) we
first define the consumer price index as a Cobb—Douglas function of the nominal
prices of tradable and non—tradable goods. Accordingly, p =
aT =

laN

ap TT'
+

aN and

are the corresponding expenditure shares. Hence, in the non—tradable

goods sector

W(P =

WNPN —

WNPNPN

and, in the tradable goods sector

WT_p = wT

=

T

WT_pT

+

Using equations (13) and (1i4) yields:

(15)

=

and

q

TO

N

(16)

wTP

_______

q

+
N

+!
TO

+

aN

As may be seen from equations (15)—(16) the intermediate—run effects of
changes in the real exchange rate on the two consumption wages are ambiguous due

12

to the usual index—numbers problem. In the extreme case, however, with sufficiently low values of 0, a rise in q must lower the consumption wage in the non—

tradable goods sector and must raise the consumption wage in the tradable goods
sector.

III. The Short Run
The foregoing analysis determined the equilibrium adjustment of the real

exchange rate and of sectorial wages in response to an exogenous change in ag-

gregate demand. The analysis pertained to the intermediate run in which labor
contracts are rewritten. As indicated earlier we distinguish between the short
run and the intermediate run. This distinction reflects labor market conditions.

Specifically, it is assumed that due to cost of negotiations there are labor

market contracts that set nominal wages in advance of the realization of the
stochastic shocks. According to the contracts, employers can choose the quantity
of labor services at the prevailing wage.

[See, for example, Gray (1976), Fischer

(1977), Hall and Lazear (198)4)]. Accordingly, we define the short run as the run
during which nominal wages are given by the prevailing contract.

In the short run employment is demand—determined. Therefore, equation (6)

may not be used to determine the short-run changes in the employment of labor
services and, thereby, in the supply of non—tradable goods. In order to determine

these short—run changes we first note that the demand for labor in the non—tradable goods sector is governed by the real product wage WN/PN which, in turn, can

be written as (WN/SP)(PT/PN) where

denotes the exogeneously given foreign

price of tradeable goods and where PT=SP; by the law of one price applicable to
internationally tradable goods. Since in the short-run
that the

is given, it follows

demand for labor services in the non—tradable goods sector can be

written

d

as LN( _____
* ).

It is assumed that the nominal wage is set in advance at

the level that is expected to clear the labor market. Thus, given the nominal
wage, further changes in the demand for labor during the period of the contract
(i.e., in the short run) can arise from unexpected changes in the realized real

product wage. Since the foreign price of tradable goods, T' is assumed to be
given, the percentage change in L is

5R =

(b

where aN denotes the (absolute value of the) elasticity of the demand for labor
with respect to the real product wage in the non—tradable goods sector, s and

q

denote the unexpected changes in the nominal and the real exchange rates (relative

to the levels assumed when the nominal wage was set) and where SR denotes the
short run. Using the production function, the change in the level of output of
non—tradable goods corresponding to the change in labor input is

(10')

x

N

8 a (s—

NN

SR

Analogously, in the tradable—goods sector, the percentage changes in the demand
for labor services and in the level of output are

(6'')

SR =

GTS

and
(10'')

SR

XT =

8TaTS

Substituting (10') for XN into (9) and using (11) yields

114

(9'')

+
N

q SR

=

NN (s-q SR

)

Solving for the short-run value of q yields

14)— 1T

(12')

OMS

= — __________

Equation
demand shock, p

(12') reveals that in addition to its dependence on the exogenous

, the

short—run value of q depends positively in the (unexpected)

nominal exchange—rate policy. As seen in equation (9''), given an initial real
exchange rate, an unexpected devaluation (i.e., a positive value of s), increases

the supply of non—tradable goods by

NGNS without altering the demand.5 The

resulting excess supply is eliminated by a rise in q.

It is noteworthy that in

the special case for which the authorities follow a fixed exchange—rate policy
(or, more generally, in the case for which the authorities maintain the prean—
nounced path of the nominal exchange rate) so that s=O, an exogeneous reduction in
the demand for non—tradable goods (a negative i)

implies from equations (12) and

(1 2') that the short—run real exchange rate rises and that

0 < q < q (where

q denotes the intermediate—run change in the real exchange rate). These (weak)

inequalities imply that following the short—run rise in the real exchange rate
(consequent on an exogeneous decline in the demand for non—tradable goods), the
real exchange rate exhibits a further rise in the intermediate run (consequent on
the reopening of wage contracts).

Associated with the equilibrium values of the real exchange rate there are
equilibrium intersectorjal allocations of labor inputs and commodity outputs. In

the intermediate run the levels of output are linked through the commodity
production possibility frontier. On the other hand, in the short run, for the

given contractual nominal wages, the levels of output are determined by the
sectorial demands for labor.

In order to determine the short run output effects of the rise in the real

exchange rate we recall from equations (10') and (10'') that for a fixed nominal

exchange rate the supply of non—tradable goods changes by -aq and the
supply of tradable goods is unchanged. Using equations (16)—(17) for the short
and the intermediate—run real exchange rates it can be shown that
SR
XN < XN < 0 =

SR

<

XT

(where XN and XT

denote the intermediate—run

changes in the outputs on non—tradable and tradable goods, respectively)
A comparison between the intertemporal changes in commodity outputs and the

corresponding

changes in the real exchange rate reveals that the intermediate—run

changes in output exhibit the typical positive association between the relative
price of a commodity and its supply. This positive association reflects the fact
that the economy operates along its production possibility frontier. On the other

hand, this association does not prevail in the short run. Thus, the short—run
supply of non—tradable goods is lower than the intermediate—run supply even though

its relative price (the inverse of the real exchange rate) is higher. This lack

of a positive association between the short—run relative price of non—tradable

goods and their supply reflects the fact that in the short run, with a fixed
nominal exchange rate, the economy does not operate along its production possibility

IV.

frontier.

The Optimal Adjustment of Nominal Wages

In this section we analyze the characteristics of optimal wage adjustment.
The need for nominal wage adjustment arises from the realization of the stochastic

16

shocks. In the absence of wage adjustment the prevailing labor—market contracts
result in some stickiness of wages as in Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977).

Optimal wage adjustment yields a short—run equilibrium that replicates the

performance of an economy in which labor markets clear without the constraints

imposed by the existence of nominal wage contracts. By definition, such an
equilibrium obtaines in the intermediate run in which (due to the opening of
nominal wage contracts) the equilibrium structure of real wages is independent of

the prevailing (short—run) contractual nominal wage. In our framework, optimal
wage adjustments generate a short—run distribution of real wages which coincides
with the distribution obtained in the intermediate run.

In what follows we consider two alternative formulations of wage—adjustment

rules. The first relates changes in nominal wages to nominal exchange—rate poli-

cies and to the exogenous change in aggregate demand; the second relates the
optimal wage adjustment to the nominal exchange—rate policy and to the change in
the price level. .

In

order to compute the precise value of the equilibrium

nominal wages we note that

p =

where p denotes the intermediate—run

s—aq

change in the price level. Substituting into equation (15)—(16) and using
equation (12) for the real exchange rate, q ,

(17)

WN

(18)

WT

+

yields

bN

+

where

bN =

aToOaN

A(O+aTo)+6OaT

>0

;

b

=
T

N

>0

17

Equations (17)—(18) specify the optimal rules for short—run nominal—wage
adjustments as functions of the unanticipated nominal exchange rate policy (s) and

the exogeneous change in aggregate demand for non—tradable goods (iv). The key
characteristics of the optimal rule lies in the separation between the optimal
adjustment of wages to nominal shocks (to which the optimal elasticity is unity)
and the corresponding adjustment to real shocks (to which the optimal elasticity

differs from unity). The elasticities bN and bT of nominal wages with respect

to the exogeneous change in demand differ across sectors. Specifically, bN
exceeds bT and the difference between these two elasticities increases with the of

openness of the economy (as measured by the relative share aT). Further, the
difference between bN and bT diminishes as the degree of homogeneity of relative

skills rises. At the limit, with e=, the two elasticities coincide and
=

bT

=

aN/(XN0aT).

As may be seen, in that case the elasticities decline

with the degree of openness. At the limit, as e approaches infinity and aT
approaches unity (while aN approaches zero), the magnitude of these elasticites
approaches zero. Finally, it is noteworthy that at the other extreme, with 8=0,

bT=O and bN =

1/A

.

In

general, the difference between bN and bT reflects the

fact that with heterogeneous distribution of relative skills an exogeneous change

in the demand for non—tradable goods necessitates a change in the intersectorial
relative wage.

In order to gain further insight into the interdependencies among the
optimal values of the elasticities bN and bT, the degree of openness (as measured
by

and the heterogeneity of the distribution of relative skills (as measured

by 8) we first derive the functional relation between bN and bT. Using the definitions of these elasticities (from equation (18)) it can be shown that

6

18

a

(19)

bN =

—

N

JbT

The information conveyed by equation (2L) is summarized in Figure 3. In that
figure the negatively sloped AB schedule characterizes the relation between the
optimal values of bN and bT. The slope of this schedule depends on the degree of

openness (a). The steeper schedule, AC, corresponds to a higher degree of open-

ness (4).

For a given degree of openness the position of the equilibrium
along

the negatively sloped schedule depends on the heterogeneity of the distribution of

relative skills as measured by 0. For example if aT_aT and 0=0, the optimal
combination of bN and bT is at point A (along the vertical axis), and if

aT a and 8 =

, the

optimal combination is at point B (along the 5 line). A

rise in the value of 8 moves the optimal combination of

bN and bT towards point B

along the AB schedule.7

As is evident, the intermediate—run equilibrium is independent of the
nominal exchange rate. Since the optimal short—run policy aims at replicating the
equilibrium of the intermediate run, it follows that in the present framework the

equilibrium real exchange rate and the equilibrium relative nominal wage can be
obtained for any nominal exchange—rate policy.8

Therefore, the optimal nominal

exchange—rate policy must be determined on the basis of additional considerations
that reflect concern with the levels of nominal wages or prices. Such considerations may reflect concerns with the short—run distribution of income (the analysis
of which is provided in the Appendix), or some constraints on feasible price and
wage adjustment.9
The foregoing analysis showed that optimal wage policies result in real—

wage changes which differ across sectors. Optimal policies generate equilibrium
sectorjal changes in the product wage, as specified by equations (13)—(1), as

\

\\

0
1Dç

o

19

well as equilibrium sectorial changes in the consumption wage, as specified by
equations (15)—(16). The key point is that the equilibrium necessitates changes
in both the ratio of sectorial nominal wages (WN/WT) and the ratio of commodity
prices (PT/PN)——the real exchange rate. Attainment of these two targets requires

two (independent) instruments. This perspective suggests that nominal exchange—

rate policy alone cannot succeed in generating the necessary short—run wage adjustments since it does not alter the ratio of nominal wages.1°

It is important to emphasize, however, that equality between the number of

policy targets and instruments is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for

the attainment of a given set of policy goals. In terms of our formulation, as
long as the structure of relative nominal wages is given there is no set of policy

instruments that can yield the target of an undistorted equilibrium. As an

Illustration of this general principle we note that even though a proper
combination of fiscal and exchange—rate policies may be used in order to obtain a

desired level of aggregate employment and output mix, there is no way that such

policies can be used to eliminate labor—market distortions induced by a fixed
nominal—wage structure.

1 1

V. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we analysed the implications of a reduction in the demand for

domestic goods on the short—run and the intermediate—run values of the real exchange rate, the composition of output, real wages and the sectorial allocation of

employment; the Appendix analyses the effects on the functional distribution of
Income. While the reason for the exogeneous decline in demand was not specified
explicitely, it could be interpreted as part of a stabilization program or as a
response to an exogenous decline in current or prospective flows of foreign aid.

20

One of the typical characteristics of an economy in need for a drastic
reduction in aggregate demand is a distorted structure of wages. Such a distortion manifests itself in both the relative intersectorial wages and the absolute

levels thereof. In order to provide for a meaningful analysis of intersectorial
wage differentials without abandoning the main tenets of the competitive—neoclassical paradigm, we allowed for heterogeneous distribution of skills.

In our framework ,labor—market contracts in each sector stipulate the
nominal—wage rule for the length of the contract period. The existence of contracts and the length of the contract period reflect the cost of negotiations.
We showed that nominal exchange—rate policies alone can not succeed in alleviating

the undersirable consequences of the short—run stickiness of nominal wages.
The cost of a distorted structure of' wages can be eliminated only through a proper

adjustment of both the absolute and the relative nominal—wage structure. Our
analysis provided the precise formulae for the optimal intersectorial wage adjustment.

Rather than summarizing the results we outline in what follows some of the
limitations and further extensions. Our analysis did not attempt to contribute to

the growing body of literature on the theory of wage contracts. Rather, the form
of' the wage contract was taken as a stylized description of typical labor-market

conventions. Implicit in the formulation was the assumption that employers and
employees are risk neutral and, therefore, the existing contracts reflect only the

cost of negotiations. A useful extension would allow for risk aversion. With
risk aversion the existence of contracts could be rationalized in terms of the
insurance function.

Another extension would model explicitely the dynamic linkages between the

intermediate run and the long run, and would incorporate explicitely the process

of investment in human capital within a capital—theoretic framework. A more

21

elaborate extension would recognize that in the long run there are no sector—
specific factors of production and the transition towards the long run includes

reallocation and accumulation of both human and material capital. Furthermore,
throughout the analysis we have assumed that the economy faces a once and for all

permanent shock. An extension which allows for transitory shocks would yield
dynamic paths of adjustments that depend critically on whether the shocks are
perceived as permenent or transitory.

Further, in our framework, the welfare loss arises only from a sub—optimal

wage distribution. Implicit in this specification is the assumption that except
for the labor market all other markets are undistorted. A useful extension would

provide for a richer formulation of the welfare cost arising from sub—optimal
money holdings, and would allow for the manifestation of the services of money and
for the erosion of these services as a result of the inflationary process.
Finally,

in focusing on the relation between government spending and the

key economic variables, we have not dealt with the important issues related to
government finance. A more
finance

complete treatment would specify the means of public

along with the specification of government outlays.

22

APPENDIX

The Distribution of Income
In this Appendix we determine the effects of nominal and real exchange—rate

changes on the functional distribution of income. Since short—run changes in the

distribution of income differ from the corresponding intermediate—run changes,
their analysis provides insights into the formation of Interest groups lobbying
for policy- measures. We start with the intermediate run.

A. The Intermediate Run
Equations (13)—(i6) in section II showed the effects of real exchange—rate

changes on the intermediate-run values of equilibrium product and consumption
wages. Here we compute the analogous expressions for the returns to the sector—

specific capital. In order to simplify the exposition we will assume that the
production functions are of the Cobb—Douglas variety, and we denote the elasticities of outputs of non-tradable and tradable goods with respect to the corresponding labor inputs by

and T' respectively. Since capital is assumed to

be specific, the percentage change in the return to capital owners in each sector

can be measured by the percentage change in total capital income in the corresponding sector. Accordingly, denoting the return to capital in the non—tradable

goods sector by RN so that RN =

—
PNXN

WNLN

,

it

can be shown that the percentage

change in the real return to capital, RN/P (to be denoted by (rN—p)) equals
Thus, using equation (6) for N' the elasticity of RN/P with respect to
the real exchange rate is

23

rNp

(A—i)

q

_______

÷÷1T

N NO

Similarly, it can be shown that (rT—P) equals

which (for movements along

the labor transformation curve) is also equal to

pression

In this ex-

denotes the fraction of the total wage bill that accrues to labor

employed in the non—tradable goods sector and 4=i-

denotes

the corresponding

share that accrues to labor employed in the tradable goods sector. Therefore,
using equation (6) for N' the elasticity of the real return to capital in the
tradable—goods sector with respect to the real exchange rate is

r
(A—2)

(
N TO

The formulation in equations (A—i )—(A—2) reveals that the extent of the
change in the returns to capital depends on the heterogeneity of the distribution

of skills. At the extreme, with 0=0

,

labor is also fully sector specific. In

that case the percentage change in the product wage in each sector exactly equals
the percentage change in the return to capital in that sector.

The elasticity of the wage ratio WN/WT with respect to the real exchange
rate is found by subtracting equation (15) from equation (16), and the elasticity
of the ratio of the returns to the two types of capital RN/RT with respect to the

real exchange rate is found by subtracting equation (A-2) from (A—i). These
elasticities are

(A—3)

rNrT
q

1N +(/)
NT T<i< Nw -q

w

T

1

0(riN+nT)+i

214

In

order to compare the percentage changes in the sectoral wage—rental

ratios we subtract equation (A—1) from (15) and equation (A—2) from (16):

wTrT
1L

(A— 14 )

L L

1

_______________ >

q

0 >

w—ri = (M"4'r)
L
£

q

1

1

1N+flT+O

Thus,

except for the special case for which 0=0, a change in the real exchange

rate impacts on the relative returns to labor and capital in each sector.

In summary, these results (along with those in equations (13)—(114) of the
text) can be combined to yield the chain of inequalities. In equation (A—5) which

also indicates the intermediate—run changes in the functional distribution of
income:.

(A—5)

rN <

(for q>0,e>0)

< WN < WT < T < rT

These inequalities are reversed for the case in which q>0.

B. The Short Run
We

turn now to analyse the short—run effects of changes in the real ex-

change rate on wages and on the return to capital. In the short run, due to
contracts, the nominal wage is given and, therefore, the percentage changes in the
product wages are

(A—6)

(A—7)

WTPTS
=

WN

(wN_pT)

+

=

—

+

25

Equations (A-6)—(A-7) show that these changes depend on

the value of s which

reflects the short run nominal exchange—rate policy. We note that if the author-

ities maintain a fixed exchange rate so that s=O, then the product wage in the
tradable goods sector does riot change.

The short—run effects of the change in the real exchange rate on the real
wages measured in terms of the consumption basket are

(A—8)

WN_P =

(A—9)

WTP =

P

=

= s+q5

Thus, with s=O the elasticities of the consumption wage with respect to the real

exchange rate are positive and equal to aN. This short—run result should be
compared with the corresponding intermediate—run results (reported in equations
(15)—(16) of the text), where we saw that the intermediate—run effects of changes
in the real exchange rate on real wages were ambiguous.

This comparison between

the short run and the intermediate—run results has implications concerning the
likelihood of the formation of interest groups lobbying for policy measures.
Specifically, while the interest of labor (as measured in terms of the direction
of changes in real wages) coincides across sectors in the short run, these inter-

ests may diverge in the intermediate run. We proceed in analyzing the short—run

effects of the changes in the real exchange rate on the return to capital.
Recalling that

we use equation (6') for the short-run value of

and substitute (l/iiN) for aN in order to obtain:

(A—la)

rNp =—s—-—--a
N
q

N

T

ZN

26

Analogously, recalling that

the short—run elasticity of the

real return to capital in the tradable—goods sector is

rTp

(A—il)

=

(N/T)8T

q

SctN

Equations (A—b) and (A—li) show that, analogously with the effects on the real
wages, the short—run real returns to capital depend on the nominal exchange rate

policy. For the case in which s=O, the elasticity of RN/P with respect to the
real exchange rate is negative whereas the corresponding elasticity of RT/P is
positive. Furthermore, with s=0 we note by comparing equations (A—lO)—(A--ll) with
(A—i)—(A—2) that the (algebreic value of the) intermediate—run elasticities of the

real returns to capital with respect to the real exchange rate exceed the corresponding short-run values.

The foregoing analysis determined the short—run effects of real exchange
rate changes on real wages and on the returns to capital in each sector. Since by

assumption the stock of capital employed in each sector is given, knowledge of

changes in rental rates is sufficient for determining total income to capital

owners. In contrast, since the employment of labor need not be fixed, the
computation of the wage bill requires that we supplement our analysis of changes

in the real wage with a corresponding analysis of the changes in the level of
employment. To simplify the exposition we will assume that N =

The real wage bill is (WNLN +

WTLT)/P.

T

12

Using the fact that with equal

sectoral labor intensities =c and TT' the percentage change in the wage bill

NN + TZTP•

From equation (6') and (6") the percentage changes in the

levels of employment in the non—tradable and in the tradable goods sector are

27

a(s—q5) and as, respectively. Substituting these expressions for

and

recalling that p=s—cq and that a—1=a, yields

(A—12)

aN2.N + aT2.T

—

P

=

a(sczq5)

=

Equation (A—12) shows that the short run change in the real wage bill depends
positively on the change in the price index. The change in the price, in turn,

depends on both the nominal and the real exchange—rates. Ceteris paribus, a
higher real exchange rate lowers p, and a higher nominal exchange rate raises p.
Thus, for the case in which s=O, the real wage bill falls when the real exchange

rate rises. This result is of some interest in view of our previous analysis of
the short—run changes in the consumption wages. As shown in equations (A-8)—(A-9)

a higher value of the real exchange rate raises the consumption wage in both
sectors by an elasticity of aN. The result in equation (A—2) implies that the

rise in q lowers the wage bill by an elasticity of aaN. It f'ollows that the

level of utilization of labor declines by an elasticity of
Finally we note that in the special case for which the price index is unchanged so

that p=O, real consumption wages as well as the wage bill do not change and,
therefore, in that special case the level of aggregate labor input remains un-

changed. In general, however, unexpected changes in the nominal exchange rate
alter the price level; it impacts on the level of aggregate labor utilization by
an elasticity that is equal to a. Such short—run changes in aggregate employment

level may also serve as an important determinant of the formation of interest
groups. Since in the intermediate run the level of aggregate employment remains

unchanged, differences between the short and the intermediate—run levels of
aggregate employment may also be responsible for the changes in the composition of
interest groups that take place over time.

28

Footnotes

Formally, let the density function of skills be f(LN,LT). This function
measures the number of workers whose skills can yield labor services (LT,LN). The
total supply of labor services to each sector at the given wage ratio

(W/W)
N To =wo is

=

5

0

L =

In terms of Figure

5

[

5 f(L,LJ

LTdLT]dLN

oN
[ 5 f(LN,LT)LNdLT]dLN

the integration limit

indicates the skill level

of a

marginal worker. For example, if the marginal worker is worker c then for him

and, with a wage ratio ,

LwL.

Thus, at the margin, a reallocation of

workers between sectors implies that dLT/dLN=w. This property is used in equa-

tion (3) below and can be derived formally by taking the ratio of the derivatives

of

0
0
LT and LN with respect to w.

principle the analysis could be extended to consider long run equilibrium where the long run is defined as the run during which workers have been

allowed to acquire skills and, thereby, raise the value of 0. In the limit, as
the relative skill differentials narrows down, the value of 0 approaches infinity

and the labor transformation function becomes a straight line whose slope corresponds to the long—run equilibrium wage ratio. In this paper we focus on the
short—run and on the intermediate—run and we do not analyse the dynamic evolution

29

of the economy towards long—run equilibrium. The transition towards the long run
can be described in terms of investments in human capital. For such formulations
see Aizenman (1983) and Findlay and Kierzkowski (1983). A more complete analysis
would also allow for the gradual transformation of all the specific fixed factors

into variable mobile factors of production. For a formulation of the dynamics of
specific physical capital see Mussa (1978, 1982a).

3Formally, the link between the production possibilities frontier and the

labor transformation function can be expressed in terms of the corresponding
elasticities of' substitution. For example, denoting the elasticities of substitu-

tion along the labor transformation function and along the production possibility
frontier by

and a, respectively, where

and

we get for the Cobb—Douglas case with equal sectoral
labor shares

and oX=/[1—+(czT/O)J where aT denotes the expenditure

share of spending on tradable goods. Thus, aX=/[1—8÷(1/aL)J. As Is evident if

e,

and

richer formulation could also allow for the effects of real interest
rates on spending as in Bruno (1976), Martin and Sellowsky (1981) and Dornbusch
(1983). It is noteworthy, however, that the key conclusions of the present analy-

sis do not depend upon the real interest rate effect; for such an extension see
Aizenman and Frenkel (1985b).
5The assumption that the unexpected change in the nominal exchange rate

does not alter the demand presumes that the value of wealth (or permanent income)
is independent of s and, therefore, iji does not change in response to s. More

generally, as long as the marginal propensity to spend on non—tradable goods out
of transitory income is smaller than unity, an unexpected devaluation creates an
excess supply and results in a rise in q.

30
6

In

deriving equation (19) we use a variant of the undetermined coeffi-

cients method. We start by postulating a linear relation bN= al+a2bT. We then
substitute the definitions of bN and bT from equation (18), collecting terms and
equating coefficients of corresponding variables, yields the value of the coefficients a1 and a2.As is seen, even though the optimal values of bN and bT depend on

0, the functional relation between these elasticities is independent of 0. This
independence implies that changes in 0 which may occur over time do not impact on
the functional relation characterizing the optimal wage formulae. Therefore, this

independent

functional relation is

of time.

7The optimal rules for short—run nominal—wage adjustments can also be cast

in terms of indexation rules by which changes in nominal wages are indexed to

changes in the nominal exchange rate and to changes in the price level. Such
rules can be written as wN =

as

+

ap

and WT

=

as

+

ap,

where a and a

denote the coefficients of indexation of nominal—wage adjustment to s, and where

a and a denote the corresponding coefficients of adjustment to p.

It can be

shown [see Aizenman and Frenkel (1985b) that the optimal coefficients are

aN5

a

T

T

0ao aN

,

ap

N

=1+(T
ao

T s

a

,

O+aTo aN

a

=

T

ao
T
0+aa

0
,and apT= 0aa

,

As

seen, the smaller is the value of 0, the higher becomes the intersectoral difference between nominal wage adjustment rules. As 0

approaches Infinity, the

optimal indexation of nominal wage adjustment to changes in the price level Is

unity whereas the corresponding coefficients of indexation to exchange rate
changes is zero. Also a higher degree of openness is associated with a higher
degree of optimal wage adjustment to changes in the nominal exchange rate.

can also be observed by
express

reference

to equations (17) and (18)

which

the optimal wage adjustment as a function of the nominal exchange—rate

policy (s)

and

the change in aggregate demand for

non—tradable

goods (iv). In

that

31

connection it is seen that different values of s do not alter the equilibrium
ratio of nominal wages.
9For example, suppose that institutional constraints prevent a reduction in

nominal wages. In that case nominal exchange—rate policy must accompany the fall

in demand (i.e. ip<O). Specifically, equations (17)—(18) imply that in order to

keep the nominal wage in the non—tradable goods sector unchanged, the fall in
demand which governs the value of i must be accompanied by a devaluation so that

s+bNi=O. In that case the nominal wage in the tradable—goods sector rises by

(bTbN)1. Alternatively, suppose that the authorities wish to neutralize the
price—level consequences of the policies. Since in general p=s—ctq, it follows
that in order to stabilize the price level, the package of optimal policies should

include a devaluation so that

This devaluation must be accompanied by

changes in nominal wages in order to generate a stable price. A package of
optimal policies which includes a devaluation yielding a stable price, must lower

the nominal wage in the non—tradable goods sector and raise the nominal wage in
the tradable goods sector. The precise wage adjustemnts can be read form the wage

equations in footnote 7 for p=O.
10The only circumstance under which nominal exchange—rate policy alone can

yield optimal short—run equilibrium arises when the distribution of relative
skills is homogeneous (i.e., when O=a).

In

that case relative nominal wages are

always constant and are independent of the real exchange rate. In this special
case as shown in Aizenman and Frenkel (1985a, 1985c) wage indexation rules bear an

exact dual relation to monetary policy rules. In the more general case as shown
by Blinder and Mankiw (19811) and as illustrated in the present paper aggregative

policies (like monetary policy or nominal exchange rate policy) are not suitable
for dealing with sector—specific shocks. For a related analysis of optimal policies in the presence of firm—specific shocks see Marston and Turnovsky (1985).

32

For a detailed analysis of the interactions among fiscal policies,
exchange—rate policies and the output mix see Aizenman and Frenkel (985b) where

it is shown that for a given nominal wage structure, the ratio of commodity
outputs depends uniquely on the real exchange rate whereas the aggregate level of

employment depends uniquely on the price level (and thereby on the nominal exchange rate); hence, as long as

B <

fiscal

,

and exchange—rate policies may be

use to yield a desired employment level and output mix.

this simplification aT=aN=/(l—8), and the values of the expenditure shares on the two goods equal the corresponding shares of the sectoral labor—

income in total wage bill. Thus,

and ctT=4. This simplification allows us

to abstract from issues arising from intersectoral differences in relative labor

Intensities and to focus on issues arising from short-run nominal contracts and
intermediate—run heterogeneity of the distribution of relative skills. With our
assumption, the long—run concavity of the production possibility frontier arises

only due to the diminishing marginal productivities of labor in the presence of

the sector—specific capital. In the absence of sector—specific capital the
assumption that 8N=T implies that when O=, the production possibility frontier
is a straight line.

131t is relevant to reemphasize that due to the heterogeneity of the
distribution of relative skills, the concept of employment (as measured by the
number of workers) differs from the concept of labor input (as measured by labor

services). In our case, with Cobb—Douglas production functions and with equal
sectoral factor shares, the composite index of labor input can be defined as
(WNLN +

WTLT)/(WNWT).

33

REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua. "Dynamics of Trade Liberalization Policy," Journal of
Development Economics 13, no. 1—2 (August/October 1983): 133—142.

Aizenman, Joshua and Frenkel, Jacob A. (1985a). "Optimal Wage Indexation,
Foreign Exchange Intervention and Monetary Policy," American Economic
Review 75, No. 3 (June 1985): 1402—23.

______________ (1985b). "Real and Nominal Exchange Rates, Fiscal Policies and
the Wage Structure," presented at a conference on "The Foreign—Exchange
Rate in Inflation and Stabilization," sponsored by the Aron and Michael

Chilewich Chair in International Economics at the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel June 1985.

______________ (1985c). "Supply Shocks, Wage Indexation and Monetary Accommodation ," NBER Working Paper, No. 1609, April 1985..

Blinder, Alan S and Mankiw, Gregory N. "Aggregation and Stabilization Policy

in a Multi-Contract Economy," Journal of Monetary Economics 13, No. 1
(January 19814): 67—86.

Brecher, Richard A. "Minimum Wage Rates and the Pure Theory of International
Trade", Quarterly Journal of Economics 88, No. 1 (February 19714):

98—

116.

Bruno, Michael. "The Two—Sector Open Economy and the Real Exchange Rate,"
American Economic Review 66, No. 14 (September 1976): 566—77.

Dornbusch, Ruidger. "Real Interest Rates, Home Goods, and Optimal External

Borrowing," Journal of Political Economy 91, No. 1, (February 1983):
1111—53.

324

Findlay Ronald and Kierzkowski, Henryk. "International Trade and Human
Capital: A Simple General Equilibrium Model," Journal of Political
Economy 91, No. 6, (December 1983): 957—78.
Fischer, Stanley. "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimal

Policy Rule," Journal of Political Economy 85, No. 1, (February 1977):
191—205.

Gray JoAnna. "Wage Indexatjon: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of Monetary
Economics 2, No. 2 (April 1976):

231—146.

Hall, Robert E. and Lazear, Edward P. "The Excess Sensitivity of Quits and
Layoffs to Demand," Journal of Labor Economics 2, No. 2 (April 19814):
233—57.

Helpman, Elhanan. "Nontraded Goods and Macroeconomic Policy Under a Fixed
Exchange Rate", Quarterly Journal of Economics 91, No. 3 (August 1977):
1469—80.

Jones, Ronald W. "A Three Factor Model in Theory, Trade, and History" in
Bhagwati, Jagdish N., ed.al. (eds.) Trade, The Balance of Payments, and
Growth Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1971.

Marston, Richard C.

"Real Wages and the Terms of Trade: Alternative Indexa—

tion Rules for an Open Economy," Journal of Money Credit and Banking 16,
No. 3 (August 19824):

285—301.

Marston, Richard C. and Turnovsky, Stephen J.

"Macroeconomic Stabilization

Through Taxation and Indexation: The Use of Firm—Specific Information,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, No. 3 (November 1985): 375—95.

Martin, Ricardo and Selowsky, Marcelo. "Engery Prices, Substitution, and

Optimal Borrowing in the Short Run An Analysis of Adjustment in Oil
Importing Developing Countries." Unpublished manuscript, World Bank,
February 1981.

35

Mayer, Wolfgang. "Short-Run and Long-run Equilibrium for a Small Open
Economy," Journal of Political Economy 82, No. 5 (September/October
19714): 955—967.

Mussa, Michael. "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of
Factor Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long

Run," Journal of Political Economy 82, No. 6 (November/December 19714):
1191—1203.

"Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher—Ohlin—Samuelson Model,"

________

Journal of Political Economy 86, No. 5 (October 1978): 775—91.

__________ (1982a). "Government Policy and the Adjustment Process" in Bhagwati,
Jagdish N. (ed.) Import Competition and Response Chicago, Il: University
of Chicago Press, 1982 pp. 73—120.

_____

(1982b).

"Imperfect Factor Mobility and the Distribution of

Income," Journal of International Economics 12, No. 1 (February 1982):
1 25—141.

Neary, Peter J. "Nontraded Goods and the Balance of Trade in a Nec—Keynesian

Temporary Equilibrium", Quarterly Journal of Economics 95, No. 3
(November 1980): 1403—29.

Rosen, Sherwin. "Substitution and Division of Labor," Economica 245 (179)
(August 1978): 235—50.

Stolper, Wolfgang F. and Samuelson, Paul A. "Protection and Real Wages",
Review of Economic Studies 9, (November 19241): 58—73.

