NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WINNING BY LOSING:
EVIDENCE ON THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF MERGERS
Ulrike Malmendier
Enrico Moretti
Florian S. Peters
Working Paper 18024
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18024

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012

We thank Jeff Zeidel and seminar participants at Amsterdam, Chicago Booth, DePaul, LSE,
Luxembourg School of Finance, MIT, NYU, Ohio State University, Princeton, Tinbergen
Institute, Yale, and at the AFA, EFA, FIRS, and the NBER Summer Institute for valuable
comments. We thank Zach Liscow and Jonas Sobott for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ulrike Malmendier, Enrico Moretti, and Florian S. Peters. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Winning by Losing: Evidence on the Long-Run Effects of Mergers
Ulrike Malmendier, Enrico Moretti, and Florian S. Peters
NBER Working Paper No. 18024
April 2012, Revised August 2016
JEL No. G02,G14,G34
ABSTRACT
Do acquirors profit from acquisitions, or do CEOs overbid and destroy shareholder value? We
propose a novel approach to measuring the long-run returns to mergers. In a new data set of close
bidding contests we use losers' post-merger performance to construct the counterfactual
performance of winners had they not won the contest. We find that winner and loser returns are
closely comoving in the years before the contest, providing support for our approach to
identification. After the merger, they diverge: Winners underperform losers by 24 percent over
the following three years in the U.S. sample, and by 14 percent in the international sample.
Merger characteristics commonly associated with underperformance, such as acquiror size,
acquiror Q, or stock financing do not explain the underperformance. Instead, the large
underperformance of cash-financed mergers and their post-merger increase in leverage is
consistent with behavioral and practitioner views on the determinants of merger outcomes. We
also show that commonly used methodologies such as the announcement effect fail to identify the
acquiror underperformance.
Ulrike Malmendier
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
Enrico Moretti
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

Florian S. Peters
Finance Group
University of Amsterdam
Roetersstraat 11, 1018 WB Amsterdam
The Netherlands
and Duisenberg School of Finance
f.s.peters@uva.nl

Do acquiring companies profit from acquisitions, or do acquirors overbid and destroy shareholder value? The negative stock-market reactions to a large number of merger announcements (see, e.g., Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2005)) have attracted considerable attention to this question. Researchers have interpreted such findings as evidence of empire
building (Jensen (1986)), other misaligned personal objectives of CEOs (Morck, Shleifer,
and Vishny (1990)), or CEOs’ overconfidence (Roll (1986); Malmendier and Tate (2008)).
A major obstacle in evaluating mergers is the difficulty of obtaining unbiased estimates of
the value they create or destroy. The most common approach is to use stock price changes
on the day of the announcement; but announcement returns may be biased due to price
pressure around mergers, information revealed in the merger bid, or market inefficiencies.1
Another approach is to calculate long-run abnormal returns; but those may be biased due to
unobserved differences between the firms that merge and the benchmark firms that do not.
For example, when an acquiror’s stock price declines during the months following a merger, it
is possile that it would have declined even more had the merger not taken place (see Shleifer
and Vishny (2003) and Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004)). Generally speaking, the
issue is that it is difficult to find a valid control group to whom we can compare acquiring
firms, as the latter are a selected group and engage in mergers at selected points in time.
In this paper, we use merger contests to evaluate the long-run effects of mergers on
acquiror returns. We collect data on all U.S. mergers with concurrent bids of at least two
potential acquirors since 1985. We also construct a broad international data set on bidding
contests. The basic approach to identification is to use the post-merger performance of losers
to calculate the counterfactual performance of the matched winners had they not undertaken
the merger. To maximize the similarity between winning and losing bidders, we focus on
1

See, for example, Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford (2004); Asquith, Bruner, and Mullins Jr (1987); and
Loughran and Vijh (1997).

1

protracted contests, i.e., contests where bidders actively compete, for example by making
multiple offers and counter-offers. Participation in such a bidding contest provides a novel
matching criterion, over and above the usual market-, industry-, and firm-level observable
characteristics.
Our approach offers an improvement over existing analyses if winners are more similar
to losers than to the average firm in the market or other previously used control groups.
For example, our approach may account for strategic considerations that would lead firms
to attempt a specific takeover at a specific point in time but that are hard to control for
with the standard set of financial variables. Our approach has the disadvantage that it is
restricted to merger contests. We cannot speak to the value generated in a broader set of
mergers. The methodological implications of our findings, however, go beyond the sample
of contests. By comparing our estimates to estimates based on existing methodologies, we
provide evidence on the biases embedded in other approaches and their potential magnitude.
We find that winners’ and losers’ have generally similar observable characteristics before
the merger, and are more similar than winners are to the average U.S. firm. In particular,
before the merger, winners and losers have similar Tobin’s Q, PP&E, profitability, book
leverage, and market leverage. Most importantly, winners and losers display very similar
stock market performance in the months leading up to the announcement: Their buy-andhold abnormal returns closely track each other during the 36 months before the merger
announcement. Stock prices are particularly suitable for probing the validity of our identifying assumption because stock valuations are forward looking and capture pre-merger market
expectations about future profitability. In addition, analyst forecasts of winners’ and losers’
future earnings-to-price ratios are similar. Thus, consistent with our identifying assumption,
both the market overall and the experts appear to have similar expectations about the future
profitability of winners and losers before the merger.
2

After the merger, however, losers significantly outperform winners. The estimated effect
for U.S. mergers is economically large, a 23.7 to 35.5 percent difference in buy-and-hold
abnormal returns over the next three years, depending on the sample refinement and abnormal return calculation. These differences in post-merger performance between winners
and losers cannot be attributed to changes in the risk profile of winners relative to losers.
When we adjust for changes in risk exposure, the results remain unchanged. Outside the
U.S., contested mergers generate less underperformance. We estimate an effect of 13.6% in
the international sample.
We explore the role of a number of firm- and deal-specific characteristics that are commonly associated with merger performance. In contrast to prior literature, we do not find
that high acquiror Q, large acquiror or target size, or stock financing predict underperformance. To the contrary, once the acquiror is matched against a similar bidder, the
estimated post-merger underperformance is more pronounced among acquirors with belowmedian market-to-book ratio, size, or target size, though the difference to the respective
above-median samples is not significant. The underperformance of cash-financed mergers is
estimated to be almost three times as large (−56.45%, p-value: 0.01) as the underperformance of stock-financed mergers (−20.45%, p-value: 0.08), though the difference also fails
to be significant (p-value: 0.15). Post-merger performance does not vary significantly by the
public or private nature of the target, diversification, number of bidders, or size of the offer
premium. Only hostile bids emerge as predicting significantly larger post-merger underperformance than friendly bids. We also find that winners tend to build up significantly more
leverage than losers post-merger.
The differences in findings relative to prior literature, notably the lack of predictive power
of high acquiror-Q and the strong underperformance of cash mergers, might of course reflect properties of our specific sample of contested mergers; but they could also reflect the
3

difference in methodology. For instance, the prior finding that highly valued acquirors underperform relative to the market and characteristics-matched benchmarks (Rau and Vermaelen
(1998)) may be subject to selection concerns. As pointed out by Shleifer and Vishny (2003)
and Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004), highly valued firms may choose to acquire less
highly valued targets in order to attenuate the reversal in their (over-)valuation. In this case,
the subsequent decline in acquirors’ market valuation is not caused by the merger; it would
have occurred even in the absence of the takeover. Our setting alleviates such selection concerns since highly valued winners are benchmarked against similarly-valued losers competing
for the same target. Indeed, we do not find underperformance of high-Q acquirors relative
to their losing competitors.
The finding of a large underperformance of cash-financed mergers is consistent with
the practitioner view that cash mergers are driven by the desire of target management to
cash out, without regard for future economic value creation. It is also consistent with the
behavioral literature pointing to the role of CEO overconfidence, as overconfident CEOs
display a strong preference for cash financing (Malmendier and Tate (2008)). Consistent
with both views, we uncover a sharp divergence in capital structure between winners and
losers following the merger: Winners have significantly higher leverage ratios than losers,
which may affect the long-term health of the merged company, or at least the market’s view
thereof.
Finally, our empirical approach allows us to evaluate existing methods to measure returns
to mergers, albeit in the context of our sample of contested mergers. We calculate announcement effects, alphas based on four-factor calendar-time regressions of winner-only portfolios,
and winners’ long-run buy-and-hold abnormal returns. We find that none of these approaches
capture the negative long-run return implications of mergers. Winners’ announcement returns both at the initial bid and at the losing bidder’s withdrawal are insignificantly negative,
4

and winners’ four-factor alphas as well as winners’ long-run buy-and-hold abnormal returns
are insignificantly positive. Moreover, winners’ announcement returns display an insignificantly negative correlation with our estimates, i.e., they fail to predict the causal effect of
contested mergers even directionally.
This paper relates to a large literature estimating the value created in corporate takeovers.
Reviews of the empirical evidence go back to at least Jensen and Ruback (1983) and Roll
(1986). More recent assessments are from Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford (2001) and Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008). The evidence on the value effects of mergers for acquirors
is mixed. Recent studies of acquiror percentage announcement returns find relatively small
but statistically significant effects of 0.5-1% (Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004); Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008)). The analysis of dollar announcement returns (Moeller,
Schlingemann, and Stulz (2005)) reveals that a small number of large losses swamp the majority of profitable, but smaller, acquisitions. Studies of long-run post-merger performance
suggest that stock mergers and mergers by highly valued acquirors are followed by poor performance (Loughran and Vijh (1997); Rau and Vermaelen (1998)). Industry-specific studies
of the long-term consequences of mergers, such as recently Allen, Clark, and Houde (2014) for
the mortgage industry and Gowrisankaran, Nevo, and Town (2015) for the hospital industry,
tend to focus on the welfare implications for consumers rather than abnormal returns.
Few papers analyze bidding contests. One notable exception is Boone and Mulherin
(2008), who identify competing bidders in the private negotiation stage and test whether
more bidding competition induces lower bidder returns. They find that this is not the
case, consistent with our results for later-stage bidding. Differently from our paper, their
analysis does not use a winner-loser comparison. The winner-loser research design is, instead,
motivated by Greenstone and Moretti (2004) and Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010),
who analyze bids by local governments to attract “million-dollar plants” to their jurisdiction
5

by comparing winners and losers. Relative to their county-level analysis, mergers allow for
considerably more convincing controls of bidder heterogeneity. In contrast to measures such
as firm productivity or labor earnings, stock prices incorporate not just current conditions but
also expectations about future performance. Our identification strategy also relates to Savor
and Lu (2009), who use a small sample of failed acquisitions to construct a counterfactual.
On the theoretical side, Dimopoulos and Sacchetto (2014) features an auction model and
structural estimation relating bidder behavior to subsequent abnormal returns.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes the data. Section II explains the
econometric model. Section III presents the main estimates of the merger effects, and
Section IV explores possible channels. Section V compares the winner-loser methodology
with existing methodologies. Section VI concludes.

I. Data
A. Sample Construction
Our data combine information on merger contests from the Thomson One Mergers and
Acquisitions database with financial and accounting information from CRSP, Compustat,
Compustat Global, Datastream as well as analyst forecast data from I/B/E/S.
Thomson One records public and binding acquisition bids.2 We collect all contested
bids made by public U.S.-listed firms between January 1, 1985 and December 31, 2012. We
exclude privately held and government-owned firms, mutually owned companies, subsidiaries,
and firms whose status Thomson cannot reliably identify. We also exclude white knights since
they likely lack ex-ante similarity with other bidders in their success chances and hence do
not provide a plausible hypothetical counterfactual. To identify contested mergers, we use
2

We do not consider non-binding bids, which are often made during the initial, private stage of the
takeover bidding process (see Boone and Mulherin (2007)), since bidders with a serious interest in the
acquisition are more likely to be similar ex ante, consistent with our identification strategy.

6

Thomson One’s competing bid flag. We verify that all bids for a given target that are flagged
as contested in the Thomson One database were indeed valid in overlapping time periods.
In other words, we require that the period between announcement of the winning bid and
completion of the merger overlaps with the period between announcement and withdrawal
of the losing bids. We classify the company that succeeds in completing the merger as the
winner, and all other bidders as losers. In three cases, we find that Thomson erroneously
assigns two winners, and we identify the unique winner using a news wire search. A detailed
description of the sample construction and of all variables is contained in the Appendix.
For each contest and bidder, we merge the Thomson data with financial and accounting
information from the CRSP Monthly Stock and the CRSP/Compustat Merged databases,
using monthly data for stock returns, and both quarterly and yearly data for accounting
items from three years before to three years after the contest. We eliminate observations
that can or should not be matched, such as repeated bids of the same bidder for the same
target, contests that are not completed, or firms without CRSP permno. At the same time,
we take caution to reduce survivorship bias. When bidders disappear from CRSP in the
three-year period after a merger due to delisting, we calculate the return implications of the
delisting events for shareholders using all delisting information available in CRSP. (Details
are in the Appendix). The final sample, which we denote as the Full Sample, contains 16, 776
event-time observations from 233 bidders, 112 winners and 121 losers. Table A-I summarizes
the construction of our data set. Appendix-Figure A-1 shows the frequency distribution
of contests over the sample period, and illustrates the spikes in merger activity during the
mid-1980s and mid-1990s.
In addition, we construct a “refined” version of the Full Sample. We manually search for
press mention of each bid reported in the Thomson data in the Financial Times, Wall Street
Journal, and The Washington Post. We are able to find press mentions for 194 out of the
7

233 bids in the Full Sample. For 180 bids (87 contests, with 87 winnings bids and 93 losing
bids), at least one article mentions the competing bids identified by Thomson. We refer to
this latter sample as the Contest Coverage Sample. We estimate our empirical model both
on the Full Sample and on this smaller Contest Coverage Sample.
We supplement the merger and stock data with analyst forecasts from I/B/E/S. We
extract two-years-ahead consensus (mean) earnings forecasts for the 36 months before (and,
for completeness, the 36 months after) the merger from the I/B/E/S summary history file
using the 8-digit CUSIP as identifier.3 We construct the forecasted earnings-to-price ratios
as the consensus forecast divided by the stock price at the end of the month. Our sample
includes forecasts for 180 firms, 82.2% of our total sample.4
We also test whether the estimated merger effects are present in a broader international
sample. We include bids from companies that are headquartered outside North America. The
vast majority of contested mergers and acquisitions outside North America that are recorded
in Thomson One come from ten additional countries: Australia, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Including
the U.S. and Canada, these countries cover more than 90% of all contested bids recorded in
Thomson One. For these international cases, we turn to Compustat Global and Datastream
for the corresponding stock data, as described in more detail in the Appendix. Our final
International Sample contains an additional 72 contests and 152 bids (see Appendix-Table
A-II).
We acknowledge that the data for international bidders is significantly less reliable and
coverage is much less comprehensive than that of North American firms, as already discussed
3

In addition to the mean (MEANEST), we also extract the median forecast of all analysts covering the
firm (MEDEST) as well as forecasts of various other horizons, all of which yield very similar results.
4
Consensus forecasts are not necessarily available for every month within the +/- three years around
a merger. On average, 171 firms are covered in each event-time period. As in previous literature, we drop
observations with negative forecasted earnings (see, e.g., Richardson, Sloan, and You (2011)).

8

in prior research on similar data (e.g., Ince and Porter (2006)), in particular for data prior
to the year 2000. We attempt to address these concerns and minimize the effect of noise by
winsorizing BHARs at the 1%-level when we use the International Sample. Moreover, we
will generally focus our analysis on the two North American samples.
The contest focus of our analysis requires a specific data architecture. For all three data
sets, we construct an event time variable t that counts the months relative to a contest. As
illustrated in Figure 1(a), we set t = 0 at the end of the month preceding the start of the
contest, i.e., preceding the earliest bid. The end of the month prior to that is t = −1; the
end of the month before that is t = −2, etc. Going forward, we set t = +1 at the end of
the month in which the contest ends, that is, in which the merger is completed. The end
of the following month is +2, the end of the month after that is +3, etc. Hence, event-time
periods before and after the merger contest are exactly one month long, but the period
from t = 0 to t = 1 is of variable length, depending on the duration of the merger contest.
Figure 1(b) provides a concrete example from our data, the merger contest between Westcott
Communications and Automatic Data Processing for Sandy Corporation.
[Figure 1 approximately here]
B. Summary Statistics
Table I provides the summary statistics of our main data, the Full Sample. The bidder
statistics (Panel A) are based on balance sheet and income data from the end of the fiscal
year preceding the contest. The first three rows indicate that both winners and losers are
large compared to the average Compustat firm.5 This reflects the fact that acquiring (and
public) firms tend to be larger than non-acquiring (and private) firms. The table also shows
that winners tend to be larger than losers, though the size difference is only marginally
5

Average total assets of Compustat firms during our sample period are $5.3bn; the median is $170.7m.

9

significant, and small compared to the difference between the average acquiring and nonacquiring firm in Compustat. The differences between winners and losers in terms of firm
characteristics such as Tobin’s Q, PP&E, profitability, book leverage, and market leverage are
very small and statistically insignificant. The similarity of winners and losers in observable
characteristics is a first indication that losers may be a valid counterfactual for winners.
The last two rows of Panel A report the three-day announcement CARs, in percentage
and in dollar terms. Percentage announcement returns are negative for winners and zero for
losers, but the winner-loser differences are not significant at conventional levels. In contrast,
the winner-loser difference in dollar announcement returns is weakly significant.
[Table I approximately here]
Panel B reports deal characteristics of the completed transactions. The first three rows
show that the transaction values of contested mergers are large compared to the size of the
bidding firms involved, on average 39 percent of the losers’ book assets and 24 percent of
the winners’ book assets. None of the completed deals in our sample results from a tender
offer. This is more common in non-contested mergers. Deal attitude (hostile or friendly),
and means of payment (stock, cash, or other means) do not differ markedly from those found
in uncontested mergers (see, e.g. Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008)). 80 out of 112 cases
involve two competing bidders, 25 cases involve three bidders, and seven contests involve
more than three bidders.6
The average offer premium in our sample is 63 percent if expressed as a percentage of the
target’s market capitalization, and 10 percent if expressed as a percentage of the acquiror’s
market capitalization. We compute the takeover premium as a percentage of the acquiror’s
6

Note that our analysis employs a lower number of bidders than those that actually participate in the
contest because not all bidders are public firms and, hence, no stock data is available. Moreover, if we do
not count bidders with missing stock data, we have 104 contests with two bidders, seven contests with three
bidders, and one contest with four bidders.

10

market capitalization to assess whether overpayment could potentially have a substantial
effect on the acquiring shareholders’ equity value. In our sample, takover premia are larger
than in a typical sample of non-contested bids (for example, 48 percent relative to target
value in a sample of 4,889 bids for US targets during 1980-2002, analyzed by Betton, Eckbo,
and Thorburn (2008)) and may indicate overbidding, or winner’s curse, brought about by
the competing offers. Below we explore this possibility in more detail.

C. Identifying Close Contests
In our empirical analysis, we seek to distinguish between takeover contests in which winning
and losing bidders have a similar ex-ante chance of winning the contest, so called “close
contests,” and those where the chances differ substantially. We argue that the subsample of
close contests provides the setting that most credibly allows for a causal interpretation.
To identify the subset of contests in which all bidders have a significant ex-ante chance
of winning, we focus on contests that take a particularly long time to resolve. The idea is
that these contests likely feature a back-and-forth of bids, or otherwise a situation in which
the identity of the eventual winner is not clear from the beginning. To see this, consider
an acquisition contest as akin to an open, ascending auction with multiple bidders. If the
target valuations of the two bidders differ substantially, the bidding process is likely to be
short because it ends as soon as the winner’s bid just exceeds the (much) lower valuation
of the losing bidder. In this case, the ex-ante chances of winning are very different for the
two bidders, and therefore the loser is unlikely to be a good counterfactual for the winner.
In contrast, if both bidders have similar target valuations, the bidding process will likely
last longer, because more bidding rounds are necessary before the bidder with the (slightly)
lower target valuation drops out of the contest. Hence, empirically, longer contests should
involve bidders with more similar target valuations and hence more similar ex-ante chances
11

of winning.
To implement this idea, we focus our empirical analysis on contests with above-median
duration. Merger contests with above-median duration last six months to over two years,
with a mean of 12.79 months. The mean for contests of below-median duration is 4.39
months, which is similar to the duration of non-contested mergers. We also run all of our
empirical tests on alternative sample splits, i.e., terciles and quartiles of contest duration.
We find similar results on these subsamples (available upon request).
A qualitative and quantitative inspection of press accounts about mergers in the upper
and lower half of contest duration confirms the underlying intuition. Using the Financial
Times, Wall Street Journal, and The Washington Post articles described above, we find that,
in short-duration contests, one bidder typically withdraws the bid quickly after the competing
bid comes in, suggesting that the withdrawing company does not see much of a chance to
win. By contrast, long-duration contests often involve multiple bidding rounds in which both
bidders raise their initial bid in response to the competitor’s most recent offer, sometimes
several times. In the long-duration half of our sample, 43% of the bids are withdrawn only
after a higher bid by at least one of the potential acquirors. In the short-duration sample, this
is the case in just 24% of the contests. Instead, in the short-duration sample, 62% of losers
withdraw shortly after placement of the competing bid, but only 24% in the long-duration
contests.7 The longer duration appears to indicate that neither offer clearly dominates, and
that target management or target shareholders take both bids seriously. It is precisely in
these contests that we expect the maximum similarity between winners and losers, and hence
the loser’s performance to provide a valid counterfactual for the winner’s performance. In
7

We also check whether the contest duration is driven by the time between withdrawal of the last competing bid and the completion. Though the time from withdrawal of the last competing bid to the completion
of the merger is longer for long-duration contests, long- and short-duration contests differ significantly in the
time during which at least two bids are active (108 vs 45 days).

12

Section III.A, we will provide formal tests of winner-loser similarity across contest duration
bins which confirm our identifying assumption.
We also estimate models that use an alternative definition of contested mergers. In this
alternative set of models, we include contests of any duration and define a fight as “close” if
at least one bidder has sweetened its offer in response to a competing bid. As we will discuss
in more detail below, these estimates of the merger effect are similar to those reported for
our main measure.

II. Econometric Model
A. The Effect of Mergers on Acquirors
We evaluate winner-loser differences in abnormal performance over the three years prior to
and the three years after the merger contest using a controlled regression framework. We
compute buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) for each month in the +/- three-year
event window separately for each bidder. The BHAR is calculated as the difference between
the cumulated bidder stock return and a cumulated benchmark return, starting from 0 at
t = 0. Cumulating forward, this amounts to:

BHARijt

t
t
Y
Y
bm
=
(1 + rijs ) − (1 + rijs
),
s=1

(1)

s=1

where i denotes the bidder, j the bidding contest, t and s index event time, rijs is the bidder’s
stock return earned in event period s, i.e., over the time interval from s − 1 to s (including
bm
all distributions), and rijs
is the benchmark return in event period s.8 Recall that event

time is defined such that t = 0 indicates the end of the month preceding the start of the
merger contest, and t = 1 the end of the month of merger completion. Hence, the return
8

Cumulating backward, this corresponds to BHARijt =

13

Qt+1

s=0 (1 + rijs )

−1

−

Qt+1

bm −1
s=0 (1 + rijs )

for t < 0.

at t = 1 captures the performance over the whole (variable-length) contest, collapsed into
one event period. It includes the stock price reactions at bid announcements as well as at
contest resolution. After t = 1 and before t = 0, event time proceeds in steps of calendar
months and, hence, rijt corresponds to the respective calendar-month return.
We use three standard benchmarks for normal returns to adjust for systematic differences
in asset returns: (1) the value-weighted market return, rmt . This is our baseline; (2) the
value-weighted industry return, rikt , where k is the industry of bidder i based on the FamaFrench 12-industry classification; and (3) the CAPM expected return, rf t + βij (rmt − rf t ),
where rf t is the risk free rate and βij is bidder i’s beta in the event window around contest
j.9 We call the adjusted performance measures market-adjusted, industry-adjusted, and
risk-adjusted BHARs, respectively. Note that the BHARs account for calendar time-specific
shocks since they net out the cumulated benchmark return realized over the same calendar
period.
When calculating risk-adjusted returns we estimate each bidder’s beta separately for the
pre- and the post-merger periods based on monthly returns. By doing so, we adjust for
the mechanical change of the winner’s beta brought about by the merger (from that of the
pre-merger, stand-alone company to the weighted average of the acquiror’s and the target’s
beta after the merger).
We evaluate the winner-loser differences in abnormal performance using the following
9

We also use value-weighted, characteristics-matched returns as an alternative benchmark (Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997); Wermers (2004)). These are portfolio returns of firms matched
on size, book-to-market, and twelve-month momentum. Our main results become stronger when using
characteristics-matched returns. We do not report them in the paper because the latest update of the return
data provided by Russ Wermers is from 2012, which further reduces the sample size.

14

regression equation, akin to the approach in Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010):

BHARijt =

T
X

t0
πtW0 Wijt

+

t0 =T

T
X

0

πtL0 Ltijt + ηj + εijt .

(2)

t0 =T

0

0

0

t
t
The key independent variables are the two sets of indicators. Wijt
and Ltijt . Wijt
equals 1
0

t
= 1{t=t0 and i wins contest j} .
if event time t equals t0 and bidder i is a winner in contest j, i.e., Wijt
0

0

Ltijt is an equivalent set of loser-event time dummies, i.e., Ltijt = 1{t=t0 and i loses contest j} . Thus,
our specification allows the effects of the winner and of the loser status to vary with event
time, and the coefficients πtW0 (πtL0 ) measure the average winner (loser) return at event time
t0 . For example, π3W is the conditional mean of the winners’ BHARs three months after the
end of the bidding contest, and π3L is the conditional mean of the loser BHARs three months
after the merger.10
The vector ηj is a full set of contest fixed effects, i.e., of indicator variables for each
merger contest, and hence adjusts for all case-specific differences (all fixed characteristics in
each group of contestants), and εijt is a stochastic error term. The inclusion of case fixed
effects guarantees that the π-series are identified from comparisons within a winner-loser
pair. Thus, we retain the intuitive appeal of pairwise differencing in a regression framework.
We also note that the inclusion of calendar year-month fixed effects to account for time
varying shocks is redundant when using abnormal returns because abnormal returns already
account for period-specific shocks.11
Equation (2) yields 72 coefficients for winners and 72 for losers – one for each month in the
10

Note that some firms are winners and/or losers more than once, and observations from these firms
simultaneously identify multiple π’s.
11
Abnormal returns adjust in fact more finely than fixed effects since the shocks that are subtracted vary
with the firm’s exposure, e.g., with the firm’s risk exposure in the case of risk-adjusted abnormal returns.
For completeness, though, we have tested and confirmed that the inclusion of year-month dummies does not
alter the economic or statistical significance of the coefficient estimates.

15

three years prior to and after the merger. This detailed information is useful for graphically
assessing the evolution of winners’ and losers’ performance over time. However, in order to
perform statistical tests of the merger effects, we need a more parsimonious version with few
interpretable coefficients. We estimate the following piecewise-linear approximation:

BHARijt = α0 + α1 Wijt + α2 tijt + α3 tijt Wijt + α4 P ostijt + α5 P ostijt Wijt
+ α6 tijt P ostijt + α7 tijt P ostijt Wijt + ηj + εijt .

(3)

This specification allows for different levels of loser performance before and after the merger
(α0 and α4 P ost) as well as for winner-loser differences in performance levels pre- and postmerger (α1 W and α5 P ost W ). It also accounts for two separate linear time trends in the
pre-merger and post-merger periods (α2 t and α6 t P ost), and for winners deviating from these
trends, separately in the pre-merger and in the post-merger periods (α3 t W and α7 t P ost W ).
Finally, the specification retains the contest dummies ηj . We estimate the value effect
of mergers as the long-run performance difference between winners and losers at t = 36,
α̂1 + α̂5 + 35 · (α̂3 + α̂7 ). We account for possible serial correlation and correlation within
winner-loser pairs by clustering standard errors by contest.
A major advantage of the regression approach above is that it fully leverages the underlying contest-specific matching of firms and, at the same time, flexibly allows for any remaining
differences between matched firms to vary over time. The more standard approach in the
literature, running calendar time portfolio regressions, cannot be implemented in our setting.
The matching requirements leave us with too few firms to form calendar-month portfolios
that are long in the winning bidders’ stocks and short in the losing bidders’ stocks. The long
or short portfolios would often contain just one or otherwise very few stocks. As a result,
the estimates would become unreliable and depend on minimum-portfolio requirements.

16

B. Is There an Effect of Mergers on Losers?
An important consideration in assessing our identification strategy is whether the merger
affects the loser’s profitability directly. For example, the merger might change the loser’s
market power. Such a “loser effect” is not of concern if losing the merger contest affects the
loser in a similar manner as it would have affected the winner had he (counterfactually) lost
the contest. However, it is a concern if this hypothesized loser effect were to differ between
winners and losers.
Two points are worth mentioning in this respect. First, consider the possibility that a
merger hurts the performance of the loser more than it would have hurt the performance
of the winner had the winner lost the contest. If this were true, it would strengthen our
main finding of a negative merger effect. In this scenario, the measured merger effect would
be even more negative in the absence of the loser effect and, hence, our estimates would
provide a conservative lower bound. Second, consider the possibility that mergers are more
beneficial to the loser than to the winner. For example, consider the scenario discussed by
Stigler (1950) in which the acquiror reduces post-merger output to a level below the combined
output of its pre-merger parts and industry prices increase. Firms that did not merge may
then expand output and profit from the higher prices.12 This entire class of models where
mergers are not profitable and firms prefer not to merge does not apply in our case. The
bidders in our sample engage in deliberate and protracted battles to prevail in the merger.
Overall, we conclude that in our context, loser effects are unlikely to be a concern.
12

For example, the Continental-United and Delta-Northwest airline mergers are expected to benefit
the non-merging airlines. Theoretically, in both a Cournot oligopoly model and a differentiated products
Bertrand model, the non-merging firm could benefit if the synergy or efficiency effects of the merger are not
very large. Salant, Switzer, and Reynolds (1983) conclude that in general, a merger is not profitable in a
Cournot oligopoly, with the exception of two duopolists that become a monopoly. Subsequent literature has
identified some limits of this result. Deneckere and Davidson (1984) argue that the existence of product
differentiation can result in the merged firm producing all the output of its pre-merger parts. Perry and
Porter (1985) identify many circumstances in which an incentive to merge exists, even though the product
is homogeneous.

17

III. Empirical Results
A. Are Winners and Losers Comparable?
Table I indicated that winners and losers have similar observable characteristics, with the
exception of a marginal difference in size. In this subsection, we go further in testing whether
losers are a valid counterfactual for winners, and test for pre-merger similarities in stock
prices. Stock prices are particularly suitable for probing the validity of our identification
assumption because they capture pre-merger market expectations about future profitability.
Unlike the variables in Table I, which are only about current characteristics, stock valuations
are forward looking. Thus, they can help us determine whether winner and loser profitability
are comparable not just at the time of the announcement, but also in the foreseeable future.
Any difference between winners and losers would indicate that the market expects future
profitability to be different even without the merger contest.
Figure 2 plots the series of winner and loser π-coefficients from regression equation (2),
estimated on the sample of close (long-duration) contests for three measures of abnormal
performance in Panels (a) to (c) and, for completeness, using raw returns in Panel (d).
[Figure 2 approximately here]
The graphs indicate that winning and losing firms display very similar performance paths
in the three years before the contest, irrespective of the measure of performance. It is only
after ther merger that winning and losing firms diverge. Statistical tests fail to reject the
hypothesis that the pre-merger trends for winners and losers are equal. (The t-statistics are
-0.19, -0.08, 0.37, and -0.42, respectively.)
We perform a similar test using analyst forecasts. Analyst forecasts capture expectations
about future profitability by well informed professional experts. While highly correlated
with stock performance, they are not identical. Figure 3 shows analyst earnings forecasts
18

(scaled by stock price) separately for winners and losers around the contest. Just as the
BHARs in Figure 2 above, the forecasted earnings-to-price ratios are normalized to zero in
t = 0. The figure shows, very similarly to the evidence on stock performance, that the paths
of forecasted earnings of winners and losers are closely aligned in the three years before the
contest.
[Figure 3 approximately here]
In Section IV, we will also analyze ex-post measures of realized operating performance
and find that winners and losers in long-duration contests have very similar levels of, and
very similar trends in, operating cash flow in the months leading up to the merger.
The close alignment in the paths of these variables for winners and losers, and in particular
in the forward-looking variables, lends further support to the identifying assumption. We
can go one step further and conduct an even sharper test by analyzing the pair-specific
alignment in paths. In Table II we correlate winners’ abnormal performance trends prior
to the merger (their pre-merger alphas) with their matched losers’ abnormal performance
trends over the same period. We estimate bidder-specific pre-merger alphas by regressing
the pre-merger abnormal returns of each bidder on a constant, and then regress the winner
alphas on matched-loser alphas.
Panel A shows the results for long-duration contests (column 1) and, for comparison,
for the short-duration contests (column 2) in the Full Sample. We find that the correlation
between pre-merger alphas of winners and losers is high and statistically significant. It is
more than twice as large in long-duration contests as in the short-duration contests. A similar
pattern can be observed for R-squared. In Panel B, we report the analogous results estimated
on the Contest Coverage Sample, for which press reports confirm the contested nature of
each deal. The results are even stronger. Going from long to short contests, the correlation
19

in alphas and R-squared drops by even more than in the full sample. Thus, the results
indicate that winning bidders who experience abnormal run-ups (declines) during the three
years preceding the merger are typically challenged by rival bidders who have experienced
a similar run-up (decline), and that this similarity is most pronounced in contests of long
duration.
These findings speak to the concern that contestants differ in their acquisition motives or
prospects. Specifically, one may worry that bidders who are motivated by overvaluation of
their own stock, possibly following a pre-merger run-up, systematically differ in their postmerger performance from bidders who did not experience a recent run-up. We find that
pre-merger trends of both sets of bidders are closely aligned in the sample of long-duration
contests.
[Table II approximately here]
The results for the International Sample in Panel C are less strong. Winners’ performance
is significantly correlated with the performance of their matched loser, though somewhat less
strongly than in the two U.S. samples. This is perhaps not surprising since the International
Sample contains bidder pairs with companies from different countries. We therefore consider
our estimates of the effect of mergers to be most accurate on the two U.S. samples.
Overall, the evidence presented in this subsection indicates that losers represent a plausible counterfactual for winners in long-duration contests. Before the contest, the market
expects them to perform similarly in the future. In addition, winners and losers are similar
in terms of accounting measures of profitability and other firm characteristics.

20

B. Estimates of the Effect of Mergers
Figure 2 provides a visual description of our main finding. In the months leading up to the
contest, winner and loser performance is quite similar. After the contest, however, winner
and loser returns begin to diverge. Losers of a close bidding contest display positive abnormal
performance, with an initial jump immediately after the end of the contest, and a continued
upward trend in the three years after the merger. In contrast, winners display no or negative
abnormal performance after the merger. In other words, the shareholders of the acquiring
company would have been better off under the hypothetical counterfactual in which their
company lost the merger contest.
Table III quantifies the magnitude of the effect, by showing the coefficient estimates of
equation (3). In addition, we report the estimated cumulative merger effect at t = 36 or
three years after the contest at the bottom of the table. We estimate our model separately
on all close contests in the Full Sample in column (1), on the Contest Coverage Sample in
column (2), and on the International Sample in column (3).
[Table III approximately here]
For all three samples, Table III reports an insignificant coefficient estimate α3 , which measures the pre-merger trend difference in winner and loser performance. Consistent with the
evidence in Figure 2 and Table II, winner and loser returns are statistically indistinguishable
at conventional levels during the 36 months leading up to the merger.
The estimated merger effect, instead, is significantly negative. In the Full Sample, reported in column (1), the cumulative underperformance of winners from the beginning of
the contest to the end of three years after merger completion is 24 percent. That is, consistent with the visual evidence, the estimates in the table suggest that in our core sample of
long-duration contests, winners fare significantly worse than losers and that the difference
21

is statistically significant. In the Contest Coverage Sample, which includes only contests
validated by the newspapers articles, the effect is even larger, at 35 percent. Despite being left with a relatively small sample after applying all of the matching criteria, the effect
is statistically highly significant. We also note that, in both samples the coefficient α7 is
insignificantly negative, indicating that the underperformance of winners relative to losers
does not decrease over time.
In the International Sample, analyzed in column (3), the estimate of the merger effect is
smaller, −14%, but precise enough to remain statistically significant (p-value: 0.05).
We have also re-estimated the model using alternative definitions of stock performance
and abnormal returns, mirroring the variations in Panels (b), (c), and (d) of Figure 2. As
shown in Table IV, our results are insensitive to employing alternative return adjustments.
Hence, in the remainder of the paper, we focus on market-adjusted returns.
[Table IV approximately here]
As another robustness check, we have also estimated models that use an alternative
definition of contested mergers. In this alternative set of models, we include contests of
any duration and define a fight as “close” if at least one bidder has sweetened its offer in
response to a competing bid. Our estimates are consistent with those reported in Table III.
In particular, the cumulative underperformance of winners from the beginning of the contest
to the end of three years after merger completion is -30.13 (14.87), -29.38 (16.41), -36.72
(18.42), and -23.75 (16.89) for market-adjusted, industry-adjusted, risk-adjusted, and raw
returns (and their standard errors), respectively.13
13

For completeness, we report the estimates for the short-duration subsample in Appendix Table A-III. We
find no significant differences in post-merger performance between winners and losers. As discussed above,
it is unclear how to draw inferences about the causal effect of mergers from this sample of contests. In an
attempt to relate our main results to the short-duration estimates, we have also estimated the incremental
effect of increasing contest duration by one year. In pooled regressions, we interact all variables with contest

22

IV. Heterogeneity in the Effect and Possible Explanations
We have found that the post-merger returns of winners and losers differ substantially. On
average, losing appears to be better than winning from the perspective of acquiring-company
shareholders. However, this average effect masks significant heterogeneity in the magnitude
of the losses.
Figure 4 shows the dispersion of the estimated merger effects in our sample. In this figure
each contest is an observation, and the histogram shows the distribution of the estimated
long-run winner-loser differences in BHARs across contests.
[Figure 4 approximately here]
The mass of the distribution is shifted to the left of zero. This is not surprising by now,
since we have already determined that the effect for the mean contest is negative. But it is
also clear that not all mergers result in an equal destruction of value. In our sample, 66%
of mergers have a negative effect, and 34% have a positive effect. The 25%, 50% (median)
and 75% percentiles are -68%, -19% and 13%, respectively. Of course part of this dispersion
likely reflects small sample noise in our estimates. Intuitively, this noise comes from the
fact that we do not know the “true” merger effects, but instead can only estimate them.
A weighted version of this distribution—with weights equal to the combined firm value of
acquiror and target—is similar, though, indicating that not all the dispersion is noise.
What explains this heterogeneity then? In other words, what features of the acquiror
firm, the target firm, or the merger itself are systematically associated with larger or smaller
effects? This question is important because it can help us shed light on the economic channels
that drive the negative merger-effect estimates.
duration. We find that an increase in contest duration by one year is associated with additional value
destruction of 46.20 percent. While these estimates are consistent with our estimates in the long-duration
subsample, they also lack a causal interpretation due to differential sorting of winning and losing bidders in
the short-duration subsample, and are reported only for completeness.

23

Prior literature has associated a number of characteristics with long-term post-merger
performance. We can test whether any of these characteristics are systematically correlated
with the size of the estimated winner-loser difference and thus help explain our findings.
We first focus on characteristics of the acquiror or the target: the acquiror’s market-tobook ratio, acquiror and target size, public versus private nature of the target, and whether
acquiror and target operate in different industries. Second, we turn to characteristics of the
bidding process, namely the number of bidders, hostility of the bid, the acquisition premium,
and the means of payment, Finally, we analyze whether the underperformance in terms of
stock price is driven by operating profits or whether it is due to financing structure.
Acquiror Q. Prior research indicates that highly-valued acquirors tend to underperform
in the long run relative to a characteristics-matched firm portfolio (Rau and Vermaelen
(1998)). One concern with the interpretation of this result is that temporarily overvalued
firms may choose to acquire less highly valued targets, possibly to attenuate the reversal
in their (over-)valuation by means of acquisitions, as pointed out by Shleifer and Vishny
(2003) and Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004). In this case, the subsequent reversal in
acquirors’ market valuation is not caused by the merger, but would have occurred even in the
absence of the takeover. Our setting, in which we benchmark the winner against the losing
bidder, alleviates such selection concerns. As we have shown, winners and losers show close
similarity in Tobin’s Q before the merger (see Table I), and abnormal pre-merger run-ups or
declines in stock price are also very similar in winner-losers pairs (see Table II).
Column (1) of Table V shows how the merger effect varies with the acquiror’s Q. The
regression adds to our baseline model from equation (3) a full set of interaction terms with
a dummy variable indicating the subsample of acquirors with above-median market-to-book
ratio. At the bottom of the table, we report the merger effect for acquirors with belowmedian Q, above-median Q, as well as for the difference. The results reveal that there is
24

no difference in the merger effect between the overvalued and undervalued acquirors once
post-merger performance is compared to a similarly over- or undervalued competing bidder.
[Table V approximately here]
These findings, and also the insignificant merger effect estimated for the high-Q subsample, are interesting in that they imply that previous findings on the ‘underperformance’ of
highly valued acquirors post-merger may have to be interpreted with caution. As indicated
above, those prior estimation results might be affected by the lack of a proper counterfactual. Empirically, acquisitions of such firms may appear to be value-destroying when not
benchmarked against the right counterfactual. Our approach reveals that, in our sample of
contested mergers, mergers of high-Q acquirors do not appear to be value-destroying once
they are benchmarked against the close-bidder counterfactual.
Acquiror Size. The role of bidder size as a determinant of the returns to mergers has been
documented in numerous studies (Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz, 2004; Betton, Eckbo,
and Thorburn, 2008; Alexandridis, Fuller, Terhaar, and Travlos, 2013). These studies show
that large bidders typically experience worse announcement returns than small bidders. Even
though the evidence for long-run performance and its relationship with size is less conclusive,
we investigate whether a size effect is present in our winner-loser setting.
Column (2) of Table V shows that acquiror size is not significantly correlated with longrun post-merger performance. If anything, the effect is opposite to what the prior literature suggests: Long-run merger performance is significantly negative for small acquirors
(−38.62%, p-value = 0.02) but not for large acquirors (−9.73%, p-value = 0.52).
Target Size. Similarly, relative target size has been associated with bidder returns, at least
in the short-run. Alexandridis, Fuller, Terhaar, and Travlos (2013) find that the three-day
bidder returns are 2.4% worse for large deals than for small deals. Spalt and Schneider
25

(2016) find that target size is negatively related to three-day bidder announcement returns if
the target is public, but positively related to three-day bidder announcement returns if the
target is private. Here too, causal interpretation is complicated by the fact that acquirors of
large firms may be different from acquirors of small firms. For instance, mature firms with
declining profits may choose to acquire large firms while young growth firms may tend to
acquire small firms. In our setting, both the winning and the losing bidders try to acquire the
same firm, so there is no difference in absolute target size and there are only small differences
in relative target size.
We calculate relative target size as the ratio of the transaction value (or the offered purchase price in the case of the losing bidder) and the bidder’s market capitalization. Column
(3) of Table V shows the effect of relative target size on long-run merger performance when
acquirors are benchmarked against firms that bid for the same target. We find no difference in the merger effect for small and large targets. The merger effect for small targets is
−29.61% (p-value: 0.01), and for large targets it is −24.84% (p-value: 0.30).
Public vs. Private Targets. Prior large-sample studies show that announcement returns
are significantly lower in acquisitions of publicly traded target firms than in acquisitions
of privately owned ones (Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn, 2008; Spalt and Schneider, 2016).
Again, there is a selection issue when interpreting these results. Acquirors taking over public
firms may differ in many aspects from firms that acquire private firms. In our setting, this
selection problem is not present: Both winner and loser attempt to acquire the same firm—
either both attempt to acquire a public firm or both attempt to acquire a private firm.
Column (4) of Table V confirms that acquisitions of public firms appear to destroy value.
The merger effect is statistically insignificant and positive (15.39%, p-value: 0.59) for acquisitions of private firms, but significantly negative (−34.03%, p-value: 0.00) for acquisitions

26

of public firms.14 The difference is economically large (−34.03%) but fails to be significant
at conventional levels (p-value: 0.11).
Diversification. Diversifying mergers are often suspected to generate little value, or even
to be value-destroying. Early studies support this view (Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1990),
while more recent studies find either no significant effect of diversification on acquiror announcement returns (Spalt and Schneider, 2016) or even a positive effect (Akbulut and
Matsusaka, 2010). Again, the problem with interpreting such results is that firms choose
whether to acquire within or across industries. Firms that participate in diversifying mergers
are different from firms engaging in concentrating acquisitions. In our sample, winners and
losers of takeover contests are very similar in their tendency to diversify or concentrate.
We define an acquisition bid as diversifying if the bidder is in a Fama-French 12-industry
classification that is different from that of the target (and as concentrating otherwise). In
the full sample, the winner and loser in a contest have different diversification status (winner
is diversifying, loser is concentrating or vice versa) in only 24 out of 112 contest. Moreover,
in the subsample of close contests, diversification status between winners and losers differs
in only eight out of 56 cases. Column (5) of Table V indicates that, on average, diversifying
mergers appear to destroy value. The merger effect is −21.64% (p-value: 0.05) in concentrating mergers, and -48.24% (p-value: 0.14) in diversifying mergers. However, the difference
in the effect is not precisely estimated.
Number of Bidders. Another reason for poor merger outcomes could be overpayment due
to bidding competition. A higher number of firms participating in the merger contest may
induce more severe overbidding and thereby cause the winning bidder to experience worse
post-merger performance. There is no clear evidence from prior large-sample studies that
14
Note that the direct effect of the public target dummy (α8 ) is subsumed in the contest fixed effect.
Hence the variable is not included in the regression.

27

bidding competition decreases bidder returns (Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz, 2004; Spalt
and Schneider, 2016), and there is even evidence to the contrary for earlier-stage bidding
in private negotiations (Boone and Mulherin (2008)). We investigate the hypothesis in our
sample, and also do not find such an effect. Column (6) shows that there is no difference in
the estimated merger effect between contests with two and more than two bidders.
This result also alleviates the concern that our results of a negative average merger effect
in close contests are exclusively driven by bidding competition in our specific sample. As the
bidding competition becomes more intense the estimated effect does not appear to increase.
Hostile vs. Friendly. Another feature of the bidding process that could help to explain
the post-merger underperformance of the acquiror is hostile bidding. Hostile bidders might
bid higher than they would in a friendly takeover and end up exceeding the surplus generated
by the merger. We note that there is no clear evidence of hostility-induced overbidding in
existing large-sample studies (Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn, 2008; Spalt and Schneider,
2016), but still investigate this possibility in our sample of contested bids.
The results are reported in column (7). We find that the merger effect for hostile bids
is large and significant (−131.00 with a p-value of 0.05). The difference to friendly bids is
only somewhat smaller (−116.30) and still marginally significant (p-value: 0.08).
One caveat here is that the number of hostile bids in our sample is low. As the summary
statistics in Table I.B reveal, hostile bids amount to less than one tenth of our Full Sample,
and they are even less common in the subsample of close contests (ten out of 119 bids). One
reason for this may be that hostile bids often induce targets to produce a white knight, and
we exclude white knights from our sample due to their lack of comparability to other bidders.
Thus, the explanatory power of this channel is somewhat limited. At the same time, we also
note that the large estimated effect of hostility helps to explain interesting time variation
in our results. The frequency of hostile bids declined drastically in the late 1980s. In our
28

sample, we estimate a strongly negative merger effect for pre-2000 contests (−54.67, p-value:
0.00) and an insignificant effect for post-2000 contests (13.56, p-value: 0.38).
Acquisition premium. Another possible correlate of overpayment is a high acquisition
premium. High premia should mechanically induce underperformance of the acquiror to the
extent that the premium exceeds the target’s stand-alone value plus the expected synergies
from the merger. Empirically, though, it is difficult to measure the expected-synergies component and thus true overpayment. Our empirical analysis is therefore limited to the role of
the acquisition premium, defined as the difference between offer price and stand-alone value
of the target, without consideration of synergies.
We calculate the offer premium as the run-up in the target’s stock price from 40 trading
days prior to the beginning of the contest until one day after completion. Column (8) of
Table V shows that we fail to estimate a significant effect. We note, though, that the merger
effect for the subsample of large premia is significantly negative.
Form of Payment. Finally, we investigate whether the form of payment—cash, stock, or
other—affects post-merger performance. Loughran and Vijh (1997) find that stock mergers
exhibit poor long-run abnormal returns relative to size and market-to-book matched firms,
while cash acquirors outperform the matched firms.15
Column (9) of Table V shows the estimated merger effect for all-cash offers versus those
that use at least some stock. It is helpful for our analysis that the form of payment is very
similar across winners and losers in our sample. The mean difference between winners and
losers in the percentage of the transaction value offered in cash is only 0.49% in long-duration
(close) contests. For comparison, it is 14.40% in short contests.
15

For short-run announcement returns, the evidence is less clear. Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008)
find only slightly higher announcement returns for cash bids than for stock bids, and Spalt and Schneider
(2016) find more negative announcement returns for stock bids than cash bids only in the subsample of
public targets.

29

We find that, in the subset of deals that are partially financed with stock, the merger
effect is small and marginally significant (−20.45%, p-value: 0.08), while it is almost three
times as large and statistically more significant for all-cash deals (−56.46%, p-value: 0.01).
The difference, however, fails to be significant at conventional levels (p-value: 0.15).
This result is noteworthy since much of the previous literature focuses on the (seeming)
underperformance of stock mergers. Our approach to identifying the merger effect reveals
that, at least for the specific sample of contested mergers, the opposite is the case when
acquirors are benchmarked against more comparable firms. Our finding builds on Shleifer
and Vishny (2003) and Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004) in that we question the
notion of stock-merger underperformance; and we go beyond those prior studies in that we
also point to cash-merger underperformance. This latter finding is consistent with the more
negative view of cash deals that is commonly voiced among practitioners. Practitioners
are often wary that, in deals settled in cash, the target simply seeks to cash out at the
highest possible price, without long-term involvement and irrespective of the strategic fit of
the merged entity. Under that scenario, many of these deals will result in poor long-run
performance. By contrast, in deals settled in stock, the target has an economic interest in
the subsequent performance of the merged company.
A complementary interpretation is proposed in the behavioral literature on mergers and
acquisitions. As shown by Malmendier and Tate (2008), managers with overoptimistic expectations appear to engage in more merger transactions than their peers. Crucially, overconfidence induces more and lower-performing mergers only when the acquiror is cash-rich
and can cash-finance the merger. As formalized and tested in Malmendier and Tate (2005)
and Malmendier, Tate, and Yan (2011), overconfidence implies a difference in opinion about
the value of the firm between the overconfident managers and outside capital-providers, inducing a reluctance to raise external financing and, in particular, stock financing. Both the
30

practitioner view and the behavioral view are consistent with our finding that transactions
performed at high cash prices appear to be drivers of the post-merger underperformance, as
well as with the leverage results presented below.
Operating Performance. We also test to what extent low operating performance can
explain the persistent post-merger divergence of winners’ and losers’ abnormal returns. We
calculate operating cash flow similarly to Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004) as net
sales minus cost of goods sold and selling, general and administrative expenses, and express
it as a percentage of total assets.16 Figure 5 shows the evolution of cash flows for winners
and losers in long contests over the three years around the merger. We find that winner
and loser cash flows track each other relatively closely, not only before but also after the
contest. Moreover, we find the same pattern for a range of alternative measures of operating
performance around mergers, following Healy, Palepu, and Ruback (1992). In all cases,
there is no significant deviation of winner and loser trends post-merger. In other words, the
observed stock underperformance does not reflect operating underperformance.
[Figure 5 approximately here]
Leverage. We now turn to the possibility that acquisitions impose a heavy burden for cashfinanced deals that rely on increasing debt obligations. In the case of cash deals, acquirors
may have to draw down their cash holdings and take on additional debt in order to finance
the deal. The increased net leverage may be viewed by the market as potentially harmful to
the long-term health of the company. Penman, Richardson, and Tuna (2007), for example,
find that leverage is negatively associated with future stock returns. A disregard of high
16

Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004) further subtract the change in working capital to compute
operating cash flow. We do not subtract this item as it is not available on a quarterly frequency, but we
note that it represents only a small fraction of cash flows.

31

leverage would also be consistent with both the practitioner view and the behavioral view
on cash mergers outlined above.
We compare winners’ and losers’ net leverage ratios both before and after the merger.
Using quarterly data, we compute net market leverage as the ratio of net debt (short-term
plus long-term debt minus cash and short-term investments) to market value (total assets
minus book equity plus market equity) of the firm. Alternatively, we use net book leverage
and industry-adjusted net book or market leverage; all measures yield very similar results.
Figure 6 shows the evolution of net market leverage for winners and losers. The graph
indicates that winners’ net leverage ratios sharply increase from pre- to post-merger. In the
pre-merger period, the winners’ leverage ratio is declining, and winners have a somewhat
lower leverage ratio than losers just before the merger. The merger brings about a sharp
increase (from 12 to 20 percent) in the winners’ leverage ratio while losers’ leverage remains
stable. This difference persists until three years after the merger.
Thus, while we do not have definitive evidence on the effect of capital structure changes,
the correlational evidence points to the possibility that high leverage ratios necessary to
finance and implement the merger might be constraining the acquiror post-merger.
[Figure 6 approximately here]

V. Comparison with Existing Methodologies
As a last step in our analysis, we use our findings to evaluate existing empirical approaches to
estimating the returns to mergers. While our empirical approach to identification is limited
to contested mergers and cannot easily be generalized, we can still apply existing approaches
to our sample and compare the resulting estimates to our winner-loser estimates. Such an
analysis allows us to assess possible biases in the existing approaches, at least to the extent
32

that they materialize in our sample. We consider announcement returns, alpha estimates
based on calendar-time portfolio regressions of winner-only portfolios, and winners’ buyand-hold abnormal returns relative to the market portfolio. We present the corresponding
estimates in Panel A of Table VI.
The first row of Panel A reports winners’ three-day announcement returns. Announcement effects are commonly viewed as the most credible measure of the causal effect of mergers
on acquiring-company stock returns, given the difficulty of identifying a valid benchmark for
long-run performance. We find that the three-day announcement returns are negative but
not statistically significant in closely contested mergers. Thus, compared to our winner-loser
estimates, announcement effects underestimate the loss of value generated by mergers and
the market is, on average, incorrect in its initial assessment of the causal effect of contested
mergers.
[Table VI approximately here]
The second row of Panel A shows the winners’ announcement returns around the date of
the losers’ withdrawal. We add these statistics since, compared to single-bidder acquisitions,
the market may perceive the probability of deal success as lower at the announcement of the
ultimate winner’s initial bid, and therefore not react strongly at that point in time. When
the losing bidder drops out of the contest, the takeover probablility for the winner increases
and the market may react more strongly. In our sample, we do not find statistically or
economically significant market reactions at the time of the losers’ withdrawal.
In the third row, we report the losers’ announcement returns around the date of their
bid withdrawal. If the market views the acquisition as value-destroying, we expect a positive
market reaction around the withdrawal date. We indeed find a strong, positive market
reaction of +1.8% in losers at the withdrawal of their bid. These results are consistent with
33

the findings based on our winner-loser methodology, and they support the notion that losing
bidders’ performance is informative about the value created in mergers.
The fourth row shows four-factor abnormal returns of winners, using an equally-weighted
calendar-time portfolio methodology for the contest period and post-acquisition returns of
the winner. (The monthly alpha is scaled by the duration of the contest period and the
three-year post-merger period so that the magnitude of the estimate is comparable to our
long-run winner-loser estimates.) We estimate a positive and insignifcant alpha of 10.3%,
instead of a negative and significant effect as in the winner-loser method.
Finally, in row five, we calculate the long-run abnormal buy-and-hold returns of winners
relative to the market portfolio. This is similar to our main estimates, which also use longrun BHARs, except that here the market return is used as a benchmark instead of the loser’s
performance. We find results that are quite different from the winner-loser approach. The
winner-only effect is close to zero (+0.1% on the Full Sample, and +1.1% on the Contest
Coverage Sample). To check the robustness of these winner-only estimates, we also compute
long-run winner BHARs using alternative risk adjustments. We obtain −13.5 percent and
−3.2 percent for industry-adjusted and risk-adjusted BHARs, respectively. Although they
are also negative, these estimates are much smaller in magnitude than the corresponding
winner-loser estimates, and none of them are statistically significant.
In summary, none of the traditional methods appear to capture the negative causal effect
of mergers in our sample on average.
In Table VI, Panel B, we go one step further. Instead of simply comparing the respective
overall estimates of the merger effect, we correlate the estimates case by case. Specifically, we
regress the long-run winner-loser difference in BHARs on the three announcement returns
calculated above and on the winner’s long-run market-adjusted BHAR.17 This additional
17

We cannot regress our case-by-case winner-loser estimates on the winner’s alpha, since alpha is a single

34

analysis tests which of the traditional methods generates the same relative assessment of
mergers, i.e., the same ordering of mergers with respect to the returns they produce, as our
winner-loser methodology, even if the methodologies disagree on the absolute level of returns
and possibly even on the sign of merger-induced abnormal returns.
For the winner’s announcement return, we find an insignificantly negative correlation. In
other words, in deals for which our estimates point to a more negative effect of mergers, the
announcement effect tends to be more positive (less negative), while in deals for which our
estimates point to a more positive (less negative) effect of mergers, the announcement effect
tends to be more negative. Hence, the announcement effect fails to predict the causal effect
of mergers even directionally.
The winner’s three-day CAR at the loser’s withdrawal, reported in the second row of
Panel B, shows a positive correlation with our long-run winner-loser estimates, but it is not
statistically significant. The loser’s CAR around the withdrawal date, shown in the third
row, has an even weaker correlation with our estimates.
Turning to the correlation with the winners’ long-run BHARs, the picture is more encouraging. The correlation is positive and significant. Partly, this result may reflect the
fact that the winners’ long-run BHARs are part of the winner-loser difference in long-run
BHARs. However, it is not entirely mechanical as the benchmarking against the loser can
(and does) turn negative returns positive and vice versa. Quantitatively, the correlation
amounts to about 65 percent, and the R-squared is about 40 percent.
Overall, these estimation results indicate that researchers should be cautious when using
announcement returns to measure the expected returns to mergers. At least in the subsample
of merger contests, the winner’s announcement effect appears to be generally uninformative
about the returns generated by the merger in the long-run. Existing methodologies focusing
number. It is not estimated case by case.

35

on long-run abnormal returns are better in terms of their relative assessment, but fail to
capture the extent of value destruction (or creation) in our sample of mergers.

VI. Conclusion
This paper makes two contributions. Methodologically, we exploit bidding contests to address the identification issue in estimating the returns to mergers. We argue that, in contests
where at least two bidders have a significant ex-ante chance of winning, the post-merger performance of the losing bidder permits the calculation of the counterfactual performance of
the winner without the merger. This logic applies to protracted merger fights, in which all
participating bidders have, ex ante, a similar chance to win.
Substantively, this paper provides credible estimates of the effect of contested mergers on
stock prices. We find that the stock returns of bidders in close contests are not significantly
different before the merger contest, corroborating the validity of our methodology. Postmerger, however, bidder returns diverge significantly, providing us with the measure of a
causal effect of mergers on acquiring-company stock. In the case of close contests, losers
outperform winners by 24 to 37 percent over the three years following the merger. We also
uncover an increase in the leverage of winners relative to losers after the merger. High
payments for relatively large deals, especially payments in cash, appear to be the most
important indicator of long-term underperformance, rather than other factors related to
the productivity of the merged firm. These results draw attention to a commonly voiced
practitioner concern about highly priced cash mergers, and are in contrast to the seeming
underperformance of stock mergers emphasized in the academic literature. They are also
consistent with the behavioral view that managers’ overestimation of future returns are an
important factor in explaining value-destroying merger activities.
In interpreting our results, it is important to keep two points in mind. First, while
36

we argue that losers provide a good counterfactual for winners in long contests, we cannot
rule out the presence of additional unobserved factors correlated with merger activity that
affect abnormal returns. In the paper, we discuss possible omitted variables and show that
the empirical evidence is generally inconsistent with the alternative explanations of our
main result. Ultimately, though, the credibility of our estimates rests on the identification
assumption, which of course cannot be tested directly.
Second, the external validity of our findings is unclear. Our estimates are based on
contested mergers, which are not representative of the entire population of mergers. While a
non-trivial fraction of mergers are contested (and the empirical assessment of merger contests
is interesting in and of itself), the size and even the direction of the effect may not generalize
to mergers more broadly. Indeed, our additional results linking acquiror underperformance
to large cash transactions suggest that closely contested mergers maybe particularly likely
to exhibiting long-term negative effects in the acquiring firm.
At the same time, the empirical estimates do allow us to evaluate existing methodologies
at least in this specific context, which suggests caution in interpreting announcement effects
as measures of the returns to mergers. Thus, despite the inherent difficulties in assessing
long run abnormal returns, our results imply a renewed emphasis on developing long-term
approaches along the lines of Lyon, Barber, and Tsai (1999), possibly coupled with matching
on pre-merger stock returns.

37

References
Akbulut, Mehmet E., and John G. Matsusaka, 2010, 50+ years of diversification announcements,
The Financial Review 45, 231–262.
Alexandridis, George, Kathleen P. Fuller, Lars Terhaar, and Nickolaos G. Travlos, 2013, Deal size,
acquisition premia and shareholder gains, Journal of Corporate Finance 20, 1–13.
Allen, Jason, Robert Clark, and Jean-Francois Houde, 2014, The effect of mergers in search markets:
Evidence from the canadian mortgage industry, American Economic Review 104, 3365–3396.
Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell, and Erik Stafford, 2001, New evidence and perspectives on mergers, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103–120.
Asquith, Paul, Robert F. Bruner, and David W. Mullins Jr, 1987, Merger returns and the form of
financing, Journal of Financial Economics 11, 121–139.
Betton, Sandra, B. Espen Eckbo, and Karin Thorburn, 2008, Corporate takeovers, in Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, volume 2, chapter 15 (North Holland/Elsevier).
Boone, Audra L., and J. Harold Mulherin, 2007, How are firms sold?, The Journal of Finance 62,
847–875.
, 2008, Do auctions induce a winner’s curse? New evidence from the corporate takeover
market, Journal of Finance Economics 89, 1–19.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, The Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.
Deneckere, Raymond, and Carl Davidson, 1984, Horizontal mergers and collusive behavior, The
International Journal of Industrial Organization 2, 117–132.
Dimopoulos, Theodosios, and Stefano Sacchetto, 2014, Preemptive bidding, target resistance, and
takeover premiums, Journal of Financial Economics 114, 444–470.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town, 2015, Mergers when prices are negotiated:
Evidence from the hospital industry, American Economic Review 105, 172–203.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti, 2010, Identifying agglomeration
spillovers: Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings, Journal of Political Economy
118, 536–598.
Greenstone, Michael, and Enrico Moretti, 2004, Bidding for industrial plants: Does winning a
‘million dollar plant’ increase welfare?, Working Paper.

38

Healy, Paul M., Krishna G. Palepu, and Richard S. Ruback, 1992, Does corporate performance
improve after mergers?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135–175.
Ince, Ozgur S., and R. Burt Porter, 2006, Individual equity return data from Thomson Datastream:
Handle with care!, Journal of Financial Research 29, 463–479.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency cost of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 76, 323–329.
, and Richard S. Ruback, 1983, The market for corporate control, Journal of Financial
Economics 11, 5–50.
Loughran, Tim, and Anand M. Vijh, 1997, Do long-term shareholders benefit from corporate
acquisitions?, Journal of Finance 52, 1765–1790.
Lyon, John D., Brad M. Barber, and Chih-Ling Tsai, 1999, Improved methods for tests of long-run
abnormal stock returns, The Journal of Finance 54, 165–201.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment, The
Journal of Finance 60, 2661–2700.
, 2008, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market’s reaction, Journal
of Financial Economics 89, 20–43.
, and Jun Yan, 2011, Overconfidence and early-life experiences: The effect of managerial
traits on corporate financial policies, Journal of Finance 66, 1687–1733.
Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2004, Price pressure around mergers, Journal of
Finance 59, 31–63.
Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Firm size and the gains from
acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 201–228.
, 2005, Wealth destruction on a massive scale? A study of acquiring-firm returns in the
recent merger wave, Journal of Finance 60, 757–782.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1990, Do managerial objectives drive bad
acquisitions?, The Journal of Finance 45, 31–48.
Penman, Stephen H., Scott Richardson, and Irem Tuna, 2007, The book-to-price effect in stock
returns: Accounting for leverage, Journal of Accounting Research 45, 427–467.
Perry, Martin K., and Robert H. Porter, 1985, Oligopoly and the incentive for horizontal merger,
The American Economic Review 75, 219–227.
Rau, Raghavendra, and Theo Vermaelen, 1998, Glamour, value, and the post-acquisition performance of acquiring firms, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 223–253.

39

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and S. Viswanathan, 2004, Market valuation and merger waves, The
Journal of Finance 59, 2685–2718.
Richardson, Scott, Richard Sloan, and Haifeng You, 2011, What makes stock prices move? Fundamentals vs. investor recognition, Working Paper.
Roll, Richard, 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, Journal of Business 59, 197–216.
Salant, Stephen W., Sheldon Switzer, and Robert J. Reynolds, 1983, Losses from horizontal merger:
The effects of an exogenous change in industry structure on cournot-nash equilibrium, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 98, 185–99.
Savor, Pavel G., and Qi Lu, 2009, Do stock mergers create value for aquirers?, The Journal of
Finance 64, 10611097.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 295–311.
Spalt, Oliver, and Christoph Schneider, 2016, Why does size matter so much for bidder announcement returns?, Working Paper.
Stigler, George J., 1950, Monopoly and oligopoly by merger, American Economic Review Papers
& Proceedings 40, 23–34.
Wermers, Russ, 2004, Is money really ‘smart’ ? New evidence on the relation between mutual fund
flows, manager behavior, and performance persistence, Working Paper, University of Maryland.

40

Figures and Tables

Completion of bid by company B
Completion of merger by company B

First bid of company B
First bid of company B
First bid of company A

t=ï3

t=ï2

t=ï1

Withdrawal of bid by company A

t=0

t=1

t=2

t=3

Event time

(a) Stylized Example
Loser: Westcott Communications
Announced: 7 April 1995. Withdrawn: 4 Jan 1996.
Winner: Automatic Data Processing
Announced: 5 June, 1995. Completed: 4 Jan 1996.

01/95 02/95 03/95 04/95 05/95 06/95 07/95 08/95 09/95 10/95 11/95 12/95 01/96 02/96 03/96 04/96
t=-2
t=-1
t=0
t=1
t=2
t=3

(b) Data Example

Figure 1
Construction of Event Time

41

50

50

Winners

Winners

0
-25
-50

-50

-25

0

25

Losers

25

Losers

-40

-20

0
Period

20

40

-40

0
Period

20

40

(b) Industry-adjusted BHARs

Winners

Winners

Losers

Losers

-50

-50

-25

-25

0

0

25

25

50

50

(a) Market-adjusted BHARs

-20

-40

-20

0
Period

20

40

-40

(c) Risk-adjusted BHARs

-20

0
Period

20

40

(d) Unadjusted buy-and-hold returns

Figure 2
Winner and Loser Performance
The graphs show the average stock price performance of winners and losers in close contests,
i.e., in the long-duration subsample. The top graphs show market-adjusted and industry-adjusted
buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs). The bottom graphs show risk-adjusted BHARs and
buy-and-hold raw returns.
BHARs are calculated as described in Table III.
Cumulative
raw returns are calculated using the same formula, but setting the benchmark return to zero.
The circles correspond to the average winner returns, the crosses to the average loser returns.

42

.03

Winners

-.01

Forecasted Earnings-to-Price Ratio
0
.01
.02

Losers

-40

-20

0
Period

20

40

Figure 3
Forecasted Earnings-to-Price Ratio
The figure shows the forecasted earnings-to-price ratio (F E/P ratio) of winners and losers around
merger contests in long contests. The F E/P ratio is computed as analysts’ two-year consensus (mean)
forecast divided by the stock price at the end of the forecast month. It is computed using quarterly
data from I/B/E/S. The F E/P ratio is normalized to zero in t = 0 and expressed as a decimal. The
circles correspond to the event-time specific mean F E/P ratios of winners, the crosses to those of losers.

43

.4
.3
Fraction
.2
.1
0

-400

-300

-200
-100
0
100
200
Winner-Loser Difference in Long-Run BHAR

300

400

Figure 4
Distribution of Merger Effect Estimates
The histogram shows the distribution of the estimated merger effect for all 56 contests of above-median
duration in our Full Sample. The merger effect is the winner-loser difference in the market-adjusted
BHAR three years after the merger.

44

4

Winners

2

2.5

Operating Cash Flow
3
3.5

Losers

-40

-20

0
Period

20

40

Figure 5
Operating Performance
The figure shows operating cash flow of winners and losers around merger contests in the subsample of long contests.
Operating cash flow is calculated as the ratio of net sales minus cost of goods sold and selling, general and administrative expenses over total assets. It
is based on quarterly data and is expressed as a percentage.
The circles correspond to
the event-time specific mean oeprating cash flow of winners, the crosses to those of losers.

45

.2

Winners

.12

Net market leverage
.14
.16
.18

Losers

-40

-20

0
Period

20

40

Figure 6
Net Market Leverage
The figure shows net market leverage of winners and losers around merger contests in long
contests.
Net market leverage is defined as debt in current liabilities plus long term
debt minus cash and short-term investments, divided by total assets minus book equity
plus market equity.
The variable is computed using quarterly data.
The circles correspond to the event-time specific mean leverage of winners, the crosses to those of losers.

46

Table I
Descriptive Statistics
In Panel A, Total assets are the book value of total assets. Market value is Total assets plus market value
of equity (common shares outstanding times fiscal-year closing price) minus book value of equity (book value
of shareholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit [if available], minus book
value of preferred stock, where, depending on availability, we use redemption, liquidation, or par value (in
that order) to estimate the book value of preferred stock). Tobin’s Q is the ratio of Market value to book
value of assets. PP&E is book value of property, plant and equipment divided by total assets. Profitability is
operating income before depreciation divided by total assets. Leverage is debt in current liabilities plus long
term debt, either divided by Total assets (Book leverage) or by Market value (Market leverage). Announcement
CAR [%] is the three-day cumulative market-adjusted return around the announcement date of the winner’s
or loser’s first bid in a given contest. Announcement CARs [$m] are three-day cumulative dollar abnormal
returns of the first bid, i.e., percentage announcement CARs multiplied by the bidder’s pre-merger market
value of equity. p-value of mean difference refers to the difference in means between winners and losers. In
Panel B, Deal value is the dollar value of the winning bid. Tender offer is a dummy indicating a tender
offer. Hostile is a dummy indicating whether the deal attitude of the winning bid was hostile. Percentage
paid in stock is the percentage of the winning bid that is paid in stock. Percentage paid in cash is the
percentage paid in cash. Number of bidders is the total number of bidders involved in the merger contest.
Offer premium [% of target] is the run-up in the target’s stock price from 40 days prior to the announcement
of the initial bid until completion of the merger contest. Offer premium [% of acquiror] is Offer premium
[% of target] times target equity value divided by acquiror equity value. Contest duration is the number of
months from the month-end preceding the first bid until the end of the month of the completion of the merger.
Panel A: Bidder Characteristics
Losers

Winners
Total assets [$m]
Market value [$m]
Sales [$m]
Tobin’s Q
PP&E
Profitability
Book leverage
Market leverage
Ann. CAR [%]
Ann. CAR [$m]

p-value of

Mean

Median

Std

N

Mean

Median

Std

N

mean diff.

12539.02
19152.86
6877.06
1.88
0.29
0.12
0.26
0.18
-1.55
-333.56

3063.65
5218.28
1680.42
1.41
0.22
0.11
0.19
0.14
-0.61
-6.95

26816.43
39326.26
16633.67
1.36
0.25
0.08
0.21
0.16
7.39
1959.05

112
112
112
112
109
109
112
112
112
112

7759.56
12153.98
4060.66
1.81
0.29
0.13
0.23
0.17
0.00
12.43

2527.63
3364.47
1172.70
1.36
0.22
0.12
0.19
0.14
-0.01
-4.94

12334.93
22549.19
8425.34
1.28
0.26
0.11
0.18
0.15
0.07
877.99

121
121
120
121
117
117
117
117
120
119

0.08
0.10
0.12
0.63
0.93
0.72
0.18
0.61
0.25
0.08

Panel B: Deal Characteristics

Deal value [$m]
Tender offer
Hostile
Percentage paid in stock
Percentage paid in cash
Number of bidders
Offer premium [% of target]
Offer premium [% of acquiror]
Contest duration [months]

P25

Median

P75

Mean

Std

N

88.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.00
31.49
1.68
4.00

484.48
0.00
0.00
0.00
39.41
2.00
51.78
5.99
7.00

1,186
0.00
0.00
68.44
100.00
3.00
79.35
18.14
10.00

2,989.48
0.00
0.09
30.92
47.19
2.38
63.47
10.00
8.59

10,760.02
0.00
0.29
40.67
45.04
0.89
62.87
20.43
6.66

110
112
112
112
112
112
80
80
112

47

Table II
Winner-Loser Similarities: Correlation in Pre-Merger Abnormal Returns
Winner-loser similarities in abnormal returns are estimated in two steps: In the first step (unreported),
we estimate market-adjusted abnormal performance trends for each bidder by regressing each bidder’s
market-adjusted returns on a constant, separately for the three-year pre-merger and the three-year postmerger periods. In the second step, we regress the abnormal performance trends of the winners on those
of the losers in the same merger contest and in the same (pre- or post-merger) period. The table reports
the resulting coefficients of this univariate regression, separately for the different samples (Panel A to
C). We show the pre-merger period results split up into above-median and below-median subsamples of
contest duration (column 1 and 2) as well as the full sample (column 3) for the pre-merger period. For
completeness, the last column also shows the result for the post-merger period. The intercept is omitted.
Panel A: Full Sample
Pre-merger
Long
Short
Coefficient
SE
R-squared
Observations

0.586***
(0.186)
0.16
56

0.272**
(0.104)
0.11
56

Pre-merger
Full sample

Post-merger
Full sample

0.369***
(0.096)
0.12
112

0.308***
(0.090)
0.10
112

Panel B: Contest Coverage Sample
Pre-merger
Long
Short
Coefficient
SE
R-squared
Observations

0.645**
(0.249)
0.14
43

0.239**
(0.119)
0.09
44

Pre-merger
Full sample

Post-merger
Full sample

0.343***
(0.116)
0.09
87

0.175
(0.112)
0.03
87

Panel C: International Sample
Pre-merger
Long
Short
Coefficient
SE
R-squared
Observations

0.307**
(0.136)
0.05
92

0.289***
(0.081)
0.12
92

48

Pre-merger
Full sample

Post-merger
Full sample

0.296***
(0.075)
0.08
184

0.247***
(0.064)
0.08
184

Table III
Winner-Loser Differences in Long-Run Abnormal Returns
The regression equation in all columns is: BHARijt = α0 +α1 Wijt +α2 tijt +α3 tijt ·Wijt +α4 P ostijt +
α5 P ostijt · Wijt + α6 tijt · P ostijt + α7 tijt · P ostijt · Wijt + ηj + εijt (equation (3)). The regressions are
run on the subsample of long (above-median) contest duration of the sample indicated in the first row.
The dependent variable is the market-adjusted buy-and-hold abnormal return,
normalized
Qt
Qtto zero in the
month preceding the start of the contest and computed as BHARijt = s=1 (1 + rijs ) − s=1 (1 + rsmkt )
Qt+1
Qt+1
going forward in event time, and as BHARijt = s=0 (1 + rijs )−1 − s=0 (1 + rsmkt )−1 going backward,
where i denotes the bidder, j the contest and t the event month. The market return is the CRSP
value-weighted market return. Winner (Wijt ) is a dummy indicating whether bidder i is a winner in
merger contest j. t is a variable counting event time. The dummy variable P ostijt indicates whether
period t is in the post-merger window of contest j. The lower part of the table between the two solid
lines reports tests for the long-run winner-loser differences in BHARs at t = +36. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by contest.
Sample:

Full Sample
(1)

Contest Coverage
(2)

Intl. Sample
(3)

Contest fixed effects

1.049
(3.963)
-0.182
(0.217)
-0.018
(0.245)
6.756
(8.130)
-8.927
(7.768)
0.693*
(0.367)
-0.433
(0.423)
Yes

-0.237
(5.186)
-0.190
(0.272)
-0.236
(0.294)
3.720
(9.075)
-7.239
(10.00)
0.978**
(0.438)
-0.563
(0.535)
Yes

-0.008
(2.520)
0.111
(0.137)
0.011
(0.178)
5.382
(5.837)
-4.472
(5.622)
-0.043
(0.233)
-0.273
(0.241)
Yes

Merger effect at t = 36
Merger effect: p-value

-23.69**
0.03

-35.46***
0.01

-13.63**
0.05

8,568
0.28
56

6,408
0.26
43

14,040
0.28
92

Winner (α1 )
t (α2 )
Winner × t (α3 )
Post (α4 )
Winner × Post (α5 )
t × Post (α6 )
Winner × Post × t (α7 )

Observations
R-squared
Number of contests

49

50

Observations
R-squared
Number of contests

Merger effect at t = 36
Merger effect: p-value

Contest fixed effects

Winner × Post × t (α7 )

t × Post (α6 )

Winner × Post (α5 )

Post (α4 )

Winner × t (α3 )

t (α2 )

Winner (α1 )

Dept. variable:
Sample:

8,419
0.265
56

-33.90***
0.00

1.480
(4.199)
-0.059
(0.251)
0.125
(0.335)
6.696
(7.612)
-9.535
(7.630)
0.641*
(0.367)
-0.864*
(0.481)
Yes

6,365
0.237
43

-47.71***
0.00

-0.015
(5.327)
-0.115
(0.309)
-0.056
(0.420)
2.423
(8.277)
-5.627
(9.350)
0.984**
(0.450)
-1.146*
(0.601)
Yes

BHAR (ind.-adjusted)
Full Sample Contest Coverage
(1)
(2)

8,568
0.256
56

-26.10**
0.05

1.351
(4.008)
-0.020
(0.190)
-0.101
(0.241)
3.302
(8.755)
-9.625
(7.896)
0.524
(0.340)
-0.408
(0.440)
Yes

6,480
0.261
43

-36.43**
0.02

0.082
(5.021)
-0.032
(0.217)
-0.306
(0.278)
-1.330
(9.189)
-6.399
(9.622)
0.850**
(0.376)
-0.555
(0.540)
Yes

BHAR (risk-adjusted)
Full Sample Contest Coverage
(3)
(4)

8,568
0.356
56

-23.45**
0.04

0.811
(0.211)
0.517**
(2.089)
-0.045
(-0.188)
22.612***
(2.774)
-7.957
(-1.048)
0.844*
(1.813)
-0.421
(-0.984)
Yes

6,480
0.358
43

-32.08**
0.02

-0.855
(-0.177)
0.546*
(1.709)
-0.257
(-0.907)
21.261**
(2.358)
-5.068
(-0.537)
1.052*
(1.792)
-0.490
(-0.928)
Yes

BHR (unadjusted)
Full Sample Contest Coverage
(5)
(6)

The regression equation in all columns is: BHARijt = α0 + α1 Wijt + α2 tijt + α3 tijt · Wijt + α4 P ostijt + α5 P ostijt · Wijt +
α6 tijt · P ostijt + α7 tijt · P ostijt · Wijt + ηj + εijt (equation (3)). The regressions are run on the subsample of long (above-median)
contest duration of the sample indicated in the first row. The dependent variable is the buy-and-hold
cumulative
return,
Qt
Qt abnormal
bm
normalized to zero in the month preceding the start of the contest and computed as BHARijt = s=1 (1 + rijs ) − s=1 (1 + rijs
) going
Qt+1
Qt+1
−1
bm −1
forward in event time, and as BHARijt = s=0 (1 + rijs ) − s=0 (1 + rijs ) going backward, where i denotes the bidder, j the
contest, t the event month, and bm references a benchmark portfolio. In column 1 and 2, the benchmark return is the value-weighted
industry return using the Fama-French 12-industry classification. The benchmark return in columns 3 and 4 is the CAPM required
return, rf t + βi (rmt − rf t ). Columns 5 and 6 use the raw, unadjusted buy-and-hold return, i.e. the benchmark return is set to zero.
Winner (Wijt ) is a dummy indicating whether bidder i is a winner in merger contest j. t is a variable counting event time. The
dummy variable P ostijt indicates whether period t is in the post-merger window of contest j. The lower part of of the table between
the two solid lines reports tests for the long-run winner-loser differences in BHARs at t = +36. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered by contest.

Table IV
Winner-Loser Differences in Long-Run Abnormal Returns - Alternative Return Adjustments

51

Winner × Post × t (α7 )

t × Post (α6 )

Winner × Post (α5 )

Post (α4 )

Winner × t (α3 )

t (α2 )

Winner (α1 )

Dependent variable:
Interaction variable:
-3.571
(8.769)
-0.464
(0.375)
-0.350
(0.507)
11.214
(12.101)
-6.602
(11.428)
1.176**
(0.537)
0.095
(0.689)

Acquiror Q
(1)
-2.706
(8.737)
-0.544
(0.445)
0.249
(0.455)
-3.051
(10.164)
1.449
(11.292)
1.431**
(0.582)
-1.059*
(0.620)

Target size
(3)

5.622
(4.733)
0.252
(0.231)
0.087
(0.309)
2.624
(12.746)
-17.261*
(9.675)
0.613
(0.682)
0.685
(0.794)

-0.578
(4.692)
-0.113
(0.185)
-0.117
(0.255)
9.935
(8.730)
-10.017
(9.002)
0.603*
(0.328)
-0.198
(0.418)

-0.440
(5.687)
-0.374
(0.335)
0.207
(0.333)
3.155
(10.992)
-12.433
(10.605)
0.842
(0.535)
-0.559
(0.557)

BHAR (market-adjusted)
Public tgt Diversif.
#bidders>2
(4)
(5)
(6)

(Table continued on next page)

0.061
(8.246)
-0.434
(0.418)
-0.182
(0.475)
-2.397
(14.356)
-4.967
(14.089)
0.992
(0.696)
-0.781
(0.717)

Acquiror size
(2)

0.245
(4.821)
-0.218
(0.241)
0.022
(0.261)
2.174
(8.622)
-4.777
(8.550)
0.682*
(0.404)
-0.314
(0.462)

Hostile
(7)

-0.644
(9.380)
-0.247
(0.381)
-0.472
(0.492)
-3.295
(15.230)
1.077
(16.292)
0.115
(0.580)
-0.251
(0.734)

Premium
(8)

0.286
(4.286)
-0.054
(0.182)
-0.060
(0.240)
6.720
(8.788)
-9.763
(8.277)
0.534
(0.345)
-0.254
(0.429)

All-cash
(9)

The regression equation in all columns is BHARijt = α0 +α1 Wijt +α2 tijt +α3 tijt Wijt +α4 P ostijt +α5 P ostijt Wijt +α6 tijt P ostijt +
α7 tijt P ostijt Wijt + α8 Interactionsijt + ηj + εijt . The dependent variable is the market-adjusted buy-and-hold abnormal return,
Qt
Qt
normalized to zero in the month preceding the start of the contest and computed as BHARijt = s=1 (1 + rijs ) − s=1 (1 + rsmkt )
Q
Qt+1
t+1
going forward in event time, and as BHARijt = s=0 (1 + rijs )−1 − s=0 (1 + rsmkt )−1 going backward, where i denotes the bidder,
j the contest and t the event month. The market return is the CRSP value-weighted market return. Wijt is a dummy indicating
whether bidder i is a winner in merger contest j; t is a variable counting event time; and P ostijt is a dummy indicating whether
period t is in the post-merger window of contest j. Interaction is a placeholder indicating the respective subsample analyzed in each
of the columns. For columns (1), (2), (3) and (8), Interaction indicates the above-median subsample in terms of acquiror Q, acquiror
size, target size, and acquisition premium, and for columns (4), (5), (6), (7) and (9), the subsamples of public targets, diversifying
mergers, contests with more than two bidders, hostile bids and all-cash offers, respectively. Acquiror Q is the ratio of the acquiror’s
market value to book value of assets. Acquiror size is the book value of debt plus market value of equity. (Relative) target size is the
ratio of the transaction value (or the offered purchase price in the case of the losing bidder) and the bidder’s market capitalization.
A bid is diversifying if the bidder is in a Fama-French 12-industry classification that is different from that of the target. The takeover
premium is computed as the runup in the target’s stock price from 40 trading days prior to the beginning of the contest until one
day after completion. The lower part of the table between the two solid lines reports tests for the long-run winner-loser differences
in BHARs at t = +36. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by contest.

Table V
Winner-Loser Differences in Long-Run Abnormal Returns - Interaction Effects

52

Observations
R-squared
Number of contests

Merger effect at t = 36 for interaction=0
p-value
Merger effect at t = 36 for interaction=1
p-value
Difference in merger effect
p-value

Interaction × Post × t × Winner (α15 )

Interaction × Post × t (α14 )

Interaction × Post × Winner (α13 )

Interaction × Post (α12 )

Interaction × Winner × t (α11 )

Interaction × t (α10 )

Interaction × Winner (α9 )

Interaction (α8 )

Dependent variable:
Interaction variable:

8,568
0.28
56

-26.15***
0.01
-19.90
0.31
6.25
0.78

Acquiror Q
(1)
9.711
(9.108)
6.697
(12.389)
0.613
(0.414)
0.496
(0.635)
-9.684
(15.990)
-2.569
(19.286)
-1.049
(0.707)
-0.778
(1.086)

8,568
0.30
56

-38.62**
0.02
-9.73
0.52
28.89
0.20

Acquiror size
(2)
-9.185
(11.583)
2.238
(10.442)
0.496
(0.434)
0.306
(0.513)
18.020
(16.335)
-7.993
(18.477)
-0.588
(0.742)
0.684
(0.943)

8,424
0.28
55

-29.61***
0.01
-24.84
0.30
4.77
0.87

Target size
(3)
-18.958
(12.477)
6.158
(13.194)
0.744
(0.480)
-0.555
(0.548)
16.788
(17.832)
-17.735
(21.998)
-1.382*
(0.778)
1.022
(1.032)

8,568
0.29
56

15.39
0.59
-34.02***
0.00
-49.41
0.11

8,568
0.28
56

-21.64**
0.05
-48.24
0.14
-26.60
0.44

8,568
0.29
56

-25.20**
0.05
-18.76
0.29
6.43
0.77

BHAR (market-adjusted)
Public tgt Diversif.
#bidders>2
(4)
(5)
(6)
-7.217
(12.579)
-5.829
13.329
3.351
(6.822)
(18.435)
(6.792)
-0.569
-0.482
0.483
(0.360)
(1.028)
(0.387)
-0.117
0.764
-0.588
(0.432)
(1.120)
(0.424)
5.423
-22.252
9.075
(16.150)
(21.283)
(15.986)
10.443
2.755
13.036
(13.657)
(24.726)
(14.987)
0.105
0.634
-0.375
(0.807)
(1.602)
(0.682)
-1.426
-1.983
0.304
(0.933)
(1.537)
(0.814)

Table V - Continued

8,568
0.28
56

-14.76
0.23
-131.00**
0.04
-116.30*
0.08

Hostile
(7)
-9.199
(15.800)
5.249
(28.138)
0.323
(0.423)
-0.407
(0.682)
41.233**
(19.209)
-33.182
(45.581)
0.097
(0.784)
-2.117
(1.268)

6,624
0.29
44

-24.86
0.12
-41.46***
0.01
-16.60
0.46

0.204
(9.821)
-0.136
(0.552)
0.877
(0.575)
21.776
(19.570)
-14.883
(19.395)
1.158
(0.849)
-0.932
(0.969)

Premium
(8)

8,568
0.28
56

-20.45*
0.08
-56.46***
0.01
-36.01
0.15

10.350
(8.772)
-1.613
(1.619)
0.641
(1.397)
0.456
(13.720)
9.316
(20.322)
2.005
(2.125)
-2.231
(1.843)

All-cash
(9)

Table VI
Alternative Methods to Assess the Returns to Mergers – Comparison
Panel A reports the three-day market-adjusted return to the aquiror at announcement of the acquiror’s
initial bid (first row) and at the announcement of the loser’s withdrawal (second row), the return to the
loser at withdrawal (third row), the four-factor alpha of equally-weighted calendar-month portfolios of
post-acquisition acquiror returns (fourth row), and the long-run buy-and-hold market-adjusted return
of acquirors (fifth row). The four-factor alpha is the intercept of a time-series regression of the equally
weighted excess return of an acquiror portfolio on the excess market return, the Fama-French factors,
and the momentum factor. We use all acquiror stock returns that occur during the contest period or
the following 36 months. The four-factor alpha from the monthly return regression is multiplied by
36 plus the average contest duration to make it comparable to the performance measurement period
used for the estimates in Table III. Panel B reports univariate regressions of the long-run winner-loser
difference in BHARs on the return at announcement of the acquiror’s initial bid (first row) and at the
announcement of the loser’s withdrawal (second row), the return to the loser at withdrawal (third row),
and the long-run buy-and-hold market-adjusted return of acquirors (last row). Standard errors are in
parentheses.
Panel A: Estimates from traditional methods
Mean

SE

N

Winners’ announcement CAR [%]

-1.097

(0.799)

56

Winners’ CAR at loser’s withdrawal [%]

-0.095

(0.824)

55

Losers’ CAR at loser’s withdrawal [%]

1.798**

(0.715)

62

Winners’ 4-factor alpha × (36+avg contest duration)

10.335

(10.467)

56

Winners’ market-adjusted BHAR [%]

0.097

(13.315)

56

Panel B: Correlation with estimates from traditional methods
Coefficient

SE

N

Winners’ announcement CAR [%]

-3.496

(2.288)

56

Winners’ CAR at loser’s withdrawal [%]

3.821

(2.262)

56

Losers’ CAR at loser’s withdrawal [%]

0.504

(2.243)

62

Winners’ market-adjusted BHAR [%]

0.649***

(0.108)

56

53

Appendix: Sample Construction
In this Appendix, we provide more details on the construction of our data set from Thomson
One Mergers and Acquisitions, CRSP, Compustat, Compustat Global, Datastream, and
I/B/E/S.
The initial data collection from Thomson One for the two North American samples
described in the main paper includes the following variables: deal number of each bid,
acquiror’s and target’s company identifiers (CIDGEN), six-digit CUSIP, nation, SIC code,
announcement date of the bid, its effective or withdrawal date, dollar value of the offer,
percentage of the transaction value offered in cash, in stock, or in other means of payment,
deal attitude (friendly or hostile), number of bidders involved in the bidding process, and
competing bid flag. We collect those data items for the period from 1/1/1985 to 12/31/2012.
We collect the following data for the longer period (including +/- three years) of 1/1/1982
to 12/31/2015: From the CRSP Monthly Stock Database, we obtain holding period stock
return (RET), distribution event code (DISTCD), delisting code (DLSTCD), date of delisting
payment (DLPDT), amount after delisting (DLAMT), delisting return (DLRET), and CRSP
value-weighted index returns (VWRETD). From the Fama-French data library, we obtain
the monthly Fama-French factor returns (MKTRF, SMB, HML), the risk-free rate, and
value-weighted industry returns (12-industry classification). From the CRSP-COMPUSTAT
Fundamentals Annual Database we obtain yearly accounting data, including total assets
(AT), net sales (SALE), total debt (LT), shareholders’ equity (SEQ), deferred taxes and
investment tax credit (TXDITC), preferres stock liquidating, redemption and carrying value
(PSTKL, PSTKRV, UPSTK, respectively), common shares outstanding (CSHO), fiscal year
closing price (PRCC F), and operating income (OIBDP). From the CRSP-COMPUSTAT
Fundamentals Quarterly Database, we obtain quarterly data on total assets (ATQ), debt
in current liabilities (DLCQ), long-term debt (DLTTQ), cash and short-term investments
54

(CHEQ), common shares outstanding (CSHOQ), fiscal quarter closing price (PRCCQ), book
value of shareholders’ equity (SEQQ), balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit
(TXDITCQ), book value of preferred stock (PSTKQ), net sales (SALEQ), cost of goods sold
(COGSQ), and selling, general and administrative expenses (XSGAQ). We use the CRSPCOMPUSTAT quarterly data to construct the time series of operating cash flow and various
measures of leverage (book and market leverage, as well as net book and net market leverage)
for each bidder.
We merge the Thomson One and CRSP data using the 6-digit CUSIPs. Specifically,
we match the 6-digit CUSIP provided by Thomson One with the first six digits of CRSP’s
historical CUSIP (NCUSIP). Since the CUSIP of a firm can change over time, and reassignment of CUSIPs is particularly common following a merger, we match Thomson One’s bidder
CUSIP with CRSP’s NCUSIP for the month preceding the announcement of the bid. We
manually check that the company names recorded by Thomson correspond to the matched
CRSP company names. If a firm has multiple equity securities outstanding, we use (1) the
common stock if common and other types of stock are traded; (2) Class A shares if the
company has Class A and Class B outstanding; and (3) the stock with the longest available
time series of data if there are multiple types of common stock traded.
We use the stock return data to construct the monthly time series of bidder returns for
a window of +/− three years around the merger contest (from event time t = −35 to event
time t = +36). Depending on the duration of the bidding contest, the length of the return
time series vary. The CRSP holding period return is adjusted for stock splits, exchanges,
and cash distributions. (This adjustment is important since these events are particularly
common around mergers.) We then construct the corresponding time series of CRSP valueweighted market returns and of value-weighted industry returns. From these return series
we construct buy-and-hold abnormal returns as described in Section II.
55

For publicly listed target firms, we also construct time series of daily returns to calculate
the offer premium, computed as the percentage run-up in stock price from 40 trading days
prior to the beginning of the contest until the day of delisting. Alternatively, we express
the offer premium as a percentage of the acquirors’ equity value (percentage run-up in the
target stock price × target market capitalization / acquiror market capitalization).
In the three-year period after a merger, many bidders disappear from CRSP due to delisting. To reduce survivorship bias, we calculate the return implications of the delisting events
for shareholders using all delisting information available in CRSP. The delisting code (DLSTCD) classifies delistings into mergers, exchanges for other stock, liquidations, and several
other categories of dropped firms; the distribution information (DIVAMT) reports to what
extent shareholders were paid in cash or stock; and the delisting return (DLRET) provides
the shareholder returns from the last day the stock was traded to the earliest post-delisting
date for which CRSP could ascertain the stock’s value. We round the delisting return period
to full months and track the performance of a delisted firm from the perspective of a buyand-hold investor, mirroring our approach when tracking the performance of bidders who are
listed. Specifically, we assume that stock payments in takeovers are held in the stock of the
acquiring firm and exchanges for other stock are held in the new stock. When shareholders
receive cash payments (in mergers, liquidations, and bankruptcies) or CRSP cannot identify
or does not cover the security in which payments are made, we track performance as if all
proceeds were invested in the market portfolio, using the value-weighted CRSP index.
We merge the resulting monthly panel with the annual and the quarterly accounting data
from CRSP-COMPUSTAT by assigning, to each monthly observation, the data pertaining
to the most recent preceding fiscal-year (fiscal-quarter) end.
Our initial sample contains 623 bids and 293 takeover contests. We drop repeated bids
by the same bidder, and keep the date of the first bid as the announcement date. This
56

eliminates 20 bids. Next, we drop 57 contests that had not been completed by March 31,
2012. We further drop 99 bidders that could not be matched to a CRSP PERMNO. We then
delete 14 contests in which the winner is the ultimate parent company of the target. Next,
we balance the sample by requiring non-missing stock return data from t = −35 to t = +36
(i.e., from three years before to three years after the contest), which reduces the number
of contests to 178. We also eliminate one bidder which exhibits extreme stock returns and
return volatility in the pre-merger period due to idiosyncratic factors.18 Finally, we keep only
those contests for which we have stock price data for both the winner and the loser(s) in a
given contest. This reduces the sample by another 66 contests, resulting in a final sample of
112 contests with bids placed by 233 bidders, 112 winners and 121 losers (Full Sample).
For the International Sample, we obtain the stock returns of non-North American firms in
a three-step procedure. In the first step, we are able to match 59 non-North American firms
with Compustat Global via the SEDOL identifier provided by Thomson One. The firms that
cannot be matched with Compustat Global are then merged with Datastream, also using
the SEDOL. We are able to match 13 firms in this second step. For the remaining firms,
we search annual reports and company profiles for their company identifiers. If no SEDOL
but the International Securities Identification Number (ISIN) can be found, the ISIN is used
as identifier. Finally, we merge these firms with Datastream again, successfully matching
another 18 firms. Daily Compustat Global and Datastream stock prices are compounded to
monthly returns and adjusted for stock splits and dividends. Eventually, we are able to add
152 bids and 72 contests to our North American sample.19
18

This is the contest between Yahoo! Inc and TMP Worldwide Inc for HotJobs.com Ltd initiated by
TMP Worldwide Inc on 29 June 2001 and won by Yahoo! Inc on February 13, 2002. Yahoo! Inc shows
a 1000% stock price runup and reversal in the 36 months leading up to the merger, TMP Worldwide Inc
shows a 100% runup and reversal in the same period. Idiosyncratic factors determining the run-ups make
these bidders a poor benchmark for each other. Keeping the observation in the sample does not affect the
magnitude of our findings; it only increases the standard errors.
19
We drop the contest between Volkswagen and General Motors for Skoda. According to Thomson One,

57

the contest starts on 12th September 1990 and ended on the 12th December 1995. However, the corporate
history states that a decision for Volkswagen was been made as early as December 1990. The discrepancy
between Thomson One and the corporate history is possibly due to the structure of the merger. Skoda
remained a joint venture between Volkswagen and the Czech Republic, and Volkswagen only increased its
ownership share of the joint venture (above 50%) on Dec 11, 1995. Hence, uncertainty about the outcome
of the contest was resolved significantly before the official completion date.

58

0

Number of contests
5

10

Appendix: Figures and Tables

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year

Figure A-1
Merger Contests over Time
This figure shows the frequency distribution of merger contests over the sample period. Years are the
calendar years in which the contests started.

59

60

Initial sample
less repeated bids of same bidder for same target
less contests that were not completed
less bidders without CRSP PERMNO
less contests where winner was parent company
less bidders with missing return data in the +/- three-year event window
less bidders with extreme return volatility
less bidders in contests with missing winner or loser

Sample selection criterion
623
603
488
389
362
304
303
233

Bids

604
603
488
389
362
304
303
233

Bidders

239
238
238
191
176
154
153
112

Winners

365
365
250
198
186
150
150
121

Losers

293
292
235
208
194
178
178
112

Contests

The initial sample consists of all bids in contested mergers submitted by public U.S-listed companies between January 1, 1985
and March 31, 2012 and recorded in the Thomson One Mergers and Acquisitions database, excluding bids by White Knights.
We apply the criteria below to obtain a balanced and matched sample, that is, a sample with complete data on stock returns for
both the winner and the loser(s) in the three-year periods before and after the merger contest.

Table A-I
Sample Construction

61

Bids
1154
1129
898
847
615
526
523
385
247
40
37
23
10
9
5
5
3
1
1
1

Sample selection criterion

Initial sample
less repeated bids of same bidder for same target
less contests that were not completed
less bidders for which no stock data could be found
less contests where winner was parent company
less bidders with missing return data in the +/- three-year event window
less bidders with extreme return volatility
less bidders in contests with missing winner or loser

Nation of bidder, final sample
United States
Canada
United Kingdom
Australia
France
Germany
Japan
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Sweden
Switzerland

225
39
34
19
10
9
5
4
3
1
1
1

997
994
815
772
551
470
468
357

Bidders

112
15
17
8
3
4
3
3
1
1
1
0

421
418
418
392
283
244
243
180

Winners

113
24
17
11
7
5
2
1
2
0
0
1

689
689
459
435
316
269
268
201

Losers

539
536
427
404
343
318
317
184

Contests

The initial sample consists of all bids in contested mergers submitted by publicly listed companies in the United States, Canada,
the United Kingdom, Australia, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Spain, Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland between January 1, 1985 and March 31, 2012 and recorded in the Thomson One Mergers and Acquisitions database, excluding bids by
White Knights. We apply the criteria below to obtain a balanced and matched sample, that is, a sample with complete
data on stock returns for both the winner and the loser(s) in the three-year periods before and after the merger contest.

Table A-II
Sample Construction - International Sample

Table A-III
Winner-Loser Differences in Long-Run Abnormal Returns, Short Contests
The regression equation in all columns is: BHARijt = α0 +α1 Wijt +α2 tijt +α3 tijt ·Wijt +α4 P ostijt +
α5 P ostijt · Wijt + α6 tijt · P ostijt + α7 tijt · P ostijt · Wijt + ηj + εijt (equation (3)). The regressions are
run on the subsample of short (below-median) contest duration of the sample indicated in the first row.
The dependent variable is the market-adjusted buy-and-hold abnormal return,
normalized
Qt
Qtto zero in the
month preceding the start of the contest and computed as BHARijt = s=1 (1 + rijs ) − s=1 (1 + rsmkt )
Qt+1
Qt+1
going forward in event time, and as BHARijt = s=0 (1 + rijs )−1 − s=0 (1 + rsmkt )−1 going backward,
where i denotes the bidder, j the contest and t the event month. The market return is the CRSP
value-weighted market return. Winner (Wijt ) is a dummy indicating whether bidder i is a winner in
merger contest j. t is a variable counting event time. The dummy variable P ostijt indicates whether
period t is in the post-merger window of contest j. The lower part of the table between the two solid
lines reports tests for the long-run winner-loser differences in BHARs at t = +36. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by contest.
Sample:

Full Sample
(1)

Contest Coverage
(2)

Intl. Sample
(3)

1.110
(2.423)
-0.117
(0.177)
0.137
(0.216)
-0.513
(4.798)
-3.095
(5.842)
-0.457
(0.377)
0.415
(0.501)
Yes

2.767
(2.753)
-0.151
(0.211)
0.155
(0.265)
1.262
(5.922)
-7.319
(7.016)
-0.491
(0.428)
0.577
(0.618)
Yes

2.549
(1.990)
-0.177
(0.155)
0.363**
(0.164)
2.750
(3.950)
-1.180
(3.889)
0.292
(0.270)
-0.571*
(0.293)
Yes

Merger effect at t = 36
Merger effect: p-value

17.32
0.27

21.07
0.28

-5.89
0.49

Observations
R-squared
Number of contests

8,208
0.28
56

6,480
0.27
44

13,680
0.25
92

Winner (α1 )
t (α2 )
Winner × t (α3 )
Post (α4 )
Winner × Post (α5 )
t × Post (α6 )
Winner × Post × t (α7 )
Contest fixed effects

62

