                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHY DO FIRMS OWN PRODUCTION CHAINS?

                                           Enghin Atalay
                                            Ali Hortacsu
                                           Chad Syverson

                                        Working Paper 18020
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18020


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2012




Hortaçsu thanks the NSF (SES-1124073) and Syverson thanks the NSF (SES-0519062), the John M.
Olin Foundation, and the Stigler Center for funding. The research in this paper was conducted while
the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Chicago Census
Research Data Center. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to insure that
no confidential data are revealed. Support for this research at the Chicago RDC from NSF (awards
no. SES-0004335 and ITR-0427889) is also gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Enghin Atalay, Ali Hortacsu, and Chad Syverson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Do Firms Own Production Chains?
Enghin Atalay, Ali Hortacsu, and Chad Syverson
NBER Working Paper No. 18020
April 2012
JEL No. L0,L23,L24

                                             ABSTRACT

We use broad-based yet detailed data from the economy’s goods-producing sectors to investigate firms’
ownership of production chains. It does not appear that vertical ownership is primarily used to facilitate
transfers of goods along the production chain, as is often presumed: Roughly one-half of upstream
plants report no shipments to their firms’ downstream units. We propose an alternative explanation
for vertical ownership, namely that it promotes efficient intra-firm transfers of intangible inputs. We
show evidence consistent with this hypothesis, including the fact that upon a change of ownership,
an acquired plant begins to resemble the acquiring firm along multiple dimensions.


Enghin Atalay                                       Chad Syverson
University of Chicago                               University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street                                  Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL 60637                                   5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
atalay@uchicago.edu                                 Chicago, IL 60637
                                                    and NBER
Ali Hortacsu                                        chad.syverson@chicagobooth.edu
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu
        Many firms own links of production chains. That is, they operate both upstream and
downstream plants, where the upstream industry produces an input used by the downstream
industry. We explore the reasons for such ownership using two detailed and comprehensive data
sets on ownership structure, production, and shipment patterns throughout broad swaths of the
U.S. economy.
        We find that most vertical ownership does not appear to be primarily concerned with
facilitating physical goods movements along a production chain within the firm, as is commonly
presumed. Upstream units ship surprisingly small shares of their output to their firms’
downstream plants. One-half of upstream plants do not report making shipments inside their
firm. The median internal shipments share across upstream plants in vertical production chains
is 0.4 percent, if shipments are counted equally, and less than 0.1 percent in terms of total dollar
values or weight. Even the 90th percentile internal shippers are hardly dedicated makers of
inputs for their firms’ downstream operations, with 38 percent of the value of their shipments
sent outside the firm. (However, a small fraction of upstream plants—slightly more than 1
percent—are operated as dedicated producers of inputs for their firms’ downstream operations,
and these plants tend to be quite large. We will discuss this further below.) These small shares
are robust to a number of choices we made about the sample, how vertical links are defined, and
whether we measure internal shares as a percentage of the firm’s upstream production or its
downstream use of the product.
        This result raises a puzzle. If firms don’t own upstream and downstream units so the
former can provide intermediate materials inputs for the latter, why do they? Certainly, much of
the literature on vertical integration—stretching back to the landmark paper by Coase (1937),
with other notable later contributions like Stigler (1951), and Grossman and Hart (1986)—
couches firms’ motives for integrating in terms of facilitating movement of products along a
production chain.1 (Of course, in some contexts like hotel or business services franchising,
vertical integration often does not involve transfers of physical goods. Our paper, however,
focuses on vertically integration and shipments in the goods-producing sectors of the economy,


1
 The size of the literature precludes comprehensive citation. Surveys include Perry (1989), Salop (1998), Joskow
(2005), and Lafontaine and Slade (2007). Much of the recent industrial organization research on integration has
focused on foreclosure (market power) implications. Examples of recent theoretical and empirical work with
broader views of the determinants of integration within and across industries include Antras (2003), Acemoğlu,
Johnson, and Mitton (2005) and Acemoğlu, Aghion, Griffith, and Zilibotti (2010).
like manufacturing. Our view is that a fair reading of the parables and case studies in the vertical
integration literature would imply that many, if not most, researchers would consider moderating
physical goods transactions a key motive for vertical ownership.)
         We propose an alternative explanation that is consistent with small amounts of shipments
within vertically structured firms, and even with an absence of internal shipments altogether.
Namely, that the primary purpose of ownership is to mediate efficient transfers of intangible
inputs within firms. Managerial oversight and planning strike us as important types of such
intangibles, but these need not be involved. Other possibilities include marketing know-how,
intellectual property, and R&D capital, but any information-based input might be transferred
readily across upstream and downstream units.2
         That vertical integration is often about transfers of intangible inputs rather than physical
ones may seem unusual at first glance. However, as observed by Arrow (1975) and Teece
(1982), it is precisely in the transfer of nonphysical knowledge inputs that the market, with its
associated contractual framework, is mostly likely to fail to be a viable substitute for the firm.
This, of course, does not preclude integration from also involving physical input transfers in
some cases. As noted above, we find a small number of plants that are clearly dedicated
producers for their firms’ downstream production units. However, these are the exception rather
than the rule. Thus it appears that the “make-or-buy” decision (at least referring to physical
inputs) can explain only a fraction of the vertical ownership structures in the economy.
         We find additional patterns in the data that are consistent with the intangible inputs
explanation. First, we show that plants in vertical ownership structures have higher productivity
levels, are larger, and are more capital intensive than other plants in their industries. These
disparities, which we interpret as embodying fundamental differences in plant “type,” mostly
reflect persistent differences in plants started by or brought into vertically structured firms. In
other words, while there are some modest changes in plants’ type measures upon integration, the
cross sectional differences primarily reflect selection on pre-existing heterogeneity. Controlling
for firm size explains most of these type differences; plants of similarly-sized firms have similar
types, regardless of whether their firm is structured vertically, horizontally, or as a conglomerate.
         Second, by studying how establishments’ behavior changes upon changes of ownership,

2
 These inputs might be just as likely to be transferred from the firm’s “downstream” units to its “upstream” ones as
vice versa. The names reflect the flow of the physical production process, not necessarily the actual flow of inputs
within the firm.

                                                         2
we provide suggestive evidence of flows of intangible inputs within vertically structured firms.
Acquired establishments begin to resemble existing establishments in their acquiring firms along
two key dimensions: the acquired plants start shipping their outputs to locations that their
acquirers had already been shipping to, and begin producing products that their acquirers had
already been manufacturing.
       These patterns evoke the equilibrium assignment view of firm organization advanced by
Lucas (1978), Rosen (1982), and more recently by Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) and
Garicano and Hubbard (2007). To the extent that intangibles are complementary to the physical
inputs involved in making vertically linked products, equilibrium assignment typically entails the
allocation of higher-type intangible inputs to higher-type plants in each product category. If
plant size is restricted by physical scale constraints, better intangible inputs will also be shared
across a larger number of plants. Simply put, higher-quality intangible inputs (e.g., the best
managers) are spread across a greater set of productive assets. Some of these assets can be
vertically linked plants, but their vertical linkage need not necessarily imply the transfer of
physical goods among them.
       Furthermore, there may not be anything special about vertical structures per se. The
evidence below suggests that firm size, not structure, is the primary reflection of input quality.
Larger firms just happen to be more likely to contain vertically linked plants. In this way,
vertical expansion by a firm may not be altogether different than horizontal expansion. A typical
horizontal expansion involves the firm starting operations in markets that are new but still near to
its current line(s) of business, under the expectation that its current abilities can be carried over
into the new markets. Physical goods transfers among the firm’s establishments are not
automatically expected in such expansions, but inputs like management and marketing are
expected to flow to units in the new markets. Vertical expansions may operate similarly.
Industries immediately upstream and downstream of a firm’s current operations are obviously
related lines of business. Firms will occasionally expand into these lines, expecting their current
capabilities to prove useful in the new markets. And, just as with horizontal expansions,
transfers of managerial or other non-tangible inputs will be made to the new establishments. Yet
no physical good transfers from upstream to downstream establishments need occur.
       The upshot is that the assignment view of the firm is consistent with large firms
composed of high-type plants operating (often) in several lines of business. Common ownership

                                                   3
allows the firm to efficiently move intangible inputs across its production units. Many of these
units will be vertically related, making these segments “vertical” in that the firm owns each end
of a link in a production chain. But the chain need not exist for the purpose of moderating the
flow of physical products along it.
         This scenario is consistent with the evidence we document here, and in particular with
our primary result about the lack of goods shipments within vertically structured firms. The
remainder of the paper lays out the evidence and tests the hypothesis in more detail. It is
organized as follows. The next section describes our data sources. We then explain in Section
III how we use them to measure vertical integration and shipments internal and external to
vertical chains within firms. Section IV reports the empirical results. Section V discusses flows
of intangible inputs across establishments, within firms. We conclude in Section VI.


                                                       I. Data
         We use microdata from two sources, the U.S. Economic Census and the Commodity
Flow Survey, and aggregate data from the Annual Wholesale Trade Survey and the Annual
Retail Trade Survey. We discuss each dataset in turn.
         Economic Census. The Economic Census (EC) is an establishment-level census that is
conducted every five years, in years ending in either a “2” or a “7”. Establishments are unique
locations where economic activity takes place, like stores in the retail sector, warehouses in
wholesale, offices in business services, and factories in manufacturing. Our sample uses
establishments from the 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1997 censuses. We specifically use those
establishments in the Longitudinal Business Database, which includes the universe of all U.S.
business establishments with paid employees.3 The data has been reviewed by Census staff to
ensure that establishments can be accurately linked across time and that their entry and exit have
been measured correctly.
         Critically, the Economic Census contains the owning-firm indicators necessary for us to
identify which plants are vertically integrated. (We discuss in Section III how we make this
classification.) Additionally, the Census of Manufactures portion of the EC also contains


3
  Plant-level data from before 1977 is almost exclusively for the manufacturing sector, precluding proper
classification of vertical ownership for manufacturing plants owned by firms that are in fact vertically structured, but
only into non-manufacturing sectors (e.g., firms that own a manufacturing plant and a retail store selling the product
the plant makes).

                                                           4
considerable data on plants’ production activities. This includes information on their annual
value of shipments, production and nonproduction worker employment, capital stocks, and
purchases of intermediate materials and energy. We use this production data to construct plant-
specific output, productivity, and factor intensity measures; details are discussed further below
and in the Appendix. In some cases, we augment the base production data with microdata from
the Census of Manufactures materials supplement, which contains, by plant, six-digit SIC
product-level information on intermediate materials expenditures.4
         Commodity Flow Survey. The Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) collects data on
shipments originating from mining, manufacturing, wholesale, and catalog and mail-order retail
establishments.5 The survey defines shipments as “an individual movement of commodities
from an establishment to a customer or to another location in the originating company.” The
CFS takes a random sample of an establishment’s shipments in each of four weeks during the
year, one in each quarter. The sample generally includes 20-40 shipments per week, though
establishments with fewer than 40 shipments during the survey week simply report all of them.
         For each shipment, the originating establishment is observed, as well as the shipment’s
destination zip code (exports report the port of exit along with a separate entry indicating the
shipment as an export), the commodity, the mode(s) of transportation, and the dollar value and
weight of the shipment.
         We use the microdata from the 1993 and 1997 CFS; the former contains roughly 120,000
establishments and 11 million shipments, and the latter 60,000 establishments and 5.5 million
shipments. As with the Economic Census, each establishment has an identification number
denoting the firm that owns it. Both the establishment and the firm numbers are comparable to
those in the EC, so we can merge data from the two sources. We match the 1993 CFS to the
1992 EC; this will inevitably lead to some mismeasurement of ownership patterns, but we expect
this will be small given the modest annual rates at which plants are bought and sold by firms.

4
  For very small EC plants, typically those with less than five employees, the Census Bureau does not elicit detailed
production data from the plants themselves. It instead relies on tax records to obtain information on plant revenues
and employment and then imputes all other production data. We exclude such plants—called Administrative
Records (AR) plants—from those analyses below that use plant-level measures constructed from the Census of
Manufactures (e.g., productivity). While roughly one-third of plants in the Census of Manufactures are AR plants,
their small size means they comprise a much smaller share of industry-level output and employment aggregates.
5
 Hillberry and Hummels (2003, 2008) and Holmes and Stevens (2010, 2012) use the CFS microdata to investigate
various affects of distance on trade patterns. They do not make the within- and between-firm distinctions that we do
here. These are the only other studies using the CFS microdata that we are aware of.

                                                          5
         Annual Wholesale Trade Survey and Annual Retail Trade Survey. These datasets provide
information on sales and purchases of 4-digit retail and wholesale industries. We use these
datasets to help determine whether two industries are vertically linked.


     II. Measuring Vertical Ownership and Shipments within Firms’ Production Chains
         This section explains how we use our data to determine which businesses are vertically
integrated and whether the CFS shipments we observe are internal or external to the firm.


Determining Which Industries Are Vertically Linked to One Another
         We define vertically linked industries as I-J industry pairs for which a substantial
fraction—1% in the baseline specification—of industry I’s sales are sent to establishments in
industry J. 6 To compute the fraction of sales of industry I output that are sent to industry J, we
use information from the 1992 Bureau of Economic Analysis Input-Output Tables, the 1992
Economic Census, the 1993 Commodity Flow Survey, the1993 Annual Wholesale Trade Survey,
and the 1993 Annual Retail Trade Survey. We define industries by their 4-digit SIC code. We
apply the classification of vertically linked industries implied by this data to our entire sample.7
         To measure the value of shipments sent by industry-I establishments to industry-J
establishments, we first compute the shipments of commodity C sent to industry J using the 1993
CFS. Commodities are defined by their Standard Transportation Commodity Code (STCC).8
We then sum over all commodities that each industry I ships to determine the share of I’s sales
going to J, thereby indicating which I-J industry pairs are vertically linked.
         For most industries, we rely primarily on the Input-Output Tables, which track quantities
of inter-industry flows of goods and services, to perform these calculations. However, the I-O
Tables treat the entire wholesale sector as a single, monolithic industry, with no distinction as to
the types of products its establishments distribute. They treat the retail sector in the same way.

6
  The one-percent cutoff used to define substantial vertical links is of course arbitrary. We have checked our major
findings using a five-percent cutoff and found few differences. (The overall level of integration is of course lower in
this more stringent case.)
7
 Applying one vertical structure to the entire sample is made necessary by the lack of CFS microdata before 1993
and changes in the way the CFS records commodities between 1993 and 1997. Given that the input-output structure
of the economy is fairly stable over time, we do not expect a large impact on our results.
8
 A list of STCC codes can be found in pages 117 to 167 of “Reference Guide for the 2008 Surface Transportation
Board Carload Waybill Sample,” published by Railinc.

                                                          6
Additionally, they do not keep track of shipments by manufacturers to (or through) wholesalers
or retailers, instead measuring only those inputs directly used by wholesalers and retailers in the
production of wholesale and retail services (e.g., in the I-O Tables, cardboard boxes are a major
input used by the wholesale sector, but the actual products the sector distributes are not). To
achieve better measurement of the flow of goods through the wholesale and retail sector, we use
a different algorithm that incorporates additional data from the Annual Wholesale Trade Survey
and the Annual Retail Trade Survey. All these calculations are detailed in the Appendix.9


Classifying Shipments as Internal or External to the Firm
         To classify shipments from vertically integrated establishments in the Commodity Flow
Survey as internal or external to the firm, we first must merge the CFS and EC data. This can be
done straightforwardly using the two datasets’ common establishment and firm identifiers. Of
critical importance is the fact that the Commodity Flow Survey contains the destination zip code
of each shipment, while the Economic Census records establishments’ zip codes.
         We identify a shipment as internal if the shipping establishment’s firm also owns an
establishment that is both in the destination zip code and in a 4-digit SIC industry that is a
downstream vertical link (as defined above) of the sending establishment’s industry.10 The CFS
contains shipment-specific sample weights that indicate how many actual shipments in the
population each sampled shipment represents. We use these weights when computing the shares
of internal shipments, be it by count, dollar value, or weight.


                               III. Shipments within Firms’ Vertical Links
         We begin by looking at the patterns of shipments within firms’ vertical links. We focus
on establishments in the Commodity Flow Survey that are a) in vertical ownership structures and
b) upstream links within those structures.


9
  In a previous draft, we employed a cruder methodology to identify pairs of vertically linked industries, defining
industry I as upstream of industry J provided either a) J buys at least five percent of its intermediate materials from
I, or b) I sells at least five percent of its own output to industry J. We furthermore did not attempt to make any
distinction among wholesale or retail industries. While we prefer the current methodology for its increased
accuracy, we reproduce our main analysis using the old methodology in the Appendix and find similar results.
10
  Every establishment is assigned to a unique industry. For establishments that produce products that fall under
multiple 4-digit SIC industries, the Census Bureau classifies such plants based on their primary product, which is
almost always the product accounting for the largest share of revenue.

                                                           7
A. Vertically Integrated Establishments’ Shipments—Benchmark Sample
         The combined 1993 and 1997 CFS yield a core sample of about 67,500 plant-year
observations of upstream establishments in firms’ production chains. These establishments
report a total of roughly 6.3 million shipments in the CFS. Panel A of Table 1 shows the
prevalence of internal shipments within this sample. It reports quantiles of the distribution of
internal shipment shares across our sample plants, measured as the fraction of the total number,
dollar value, and weight of the establishment’s shipments.11
         Overall, only a small share vertically integrated upstream establishments’ shipments are
to downstream units in the same firm. Across the 67,500 establishments, the median fraction of
internal shipments is 0.4 percent. The median internal shares by dollar value and weight are
even smaller, at less than 0.1 percent. Almost half of the plants report no internal shipments at
all. Even the 90th-percentile plant ships over 60 percent of its output outside the firm.
         The exception to this general pattern is the small set of establishments that are clearly
dedicated to serving the downstream needs of their firm, the 1.2 percent of the sample that
reports exclusively internal shipments. The unusualness of this specialization is even more
apparent in the histogram of plants’ internal shipment shares shown in Figure 1, panel A. The
histogram echoes the quantiles reported above: the vast majority of upstream plants make few
internal transfers. The fractions of establishments fall essentially monotonically as internal
shipment shares rise—until the cluster of internally dedicated establishments. Another factor in
the unusualness of these internal specialist plants that is not apparent in the histogram is that they
are larger on average. This, along with the internal share distribution being highly skewed,
explains why the aggregate internal share of upstream plants’ shipments (the across-plant sum of
internal shipments divided by the across-plant sum of total shipments) is 16 percent. This is well
above the median share across plants. Thus internal shipments are more important on a dollar-
weighted than an ownership-decision-weighted basis, but are the exception in either case.
         These results imply the traditional view that firms choose to own plants in upstream
industries to control input supplies may be off target. Clearly other motivations for ownership
must apply for those plants making no internal shipments. Even for those that do serve their own


11
  For data confidentiality reasons, the reported quantiles are actually averages of the immediately surrounding
percentiles; e.g., the median is the average of the 49th and 51st percentiles, the 75th percentile is the average of the
74th and 76th percentiles, and so on.

                                                             8
firm, though, their typically small internal shipments suggest that this role may not be primary.12


B. Robustness Checks
         The disconnect between the upstream plants and their downstream partners, at least in
terms of physical goods transfers, is stark and perhaps surprising. We conduct several robustness
checks to verify our benchmark results.
         First, it is appropriate to review some details of how the Commodity Flow Survey is
conducted, specifically with regard to its ability to capture intra-firm shipments. The CFS
definitely seeks to measure them, and it makes no distinction between intra- and inter-firm
transfers in its definition of “shipment.” In fact, the survey instructions (U.S. Census Bureau
(1997)) state explicitly that respondents should report shipments “to another location of your
company,” save for incidental items like “inter-office memos, payroll checks, business
correspondence, etc.”
         There are several reasons to believe the implied shipments totals are accurate. First, the
Census Bureau audits responses by comparing the establishment’s implied annual value of
shipments from the CFS with that from other sources. If the disparity is well beyond statistical
variance, the Bureau contacts the respondent and reviews the responses for accuracy. If
integrated establishments were systematically underreporting internal shipments because of
confusion or by not following directions, the auditing process would help catch this.
         Second, most establishments do report some internal shipments, indicating that they have
not interpreted the definition of shipments as precluding intra-firm transfers. This is also
reflected in the small share of establishments that report nothing but internal shipments.
Moreover, there is no mechanical reason why we should find the bump up in internal shipment
shares near one, as seen in Figure 1. We take this as further evidence that respondents
understand the CFS instructions.
         Third, for plants in the manufacturing sector, there is an independent measure of internal
shipments. The Census of Manufacturers collects data on what it terms plants’ Interplant
Transfers, shipments that are sent to other plants in the same firm for further assembly. These
interplant transfers represent part, but not all, of our internal shipments measure—for example,
12
  It is possible in some production chains that an upstream plant could completely serve its firm’s downstream
needs with only a small fraction of its output. We show that this possibility is not driving our results in Appendix
B3, however.

                                                          9
shipments to wholesalers or retailers are not included in CM Interplant Transfers.13 In addition to
the difference in definition, these measures are collected using separate survey instruments (often
likely to have been filled out by different individuals at the plant). Despite these differences, we
find a strong correlation between the two measures. The correlation coefficient between plants’
logged interplant transfers and our CFS-based estimate of internal shipments is 0.52 across our
matched sample of about 37,000 plant-years, and a regression of the latter on the former yields a
coefficient of 0.470 (s.e. = 0.011).


B.1. Robustness: Sample
         In our first series of robustness checks, we consider the impact of modifications to our
core sample of upstream vertically integrated plants. The corresponding distributions of
establishments’ internal shipments are shown in Table 3, panel B. Each row is a separate check.
We show only the distributions of the dollar value shares for the sake of brevity; similar patterns
are observed in the shares by shipment counts or total weight.
         The robustness check in the first row of panel B uses only establishments reporting at
least the median number of shipments across all establishments in the sample. The point is to
exclude those for which sampling error could be higher and for whom extreme values like zero
are more likely. This leaves us with a sample of about 34,000 establishment-years making just
over 4.2 million shipments. (This is greater than half the establishment-years in the benchmark
sample because several plants report exactly the median number of shipments.) Extreme values
are in fact rarer in this sample: 45.5 percent report making no internal shipments, down from 49
percent in the full sample, and 0.3 percent report exclusively internal shipments, down from 1.2
percent. The remainder of the distribution is not much different, however. The median fraction
of internal shipments is 0.2 percent, and the 90th percentile establishment is less likely to ship
internally than that in the full sample, with just under half of shipments being intra-firm.
         The second check drops any establishment that reports any shipments for export. In the
CFS, the destination zip code of shipments for export is for the port of exit, with a separate note
indicating the shipment’s export status and its destination country. Thus internal shipments to a
firm’s overseas locations would be misclassified as outside the firm, unless by chance the firm
13
  Restricting shipments to those that are sent for further assembly has a substantial impact on the estimate of plants’
internal shipments. We estimate in Appendix B1 that half of our measured internal shipments from manufacturing
plants are sent to plants outside of the manufacturing sector (and, thus, are not for further assembly).

                                                          10
has a downstream establishment in the port’s zip code. Focusing on the roughly 47,000
establishments reporting no exports among their roughly 4.3 million shipments avoids this
potential mismeasurement. The results are in the second row of panel B of Table 3. The entire
distribution is close to the benchmark results above, with the median internal share being less
than 0.1 percent and 49.7 percent of establishments reporting zero intra-firm shipments. Missing
export destinations are not the source of our results.14
         The next check counts shipments destined for the zip code of any plant in the same firm
as internal, not just those going to locations of downstream links of vertical chains. It is possible
that some vertical production may occur outside those chains we identify using the Input-Output
Tables. Some may even occur within a given industry, when a particularly complex production
process is broken up across multiple establishments. Here, we are taking the broadest possible
view toward defining intra-firm transfers of physical goods along a production chain. As seen in
the third row of panel B, all quantiles have internal shipment fractions higher than the
benchmark, as they must. Still, the median internal share is only 4.9 percent, and the 90th
percentile 67.5 percent. About 23 percent of establishments still have no shipments to a zip code
of any plant in their firm, and exclusively internal establishments number 2.7 percent.
         In the fourth check we make the generous assumption that a shipment is internal if it goes
to any county in which the firm has a downstream establishment. While unrealistic, this
approach accounts for almost any problems with zip code reporting errors or missing zip codes.
The results of this exercise are in row 4 of panel B. Not surprisingly, the shares of shipments
considered intra-firm are considerably higher, given the easier criterion for being defined as
internal. There are more internal specialists or near-specialists: the 90th percentile internal share
is 87 percent, and 4.2 percent of establishments have all of their reported shipments being
internal. Even so, a substantial fraction of establishments—25 percent, more than five times the
number of internal specialists—report no shipments to counties where downstream plants in their
firms are located. The median internal share across plants is 7.2 percent.
         The fifth check restricts the sample to plants in the twenty-five manufacturing industries
with the least amount of product differentiation, as measured by the Gollop and Monahan (1991)
product differentiation index. The concern is that even our detailed industry classification

14
  We will discuss below how the fraction of international trade that is within firms could be so much larger than the
intra-firm domestic trade we document here.

                                                         11
scheme may be too coarse to capture the true extant vertical links. For instance, it might be that
while two industries are substantially linked at an aggregate level, this actually reflects the
presence of (say) two separate vertical links within a four-digit SIC industry. In this case, we
would not expect many shipments to go from upstream plants in one link to downstream plants
in another, even though we might infer the two are vertically linked just from comparing the
industry-level trade patterns. Selecting industries with undifferentiated products should reduce
product heterogeneity within detailed industries and raise the probability that the industry links
we identify as described above hold at a disaggregate level. There are about 2200 plant-years in
this subset of industries in the CFS. We find that internal shares are actually lower for plants in
the less differentiated industries. The median plant has no internal shipments, while the 90th
percentile plant’s internal share is 20 percent
       The remaining robustness checks in the panel explore the impact of varying the definition
of vertical links. Row 6 of the table shows the results using a 5 percent cutoff, while Row 7
keeps the 1 percent cutoff, but removes the possibility that an industry can be vertically linked
with itself. Both of these robustness checks reduce the number of plants that are defined to be
vertically linked from the benchmark. The 5 percent cutoff sample contains about 53,000 plant-
years and 5.0 million shipments, while the “No I → I” rule produces a sample with about 43,000
plant-years and 4.0 million shipments. In both these subsamples, the median and 90th percentile
internal shares are slightly smaller than in the benchmark.
       All in all, our benchmark results appear robust to several sample and variable definition
changes. Additional robustness checks along these lines are provided in Appendix B1.


B.2. Robustness: Accounting for Actual Downstream Use
       We measure internal shipments above as an upstream plant’s internal shipments as a
share of its total shipments. There are cases where this ratio might be misleading as to the extent
of intra-firm product movements. Consider a hypothetical copper products company with two
plants: an upstream mill that produces copper billets, and a downstream plant that processes
billets into pipe. Suppose the downstream plant needs $10 million of billets to operate at
capacity. Now say the upstream mill produced $100 million of billets in a year. If the mill
shipped $10 million of billets to the pipe-making plant and the remaining $90 million elsewhere,
we would compute its internal shipment share as 10 percent. Yet the firm would be completely

                                                  12
supplying its downstream needs internally. The difference in the scales of operations upstream
and downstream creates this misleading internal share.
        While this may raise the question of why the firm wouldn’t own enough pipe plants to
use its upstream production, in this section we create an alternative measure of internal shipment
shares that can account for inherent differences in operating scales across industries. Instead of
using upstream plants’ total shipments as the denominator in the internal shipment share
measure, we instead calculate firms’ downstream use of products they make upstream. We then
construct internal shipments shares as intra-firm shipments of upstream plants divided by the
minimum of two values, either the firm’s total upstream shipments as above, or the firm’s
reported downstream use of the upstream product. Hence the internal share of the hypothetical
copper firm above would be 100%, rather than 10% as before, because the firm provides all the
copper it uses downstream.
        While the CFS offers a random sample of establishments’ shipments, we unfortunately
do not have a random sample of establishments’ incoming materials. This precludes us from
directly measuring “internal purchase shares” in the same way we measure internal shipment
shares. But for a subset of firms we can construct internal shipments as a fraction of downstream
use. To do so, we must first restrict our CFS sample to those where we observe all the upstream
shipments of a firm, at least for a given product. If firms served downstream needs from
upstream plants not in the CFS, we would not observe their non-CFS plants’ shipments, and
therefore would not know they are internal. Hence we look here only at CFS plants where we
observe all the firm’s plants in a particular industry. We use the Economic Census to find this
subset of establishments, which ends up being about 11,000 plant-years. If we calculate these
shares as before, this subsample looks similar to the entire sample. For example, 53.8 percent of
these plants report making no internal shipments, and the 90th percentile plant ships 36.5 percent
of its output internally.
        We then match these upstream plants’ shipments to downstream usage within the firm.
We construct three downstream usage measures. The first simply aggregates the materials
purchases of all the firm’s downstream manufacturing plants. These purchases are reported by
every plant in the Census of Manufactures. The firm’s downstream use of upstream products is
simply the sum of all its intermediate materials purchases. We can compute these downstream
use measures for 4438 firm-year observations. To compute internal shares, we add up the

                                                13
internal shipments of the firms’ upstream plants to use as the numerator.15
        The second measure of downstream usage matches upstream shipments to downstream
usage by product. We use the detailed materials purchase information from the Census of
Manufactures materials supplement, which collects plants’ materials purchases by detailed
product. We compute firm’s upstream shipments by product using the shipment commodity
codes available in the CFS. Product-specific shipments are computed at the 2-digit level. (We
use only 1993 CFS data here because a change in the commodity coding scheme made it difficult
to match the 1997 CFS commodity codes with the materials codes in the Census of
Manufactures.) We sum the same firm’s reported downstream use of that 2-digit product from
the Census of Manufactures. The internal shipment share is the ratio of the firm’s internal
shipments of the product divided by its reported downstream use of that product. We are able to
match 5491 firm-material combinations.
        The third and final measure of downstream materials usage repeats the procedure above,
except matches at the more detailed 4-digit product level. Because the greater detail makes
finding matches less likely, we have a sample of 2351 such firm-product combinations.
        The results from these exercises are shown in Table 2. Recall that we now compute
internal shipments as their share of the smaller of a) the firm’s (or firm-product’s) total upstream
shipments or b) the firm’s downstream usage. Again, only the dollar-value shares are shown for
brevity. The first row shows shares computed using the firm-level match where internal
materials usage is aggregated across all materials. The second row shows results from the
sample of matched firm-products at the 2-digit level; the third shows the firm-product match
sample at the 4-digit level.
        All three measures downstream usage still imply that most vertical ownership structures
are not about serving the downstream material needs of the firm. The median share across plants

15
  There are two measurement problems with this first approach that will tend to bias our internal shares measures in
opposite directions. First, because we only required that we observe all of a firm’s plants making a particular
product in the CFS, we might be missing internal shipments from firms’ other upstream plants (this is much less of a
problem in our other two downstream use measures below, since they are matched by firm-product, rather than just
by firm). This will cause us to understate the true internal shipment share. The second measurement issue arises
because we can only observe materials purchases for downstream establishments in the manufacturing sector. If
some upstream products are used in the firms’ non-manufacturing establishments, we will not include these in our
downstream usage measures. This will lead us to overstate internal shipment shares. As a practical matter, both of
these measurement concerns are probably second-order. Our restricted sample has a large fraction of firms with
only a few establishments, so if a firm’s upstream plant(s) is in the CFS and its downstream plant(s) in
manufacturing, chances are those are all the plants the firm owns.

                                                        14
of internal shipments as a fraction of the smaller of the firm’s upstream shipments and its
downstream use is 0.3% in the first (firm-wide) downstream use measure. The share of this
subsample reporting zero internal shipments is 44.4 percent. For the second measure of internal
usage (firm-product matching at the 2-digit level), 60.2 percent of the firms report no internal
shipments. For the third measure (firm-product matching at the 4-digit level), 65.3 percent of the
sample report no internal shipments.
       One thing to note about the results is that some shares are above one. It is possible that
this reflects in part the fact that some of the upstream plants’ shipments that we classified as
internal because their destination zip code was where the firm owned a downstream plant in fact
went to a plant outside the firm in the same zip code. But probably some of these shares reflect
measurement error in firms’ downstream materials use (it is outside the manufacturing sector and
we can’t observe it, for instance). A summary measure of the extent of such measurement error
is the fraction of observations with implied internal usage ratios above one. For the three
downstream use measures above, these shares are 6.7, 11.7, and 12.5 percent, respectively.
       Thus the small internal shares we were finding before do not seem to be simply reflecting
the fact that most integrated structures have considerably larger upstream plant scales than
downstream. In fact, we still find a large number of cases (slightly under one-half of the sample)
without any intra-firm shipments. In other words, we know a firm makes a particular product
upstream, uses that same product as an input downstream, but does not ship any of its own
upstream output to its downstream units.


B.3. Shipments of Plants that Make Firms Become Vertically Structured
       We next look at the internal shipment patterns for a very select subset of establishment-
years in our sample. These observations have two properties. First, they correspond to newly
vertically integrated establishments on the upstream end of a production chain (they were single-
unit firms in the previous Economic Census). Additionally, these establishments have been
acquired by firms that, concurrent with the purchase, begin owning plants in a vertical
production chain for the first time. In other words, these are the establishments that make these
firms vertically structured. These establishments might provide one of the clearest windows into
any connection between why firms expand vertically and internal shipment patterns. Because of
the narrow selection criteria, the subsample is small—a total of just over 300 establishment-years

                                                 15
in the CFS, reporting about 28,000 shipments—but this still offers enough leverage to make a
meaningful comparison to the overall patterns discussed above.
        This subsample exhibits an even lower prevalence of internal shipments than in the
benchmark. 68 percent of these plants report no internal shipments at all, and the 90th percentile
of internal shipments is only 10.1 percent. Because the small sample raises questions of whether
these differences are statistically significant, we also estimate regressions that project plants’
intra-firm shipment shares on an indicator for these new-VI establishment/firm units and full set
of industry-year dummies. The estimated coefficient on the subsample indicator in the dollar-
value-share regressions is -0.057 (s.e. = 0.009). (The coefficient is also significantly negative
when shares of shipment counts or weights are used as the dependent variable.) These
establishments do in fact have significantly lower internal shipments shares.
        Thus even for establishments acquired expressly as part of a firm’s move to build a
vertically integrated ownership structure, internal sourcing of physical inputs is unusual.


B.4. Other Robustness Checks
        We conducted additional, detailed robustness checks on the benchmark results that, for
the sake of brevity, we detail in the Appendix. One explores whether the observed small internal
shipment shares reflect the fact that plants in vertical ownership structures are spaced further
apart geographically than typical. We show this is not the case; in fact, even vertically structured
firms with all their plants in a single metro have internal shares similar to those in the broader
sample. A second robustness check asks whether our definition of vertical ownership, which by
necessity requires a firm to operate the upstream and downstream stages of production in
separate plants, misses vertically integrated production practices occurring within a single plant
(and therefore undercounting the within-plant “shipments” that accompany them). We find no
evidence that this is driving our result.


                            IV. Explanations for Vertical Ownership
        The lack of movement of goods along production chains within most vertically structured
firms appears to be a robust feature of the data. As mentioned above, we propose that vertical
ownership is instead typically used to facilitate movements of intangible inputs like management
oversight across a firm’s production units. In this section we document additional facts that are

                                                  16
consistent with this theory.


A. Firms as Outcomes of an Assignment Mechanism
           We first show evidence that plants’ vertical ownership structures are systematically
related to persistent differences in plant “types”—combinations of idiosyncratic demand and
supply fundamentals that affect plant profitability in equilibrium. Further, these type differences
primarily reflect “selection” on pre-existing differences rather than “treatment” effects of
becoming part of a vertical ownership structure. At the same time, we find that these type
differences aren’t much tied to vertical ownership itself, but rather to being in large firms of any
structure. We discuss below how these patterns are all consistent with theories of the firm as the
outcome of an assignment mechanism that allocates tangible and intangible assets among
heterogeneous firms. Models of such mechanisms—which include Lucas (1978), Rosen (1982),
and more recently by Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) and Garicano and Hubbard
(2007)16—offer an explanation for why we might not see many internal shipments within vertical
ownership structures while at the same time pointing us toward an alternative explanation for
such ownership patterns: namely, facilitating the flow of intangible inputs within the firm.


A.1. Plants in Vertical Ownership Structures are High “Type” Plants
           We first focus on the patterns of plant-level measures of “type” across vertically
integrated and unintegrated plants. We use four measures to proxy for plant type.17 They are not
independent, but they differ enough in construction to allow us to gauge the consistency, or lack
thereof, of our results. Two are productivity measures that differ in their measure of inputs:
output per worker-hour and total factor productivity (TFP). (Both are expressed as the log of the
plant’s output-input ratio.) Our third type measure is simply the plant’s logged real revenue.
The fourth metric is the plant’s logged capital-labor ratio (capital stock per worker-hour).
Further details on the construction of these measures are in the Appendix. Because of data
limitations, we can only construct these measures for the roughly 350,000 plants in each Census
of Manufactures.

16
     These models are in turn built on foundations laid out earlier by Koopmans’ (1951) and Becker (1973).
17
  Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) present a model of industry equilibrium where producers differ along
both demand and cost dimensions, and show that plant type can be summarized as a single-dimensional index of
demand, productivity, and factor price fundamentals.

                                                          17
         These empirical type measures have been shown in various empirical studies to be
correlated with plant survival. Survival probabilities reflect plant type in many models of
industry dynamics with heterogeneous producers, like Jovanovic (1982), Hopenhayn (1992),
Ericson and Pakes (1995), and Melitz (2003). The productivity-survival link has perhaps been
the most extensively studied empirically; see Syverson (2011) for a recent literature review.
Plant scale and survival was the subject of much of Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989), and
capital intensity’s connection to survival was explored in Doms, Dunne, and Roberts (1995).
Hence they capture the connection between plants’ supply and demand fundamentals and the
plants’ profit and survival prospects.
         We first compare plant type measures across integrated an unintegrated producers by
regressing plant types on an indicator for plants’ integration status and a set of industry-by-year
fixed effects. The coefficient on the indicator captures the average difference between plants in
and out of vertical ownership structures. By including fixed effects, we are identifying type
differences across plants in the same industry-year, avoiding confounding productivity, scale, or
factor intensity differences across industries and time. We estimate this specification for each of
the four plant type proxies and report the results in Table 3, panel A.18
         It is clear that plants in vertical ownership structures have higher types. They are more
productive, larger, and more capital intensive. Their labor productivity levels are on average 40
percent higher (e0.336 = 1.399) than their unintegrated industry cohorts. These are sizeable
differences; Syverson (2004) found average within-industry-year interquartile logged labor
productivity ranges of roughly 0.65; the gaps here are almost half of this. TFP differences, while
still positive and statistically significant, are much smaller, at 1.4 percent. Vertical plants are
much larger—4.2 times larger—than other plants in their industry in terms of real output.
Capital intensities are substantially higher in integrated plants as well, explaining why their labor
productivity advantage is so much bigger than the average TFP difference.
         A natural question that follows from these results is the causal nature of vertically linked
plants’ type differences. There are three possibilities, and they are not mutually exclusive. The
gaps could reflect the fact that newly built plants under vertical ownership are different than
newly built plants in other ownership structures, and because types are persistent, this is reflected
18
  Sample sizes differ across the specifications because not all the necessary variables for construction of each are
available for each proxy measure for every plant-year observation. Below, we will focus on differences among the
set of plants with each of the plant-level production measures (except TFP) available.

                                                         18
in the broader population. Or it may be that high-type firms that seek to merge new plants into
their internal production chains choose plants that already have high types to add to the firm.
Finally, becoming part of a vertical ownership structure might be associated with a change in an
existing plant’s type.
         We can separately investigate these possibilities. To see if new vertically structured
plants are different than newly built plants in other ownership structures, we re-estimate the type
specification above on a subsample that includes only new plants.19 To test if firms already
comprised of high-type vertically linked plants expand by purchasing unintegrated plants that
already have systematically higher types, we regress unintegrated plants’ type proxies on a
dummy indicating if a plant will become vertically integrated by the next Economic Census.
(Again industry-year fixed effects are included.) The estimated coefficient on the dummy
captures how to-be-vertically-owned plants compare before integration to other plants in their
industry that will not become integrated during the period. Finally, to test if becoming part of a
vertical ownership structure is associated with systematic changes in a plant’s type, we regress
the inter-census growth in plants’ type measures on an indicator for plants that become part of
integrated production chains during the period. All these specifications include industry-year
fixed effects, so we are always comparing plants within the same industry and time period.
         Panels B-D of Table 3 show the results, with panel B comparing new plants, panel C
comparing the types of unintegrated plants before integration, and panel D comparing plant type
changes. Comparing the type disparities in these panels to those in panel A suggests that much
of the heterogeneity between plants in and out of vertical ownership structures reflects
differences in the assignment of plant types to integration status. As panels B and C show, most
of vertically integrated plants’ higher productivity levels, scale of operations, and capital
intensities already existed either when they were born into integrated structures or before they
were merged into integrated structures. For example, labor productivity and capital intensity are
on average about 30 percent higher for new plants in vertically integrated structures firms than
for other new plants. This is about three-fourths of the analogous gaps observed among all

19
   New plants are defined as those appearing for the first time in the Economic Census, which is associated with the
start of economic activity at its particular locations. In other words, these plants are greenfield entrants. Existing
plants that merely change industries between ECs are not counted as entrants in our sample. New plants are an
important part of the formation of vertically integrated structures in the economy: entering integrated plants account
for roughly two-fifths of the employment, and three-fifths of the capital stock, of all new plants in a given EC. This
specification excludes observations from the 1977 EC because of censored entry.

                                                         19
plants. Similarly, unintegrated plants that will soon become part of vertical ownership chains are
already considerably more productive, larger, and capital intensive than unintegrated plants that
will remain so. Thus most of the differences observed in panel A of the table reflect “selection”
effects. At the same time, the results in panel D make clear that, for labor productivity and
capital intensity in particular, those gaps not accounted for by pre-existing differences in type are
closed due to the faster growth in experienced by existing plants when they become integrated.
Thus we cannot ignore the possibility that integration has some direct effects on plant types.20


A.2. Firm Size, Not Structure, Explains Most Plant Type Differences
         The fact that plants in vertical ownership structures are different naturally leads to the
question of whether firms with vertical structures are different. And indeed, as we show in the
Appendix, firms with vertical ownership structures are larger on average (whether measured by
total employment or revenues) than other firms with multi-unit organizational structures, be it
those that own multiple plants in a single industry or that own establishments in multiple
industries, but none of which comprise substantial vertical links as defined above.
         Given that firms with vertical structures tend to be the largest, it’s natural to ask whether
the differences in plant types seen above simply reflect underlying differences in firms. That is,
if large firms tend to own systematically larger (and more productive, etc.) plants, this might
explain the distinctive type patterns of plants in vertical structures, rather than their vertical
ownership linkages per se. Perhaps the high types of plants in vertical ownership structures are a
function of firm size rather than firm structure.
         To see if this is the case, we rerun the plant type regressions above while including
controls for firm size. We regress plant type measures on an indicator for vertically integrated
plants and industry-year dummies as above, while now adding flexible controls for firm size.
These controls are quintics of logged firm employment, logged number of establishments, and
the logged number of industries in which the firm operates. We restrict the sample to plants
owned by multi-unit firms, but few differences are seen if single-establishment firms are also
included. This specification lets us compare plants that are in firms of the same size, regardless

20
  These are of course general patterns across the hundreds of manufacturing industries in our sample. They do not
imply that the relative importance of these sources of type differences doesn’t vary across individual industries. It is
possible that in certain industries most of the type differences reflect changes that occur when plants become
integrated rather than pre-existing type dissimilarities.

                                                          20
of the firms’ internal structures.
         Table 4 shows the results of these regressions. Much of the correlation between a plant’s
type and its vertical ownership structure goes away once we control fully for firm size. The
point estimate for plants’ TFP differences is now half as large and is one-eighth as large for
revenue differences. The labor productivity and capital intensity “premia” for vertically
integrated plants are now roughly 4 percent, much smaller than the initial 35 to 45 percent
differences reported in panel A of Table 3.
         Hence, much of what makes plants in vertical ownership structures different isn’t really
related to vertical ownership itself. Instead, the largest plants tend to be in the largest firms, and
the largest firms tend to own vertically linked plants. Accounting for this fully explains the TFP
and size differences and most of the labor productivity and capital intensity gaps.21


A.3. Discussion
         The results in this subsection are consistent with theories of the firm as the outcome of an
assignment mechanism that spreads higher-quality intangible inputs (e.g., better managers)
across better and/or a greater number of production units. The highest-quality intangible inputs
are allocated to multiple establishments in distinct product categories (each among the highest
types within their industry), some of which are vertically linked. The end result is what we
document in the data: vertically integrated production chains are found in the largest firms
composed of the highest-type plants. This firm matching/sorting implication is also supported by
our results that plants that will become parts of vertical ownership structures already have
considerably higher type measures than other plants in the industries. Firms with high-type
plants seek out other high-type plants to bring into the fold. It’s also consistent with the fact that
(not reported here for space reasons) plants’ types within firms are positively correlated; firm’s
with high-type plants in one industry tend to have high-type plants in their other industries.
         Note that if the intangible inputs mediation explanation for vertical ownership is correct,
the distinction between “downstream” and “upstream” becomes one of convenience rather than


21
  This evokes the result in Hortaçsu and Syverson (2007) that vertically integrated ready-mixed concrete plants’
productivity and survival advantages don’t reflect their vertical structure per se, but rather that these plants tend to
be owned by firms with clusters of ready-mixed plants in local markets. (The clusters allow them to harness
logistical efficiencies.) Once we compared vertically integrated concrete plants to non-integrated plants that were
also in clusters, many of the differences seen between integrated and nonintegrated plants disappeared.

                                                           21
an accurate depiction of intra-firm transfers. Managerial, marketing, knowledge capital, or other
similar inputs are just as likely to be transferred from a firm’s downstream units to its upstream
ones as the reverse. The names reflect the flow of goods through the physical production
process, which may be nonexistent or otherwise very small; they do not necessarily indicate the
flow of inputs within the firm. Further, verticality itself need not be an important distinction
under this alternative explanation. Vertical firm expansions are simply a particular way in which
a firm applies its intangible capital to new but related lines of business. No flows of goods
between the firms’ vertically related establishments are necessary, just as with a typical
horizontal expansion. This is consistent with the result above that firm size rather than structure
explains most of the average type differences seen across plants.


B. Some Evidence that Vertical Structures Facilitate Intangible Input Transfers
         It is difficult to directly test our “intangible input” explanation for vertical ownership
structures because such inputs are by definition hard to measure. Ideally, we would have
information on the application of managerial or other intangible inputs (like managers’ time-use
patterns across the different business units of the firm) across firm structures. Such data does not
exist for the breadth of industries which we are looking at here, however. That said, we compile
some suggestive evidence for an intangible input mechanism in this section.
         Our first test digs deeper into the changes seen in plants that become vertically integrated,
as with those observed in panel D of Table 4. We saw there that the only significant changes in
type measures observed for such plants were in labor productivity and capital intensity.22 We
decompose these changes into their respective components by repeating the exercises, but this
time running the specifications separately for plants’ capital stocks and labor inputs. To allow
exact decomposition of these changes, we restrict the sample to plants for which we observe each
of the production measures, ensuring that the changes in the ratios’ (logged) components add up
to the change in ratios. Furthermore, for reasons that will become clear momentarily, we look at
the individual changes in two types of labor inputs: production and nonproduction workers. The
results are shown in Table 5.


22
  These are also the only two significant differences that remain between integrated and nonintegrated plants in the
cross section once we fully control for firm size. It’s not surprising that these two measures are positively
correlated; higher capital intensity implies more output per unit labor in any production technology where capital
and labor are complements.

                                                         22
         The 3.0 percent average labor productivity change in this sample is driven both by a
marginally significant 1.2 percent increase in output (unlike in the whole sample, which saw no
significant change) and by 1.8 percent decline in hours. The 2.9 percent increase in capital
intensity mostly reflects the same decrease in labor inputs, but the (albeit insignificant) point
estimate suggests investment may have been higher at these newly integrated plants than their
nonintegrated counterparts, as capital stocks grew 1.1 percent faster in the former.
         The most interesting feature of observed drop in labor inputs is the labor composition
shift that accompanies it. The percentage drop in nonproduction workers is more than four times
that in production workers. This is also reflected in the drop in nonproduction workers’ share of
total employment at the plant.
         These changes in capital intensity and labor composition are consistent with an intangible
inputs motive for vertical ownership. Capital intensity would rise upon a plant becoming part of
a vertical link if skilled managerial or other intangible inputs have stronger complementarities
with capital than labor, for example.23 The relative decline in nonproduction workers upon
integration is consistent with some of the plant’s former management, marketing, R&D, or any
other staff associated with providing intangible inputs being replaced with the new intangible
inputs of the vertically integrated structure. Fewer workers are needed to provide these new
inputs in the integrated structure because of centralization and scale returns or greater efficacy.
Both of these changes are consistent with the allocation mechanism we discuss above.
         Our next tests look for further circumstantial evidence for intangible input movements by
examining changes in the behavior of acquired plants once they are brought into their new firm.
We investigate two practices: the products the plants manufacture and, taking further advantage
of our CFS shipments data, the locations to which plants send their output.
         To explore changes in acquired plants’ product mixes, for each acquired plant we
partition the universe of products into four groups, according to the acquiring and acquired
firms’ production patterns in the previous Census of Manufactures. Group 1 consists of products
that were produced neither by any plant in the acquiring firm nor by any other plant in the



23
  Firms with vertical ownership structures might also face lower effective capital costs, which would shift their
optimal factor allocation toward a more capital-intensive orientation. Since we know vertical firms are larger on
average, and there is evidence that larger firms might be less credit constrained (e.g., Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen
(1988) and Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009)), this is a plausible alternative.

                                                          23
acquired firm.24 Group 2 are products that were produced by the acquired firm but not the
acquiring firm. Group 3 are products made by the acquiring firm but not the acquired firm, and
Group 4 includes products made by both the acquired and the acquiring firms. We then compute
the sales of the acquired plants in each of these four groups in the CMs both preceding and
following the ownership change of ownership.25 A shift in acquired plants’ product mixes away
from Groups 2 and 4 and toward Group 3 would indicate that the acquiring firms reorient the
plants toward the firms’ existing operations. This reorientation is likely to require some
intangible capital of the acquiring firms, be it production knowledge, product design, customer
lists, or the like. As such, the reorientation would be circumstantial evidence for the flow of
intangibles.
           The results are in panel A of Table 6. There is a marked shift in the acquired plants’
product mix away from what it did before. While the dollar value of production in these groups
drops only slightly, because the acquired plants’ sales grew on average (by 18 percent), the
combined share of the acquired plants’ products in these two groups falls from 36.6 to 30.7
percent. Also consistent with this reorientation is the fact that the plants’ value of sales of Group
3 products increases by 11 percent. (Although here the share drops slightly because most of the
acquired plants’ production growth was in Group 1 products—those made by neither the
acquiring firm nor the other plants of the acquired firm in the previous CM.)26
           We show in the Appendix that these basic data patterns remain present in more structured
tests. Specifically, we estimate a logit specification for the probability that an acquired plant will
produce a specific 7-digit product after acquisition as a function of the product mix of the
acquiring and acquired firms in the previous CM. The probability an acquired plant produces a
given 7-digit product is significantly and economically larger if the product was made by the
acquiring firm in the prior CM.


24
   We do not classify products based on those made by the acquired plant in question itself, as we are comparing
production patterns before and after acquisition. If we grouped products based on the acquired plant’s production,
the plant’s sales of any product in Groups 2 or 4—those groups that include products not made by the acquired firm
in the prior CM—would be zero by definition. We similarly exclude the plant’s own shipment destinations in the
analogous zip code classifications below.
25
 We define products at the 7-digit SIC level. The sample consists of all manufacturing plants that are part of a
merger or acquisition between 1987 and 1997 and for which we have detailed production data from the Census of
Manufacturers Product Supplement.
26
     Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2010) report substantial turnover in the products that firms produce.

                                                           24
         We conduct a similar exercise looking changes in the locations to which acquired plants
ship their output before and after acquisition.27 Again, we partition the acquired plants’ sales
into four groups. But here, they are based on the locations to which the acquiring and acquired
firms shipped prior to the acquisition. Group 1 contains zip codes to which neither the acquiring
firm nor any other plant in the acquired firm shipped before the acquisition. Group 2 contains
zip codes where other plants in the acquired firm shipped but no establishments in the acquiring
firm did. Group 3 contains zip codes to where the acquiring firm shipped but not the other plants
in the acquired firm, and Group 4 includes zip codes to which both firms shipped output. A shift
in acquired plants’ shipping locations away from Groups 2 and 4 and toward Group 3 again
suggests a reorientation toward the acquiring firms’ existing operations and any intangible
capital flows associated with it.
         The results are in panel B of Table 6. The patterns line up with the reorientation story.
Both the level and fraction of shipments to zip codes in groups 2 and 4 fall after acquisition.
Combined shipment levels across these two groups fall by 20 percent, and the share going to
these two groups drops from 23.1 to 15.2 percent. Concomitant with these drops is an increase
in shipments to Group 3 zip codes. Here, shipment levels increase by about 40 percent while
their share rises from 17.4 to 20.1 percent. (As with the product mix results, there is an overall
increase in reported shipments, mostly coming in Group 1 zip codes.)
         We again show using logit regressions in the Appendix that these basic patterns hold up
to more formal testing.28
         Thus we have seen that acquired plants see increases in capital intensity driven in large
part by reductions in their number of nonproduction workers, a reorientation in their product mix
away from their old firm’s products and toward their acquiring firms’ preexisting product mix,
and similar shifts in the destinations of their shipments (and presumably, the identity of their
customers as well) away from their old firm’s orientation and toward the acquirers’. These
patterns are all circumstantial evidence for the flows in intangible inputs that occur within
integrated firms. We note, however, that these results are only suggestive—we cannot observe

27
  Our sample consists of establishments in both the 1993 and 1997 CFS that experienced a change of ownership
during that period. The construction of this sample is detailed in the Appendix.
28
  Our results on the reorientation of acquired plants’ operations complement those in Maksimovic, Phillips, and
Prabhala (2011). That paper argues that, following a merger or acquisition, the acquiring firm shuts down or sells
off establishments outside of the firm’s core business segments while keeping acquired plants that operate in
segments in which the firm already has a large presence or is particularly productive.

                                                         25
workers’ positions within the firm at any finer level than the production/nonproduction worker
dichotomy, and we would need much more detailed information on managerial or other
intangible inputs to test the theory convincingly. Still, we find the results an intriguing starting
point for continued work.


                                           V. Conclusion
       We have used data on hundreds of thousands of plants, the organizational structure of
firms that own them, and their shipments, to explore production behavior in vertical ownership
structures. We find that the common view of vertical ownership supporting efficient intra-firm
transfers of goods along a production chain may not be its primary purpose. Firms’ upstream
plants ship only a fraction (and often none) of their output to downstream units inside the firm.
This finding is robust to a number of measurement methods. Thus, outside of some exceptional
plants that we find are clearly dedicated to internal production, most vertical ownership appears
to have a different motive.
       Motivated by patterns we document in plants’ “types” within and across firms, we
propose an alternative explanation for vertical integration. Namely, that it facilitates efficient
transfers of intangible inputs (e.g., managerial oversight) within firms. It is plausible that the
market would have a more difficult time mediating transfers of knowledge inputs than of
physical goods. We provide suggestive evidence in favor of the intangible inputs hypothesis:
Acquired establishments begin to resemble—both in terms of their shipment destinations and
products produced—establishments from the acquiring firm.
       Note that if this explanation is correct, there may not be anything particular about vertical
structure within firms; intangible inputs can flow in any direction across a firm’s production
units. Vertical firm structures and expansions may not be fundamentally different from
horizontal structures and expansions. Instead, a more generalized view of firm organization, like
the firm as an outcome of an assignment mechanism that matches heterogeneous tangible and
intangible inputs, may be warranted, and is consistent with some of the other patterns we
document in the data.
       One interesting point of comparison between our findings and the existing literature is
with regard to international trade flows. For countries where such data is available, intra-firm
trade accounts for roughly one-third of international goods shipments (see, e.g., Bernard, Jensen,

                                                 26
Redding, and Schott (2007)). This is clearly substantially larger than the modest, domestic
within-firm shipment volume we document here. A possible explanation might be that
multinational firms are more likely to be comprised of the types of plants at the right tail of our
Figure 1: large, dedicated producers to the firms downstream plants. Why multinationals would
choose to structure themselves in a way so different than domestic shippers is less clear; we see
this question as a good launching point for further research.




                                                 27
                                          References

Acemoğlu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Rachel Griffith, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. “Vertical Integration
     and Technology: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of the European Economic Association,
     8(3), 2010, 989-1033.

Acemoğlu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton. “Integration: Finance, Contracts, and
     Regulation.” Journal of Finance, 63(3), 2009, 1251-1290.

Antras, Pol. “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4),
       2003, 1375-1418.

Arrow, Kenneth J. “Vertical Integration and Communication.” Bell Journal of Economics, 6(1),
       1975, 173-183.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. “Intra-Firm
       Trade and Product Contractibility.” American Economic Review, 100(2), 2010, 444-448.

Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. “Multi-Product Firms and Product
       Switching.” American Economic Review, 100(1), 2010, 70-97.

Coase, R. H. “The Nature of the Firm.” Economica, 16(4), 1937, 386-405.

Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne, and Mark J. Roberts. “The Role of Technology Use in the
      Survival and Growth of Manufacturing Plants.” International Journal of Industrial
      Organization, 13(4), 1995, 523-542.

Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. “The Growth and Failure of U. S.
      Manufacturing Plants.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4), 1989, 671-698.

Eisfeldt, Andrea and Adriano Rampini. “Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and Debt Capacity.”
        Review of Financial Studies, 22(4), 2009, 1621-1657.

Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes. “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
       Empirical Work.” Review of Economic Studies, 62(1), 1995, 53-82.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. “Financing Constraints and
       Corporate Investment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1988, 141-195.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
        Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review,
        98(1), 2008, 394-425.

Garicano, Luis and Thomas N. Hubbard. “The Return to Knowledge Hierarchies.” NBER
       Working Paper 12815, 2007.



                                               28
Garicano, Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. “Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge
       Economy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4), 2006, 1383-1435.

Gollop, Frank M. and James L. Monahan. “A Generalized Index of Diversification: Trends in
       U.S. Manufacturing.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 73(2), 1991, 318-330.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart. “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
      Vertical and Lateral Integration.” Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), 1986, 691-719.

Harper, Michael, Ernst R. Berndt, and David O. Wood. “Rates of Return and Capital
       Aggregation using Alternative Rental Prices.” in Technology and Capital Formation,
       Dale W. Jorgenson and Ralph Landau (eds.), MIT Press, 1989.

Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels. “Intranational Home Bias: Some Explanations.” Review
        of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 2003, 1089-1092.

Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels. “Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions: A
        Decomposition Using MicroData.” European Economic Review, 52(2), 2008, 527-550.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.”
      Econometrica, 60(5), 1992, 1127-1150.

Holmes, Thomas and John J. Stevens. “An Alternative Theory of the Size Distribution with an
      Application to Trade.” NBER Working Paper 15957, 2010.

Holmes, Thomas and John J. Stevens. “Exports, Borders, Distance, and Plant Size.” Journal of
      International Economics, 2012, forthcoming.

Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson. “Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integration, Foreclosure,
       Productivity, and Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(2), 2007, 250-301.

Joskow, Paul. “Vertical Integration.” in Claude Menard and Mary Shirley, eds., Handbook of
      New Institutional Economics. Berlin: Springer/Kluwer, 2005.

Jovanovic, Boyan. “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica, 50(3), 1982, 649-
      670.

Lafontaine, Francine and Margaret Slade. “Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries: The
       Evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3), 2007, 629-685.

Lucas, Robert E. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics, 9(2),
       1979, 508-23.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon Phillips, and N.R. Prabhala. “Post-Merger Restructuring and the
      Boundaries of the Firm.” Journal of Financial Economics, 102(2), 2011, 317-343.



                                              29
Melitz, Marc J. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
        Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6), 2003, 1695-1725.

Nguyen, Sang V. “The Manufacturing Plant Ownership Database: Its Construction and
      Usefulness.” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 24(3-4), 1998, 209-232.

Perry, Martin K. “Vertical Integration: Determinants and Effects.” in Richard Schmalensee and
       Robert D. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization. Amsterdam: North-
       Holland, 1989.

Rosen, Sherwin. “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earning,” Bell Journal of
       Economics, 13(2), 1982, 311-323.

Salop, Steven C. “Vertical Mergers and Monopoly Leverage.” in Peter Newman, ed., The New
       Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law, London: Macmillian, 1998.

Stigler, George. “The Division of Labor Is Limited by the Extent of the Market.” Journal of
        Political Economy, 59(1), 185-193.

Syverson, Chad. “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion.” Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 86(2), 2004, 534-550.

Syverson, Chad. “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2), 2011,
       326-365.

Teece, David J. “Towards an Economic Theory of the Multiproduct Firm.” Journal of Economic
       Behavior and Organization, 3(1), 1982, 39-63.

Tirole, Jean. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Trends in Multifactor Productivity: 1948-81.” Bulletin 2178.
       Washington D.C., Government Printing Office, 1983.

U.S. Census Bureau. “Instructions for Completing the Commodity Flow Survey.” Washington
       D.C., Government Printing Office, 1997.

Williamson, Oliver E. “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
       Relations.” Journal of Law and Economics, 22(2), 1979, 233-261.




                                               30
Table 1. Plant-Level Shares of Internal Shipments

A. Benchmark

                                                     Percentile
                                                                                          Fraction =       Fraction =
  Internal share of:          25th          50th          75th        90th       95th
                                                                                              0                1
   Plant shipment            0.0%           0.4%          7.3%       32.2%      62.7%       49.7%            1.2%
        counts
  Plant dollar value         0.0%        <0.1%            7.0%       37.6%      69.5%       49.7%             1.2%
    of shipments
  Plant total weight         0.0%        <0.1%            7.1%       38.4%      69.9%       49.7%             1.2%
    of shipments

Notes: These tables report shares upstream plants’ shipments that are internal to their firm. The sample consists of
67,500 plant-years aggregated from about 6.3 million shipments. For data confidentiality reasons, the reported
percentiles are averages of immediately surrounding percentiles; e.g., the median = 0.5*(49th percentile + 51st
percentile).

B. Robustness Checks (Share of Dollar Value Shown)

                                                           Percentile
                                                                                             Frac.     Frac.         Approx.
   Specification/Sample              25th          50th       75th       90th      95th
                                                                                              =0        =1             N
 1. At least median                  0.0%      0.2%          6.9%       31.7%    59.5%      45.5%      0.3%          34,000
 number of shipments
 2. No exporters                     0.0%      <0.1%         8.6%       46.5%    78.3%      49.7%      1.6%          47,000

 3. Shipments to any                 0.1%      4.9%         25.1%       67.5%    90.6%      22.8%      2.6%          67,500
 plant in firm are internal
 4. County, not zip,                 0.0%      7.2%         39.8%       87.1%    98.8%      25.3%      4.2%          67,500
 determines internal
 5. 25 least differentiated          0.0%      0.0%          2.5%       20.0%    48.6%      61.4%      0.6%           2,200
 industries
 6. 5% cutoff definition             0.0%      0.0%          5.1%       32.1%    63.3%      53.9%      0.9%          53,000
 for VI
 7. Remove I→I as a                  0.0%      0.0%          3.9%       30.8%    60.7%      58.7%      1.0%          43,000
 potential vertical link

Notes: Each row shows for a different subsample the distributions of the shares (by dollar value) of upstream
integrated establishments’ shipments that are internal to the firm. The criteria for inclusion in and size of each
subsample is discussed in the text. For data confidentiality reasons, the reported percentiles are averages of
immediately surrounding percentiles; e.g., the median = 0.5*(49th percentile + 51st percentile).




                                                             31
Table 2. Internal Shipments as Share of Smaller of Upstream Shipments or Downstream Usage

                                                            Value share of shipments percentiles
    Downstream usage measure                       25th         50th        75th       90th        95th
 Firm’s total downstream                          0.0%         0.3%        13.8%      67.4%      134.3%
 manufacturing materials purchases
 Firm’s downstream use of 2-digit                 0.0%           0.0%          15.4%         118.8%         403.2%
 product
 Firm’s downstream use of 4-digit                 0.0%           0.0%          18.5%         125.4%         687.0%
 product

Notes: These tables report shares upstream plants’ shipments that are internal to their firm, as a fraction of the
smaller of a) the total shipments of a firm’s upstream plants or b) the firm’s downstream use of a product. Sample
construction and sizes are detailed in the text. For data confidentiality reasons, the reported percentiles are averages
of immediately surrounding percentiles; e.g., the median = 0.5*(49th percentile + 51st percentile).




                                                          32
Table 3. Plant Attributes by Vertical Ownership Structure

                                           Output per                                            Capital-labor
                                             hour                 TFP              Output           ratio

A. Within-industry differences

         Approximate N                       966,000           876,000            987,000           933,000
   Indicator for vertical plants              0.336*            0.014*             1.441*            0.424*
                                             (0.002)           (0.001)            (0.004)           (0.003)


B. Differences among new plants

         Approximate N                       237,000           211,000            245,000           230,000
   Indicator for vertical plants              0.280*            0.033*             1.224*            0.329*
                                             (0.004)           (0.003)            (0.009)           (0.006)


C. Comparing unintegrated plants: to-be-vertical vs. remaining non-vertical

         Approximate N                       403,000           367,000            410,000           389,000
Indicator for to-be-vertical plants           0.194*            0.002              1.254*            0.247*
                                             (0.005)           (0.003)            (0.010)           (0.007)


D. Changes upon entering vertical ownership

        Approximate N                        347,000           299,000            356,000           327,000
     Newly vertical indicator                 0.035*           -0.010*             0.019*            0.032*
                                             (0.005)           (0.004)            (0.007)           (0.008)

Notes: This table shows plant “type” comparisons between plants in (or to-be-in) vertical ownership structures and
their non-vertical counterparts. Panel A compares across all plants for which type measures are available. Panel B
compares new plants. Panel C compares prior period types among non-vertical plants that will become part of
vertical ownership structures by next period to those remaining non-vertical. Panel D compares changes in type for
plants that become part of vertical ownership structures to changes for unintegrated plants that remain so. All
regressions include industry-year fixed effects. Samples are comprised of non-AR manufacturing plants. See text
and appendix on construction of type measures and additional details. An asterisk denotes significance at a five
percent level.




                                                        33
Table 4. Plant Type Differences Controlling for Firm Size

                                               Output per                                              Capital-labor
                                                 hour                 TFP               Output            ratio
       Multi-unit firm dummy
          Approximate N                          966,000            876,000            987,000            933,000
            VI indicator                          0.179*             0.016*             0.698*             0.218*
                                                 (0.003)            (0.002)            (0.006)            (0.004)
       Multi-industry indicator                   0.197*             -0.003             0.935*             0.260*
                                                 (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.005)            (0.004)
   Flexible controls for firm size
          Approximate N                          947,000            862,000            965,000            915,000
            VI indicator                          0.040*             0.007*             0.154*             0.034*
                                                 (0.003)            (0.002)            (0.006)            (0.005)

Notes: This table shows the results from regressing plant-level type measures on an indicator for vertically
integrated plants, a set of industry-year fixed effects, and controls for firm size. The firm size controls are a dummy
for single-industry firms and quintics of several measures of the plant's owning-firm size: employment, the number
of establishments, and number of industries.




                                                          34
Table 5. Changes in Plant Attributes Upon Integration

                                                                     Change upon
                                                                         VI
                                      Output per hour                   0.030*
                                                                        (0.005)
                                           Output                        0.012
                                                                        (0.006)
                                           Hours                        -0.018*
                                                                        (0.006)
                                    Capital-labor ratio                 0.029*
                                                                        (0.009)
                                           Capital                       0.011
                                                                        (0.009)
                                   Production workers                    -0.011
                                                                        (0.006)
                                 Nonproduction workers                  -0.048*
                                                                        (0.007)
                              Nonproduction worker share                -0.006*
                                                                        (0.001)

Notes: The table repeats panel D of Table 3, but with additional plant production measures. The sample consists of
only of the approximately 285,000 newly integrated plants that have nonmissing data for all production measures.
See text for details. Regressions include industry-year fixed effects. An asterisk denotes significance at a five
percent level.




                                                        35
Table 6. Allocation of Sales/Shipments across Products and Locations for Acquired
Establishments

A. Product Mix


                                                          Group 1         Group 2         Group 3         Group 4

  Average sales, CM prior to acquisition
  (millions)                                                $10.1           $5.5             $7.0            $4.4
  Average sales, CM after acquisition
  (millions)                                                $14.3           $5.5             $7.8            $4.3
  Fraction of establishment sales, CM prior
  to acquisition (%)                                          37.4          20.5             26.0            16.1
  Fraction of establishment sales, CM after
  acquisition (%)                                             44.7          17.2             24.6            13.5



B. Shipment Locations


                                                          Group 1         Group 2         Group 3         Group 4

  Average sales, CM prior to acquisition
  (millions)                                                $61.5           $15.0           $17.9            $8.8
  Average sales, CM after acquisition
  (millions)                                                $86.3           $13.7           $25.0            $5.2
  Fraction of establishment sales, CM prior
  to acquisition (%)                                          59.6          14.5             17.4            8.6
  Fraction of establishment sales, CM after
  acquisition (%)                                             69.3          11.0             20.1            4.2

Notes: This table presents, for acquired establishments, the average dollar amounts and shares of sales accounted for
by products (shipment locations in panel B) in four different groups based on the behavior of the acquiring and
acquired firms’ establishments in the CM prior to acquisition. Shares are weighted according to the revenue of the
acquired establishment. Group 1 contains products (locations in panel B) that neither the acquiring firm’s
establishments nor the establishments in the acquired firm (other than the establishment in question) produced
(shipped to in panel B) in the prior CM. Group 2 contains products (locations in panel B) that the acquired firm’s
other establishments produced (shipped to in panel B) but the acquiring firm’s establishments did not. Group 3
contains products (locations) that the acquiring firm’s establishments produced (shipped to) but the acquired firm’s
other establishments did not. Group 4 contains products (locations) that both the acquiring and the acquired firms’
establishments produced (shipped to). Dollar figures are stated in terms of real 1987 dollars using industry-level
price indices from the NBER Productivity database. See text for details.




                                                         36
Figure 1. Share of Intra-firm Shipments by Upstream Vertically Integrated Establishments




                                              37
APPENDIX – NOT FOR PUBLICATION




              38
                                      A. Construction of Production Variables


         We describe here details on the construction of our production variables.


Output. Plant output is its inventory-adjusted total value of shipments, deflated to 1987 dollars using industry-
specific price indexes from the NBER Productivity Database.


Labor Hours. Production worker hours are reported directly in the CM microdata. To get total plant hours, we
multiply this value by the plant’s ratio of total salaries and wages to production worker wages. This, in essence,
imputes the hours of non-production workers by assuming that average non-production worker hours equal average
production worker hours within plants.


Labor Productivity. We measure labor productivity in terms of plant output per worker-hour, where output and total
hours are measured as described above.


Total Factor Productivity. We measure productivity using a standard total factor productivity index. Plant TFP is
its logged output minus a weighted sum of its logged labor, capital, materials, and energy inputs. That is,

                                        TFPit = yit − α lt lit − α kt k it − α mt mit − α et eit ,
where the weights αj are the input elasticities of input j∈{l, k, m, e}. Output is the plant’s inventory-adjusted total
value of shipments deflated to 1987 dollars. While inputs are plant-specific, we use industry-level input cost shares
to measure the input elastiticies. These cost shares are computed using reported industry-level labor, materials, and
energy expenditures from the NBER Productivity Database (which is itself constructed from the CM). Capital
expenditures are constructed as the reported industry equipment and building stocks multiplied by their respective
BLS capital rental rates in the corresponding two-digit industry.


Real Materials and Energy Use. Materials and energy inputs are plants’ reported expenditures on each divided by
their respective industry-level deflators from the National Bureau of Economic Research Productivity Database.


Capital-Labor Ratio. Equipment and building capital stocks are plants’ reported book values of each capital type
deflated by the book-to-real value ratio for the corresponding three-digit industry. (These industry-level equipment
and structures stocks are from published Bureau of Economic Analysis data.) Any reported machinery or building
rentals by the plant are inflated to stocks by dividing by a type-specific rental rate.29 The total productive capital
stock kit is the sum of the equipment and structures stocks. This is divided by the plants’ number of labor hours to
obtain the capital-intensity measure used in the empirical tests.

29
  Capital rental rates are from unpublished data constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for use in computing
their Multifactor Productivity series. Formulas, related methodology, and data sources are described in U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics (1983) and Harper, Berndt, and Wood (1989).

                                                             39
Nonproduction Worker Ratio. Plants directly report both their number of production and nonproduction employees.
Nonproduction workers are defined by the Census Bureau as those engaged in “supervision above line-supervisor
level, sales (including a driver salesperson), sales delivery (truck drivers and helpers), advertising, credit, collection,
installation, and servicing of own products, clerical and routine office functions, executive, purchasing, finance,
legal, personnel (including cafeteria, etc.), professional and technical [employees]. Exclude proprietors and
partners.” The nonproduction worker ratio is simply such employees’ share of total plant employment.




                    B. Measuring the Flow of Goods through the Wholesale and Retail Sectors


          The Input-Output Tables treat both the entire wholesale and retail sectors as single industries. Further, they
do not keep track of shipments by manufacturers to or through wholesalers or retailers, instead measuring only those
inputs directly used by wholesalers and retailers in the production of wholesale and retail services. To better
measure the flow of goods through these sectors, we the following algorithms.
          If industry J is in the wholesale sector, we impute the industry’s purchases of each commodity C using CFS
data on establishments’ shipments of commodity C along with data from the Annual Wholesale Trade Survey
(AWTS). The AWTS contains information on wholesale industries’ aggregate commodity purchases and aggregate
commodity sales. Using data from the AWTS, we compute the ratio RJ of commodity purchases to sales.
Aggregating across plants in the CFS gives a measure of aggregate sales of each commodity by each wholesale
industry, SCJ. Given these two pieces of information, we impute industry J’s purchases of commodity C as PCJ =
SCJ·RJ.
          To give an example, establishments in the motor-vehicle-related wholesale industries (SICs 5010-5019)
had sales of $159 billion and purchases of $131 billion in 1993. We therefore set RJ = 0.82 (131/159) for all
vehicle-related wholesale industries. For each commodity and industry within SICs 5010-5019, we impute
aggregate purchases as 82% of the shipments of the respective commodity that we observe CFS establishments
making.
          When J is a retail industry, we utilize the CFS data along with the Annual Retail Trade Survey (ARTS).
The U.S. Census Bureau uses the ARTS to collect information on purchases of groups of retail industries. For
example, in 1993, establishments in the household appliance industries (SICs 5720-5734) purchased $35.8 billion in
intermediate materials. Unfortunately, we do not know how much total merchandise was purchased by each SIC
industry within these groupings, nor do we know the amount of any specific commodity purchased by these groups.
To impute these values, we rely on data from the Commodity Flow Survey and then hand match commodity-specific
shipments to the most appropriate retail industry within the ARTS groupings.
          To demonstrate, we continue with our household appliance retailers example. Our hand match specifies
commodities 510102 (calculating and accounting machines), 510103 (electronic computers), 510104 (computer
peripheral equipment), and 510400 (other office machines) as those that are sold to SIC 5734 (computer and


                                                            40
software stores). Repeating this process for all commodities and industries yields a table of commodity-retail-
industry pairs such that the 4-digit retail industry could potentially purchase the given commodity. 30 The amount of
the commodity purchased by the industry is assumed proportional to a) the amount of the good shipped, according to
the Commodity Flow Survey, b) the 4-digit retail industry’s share of employment among its larger grouping of
industries, and c) the total amount purchased by industry group.
         For example, suppose we want to impute the purchases of computers (STCC 37531) by computer and
software stores. We know that total goods purchases by retailers in SICs 5720-5734 is $35.8 billion. Since
employment in computer and software stores is 14.6% (30,000/205,000) of employment in this retailer group, we
impute goods purchases of $5.2 billion by computer and software stores.31 To impute the amount of this total that is
computers specifically, we multiply the $5.2 billion figure by the value of shipments of computers as a fraction of all
commodities that can be purchased by computer and software stores, where both of these commodity values are
computed from the CFS.


                                            C. Additional Robustness Checks


C.1. Plant-Level Shares of Internal Shipments
         This section contains three additional robustness checks, related to those presented in Section IV.B.1. First,
we compute the distribution of internal shares using successively more restrictive definitions of vertically linked
industries. Then, we compare our measures of plants’ internal shares to the measures constructed directly from the
Census of Manufacturers. Finally, we discuss how our definitions of a) vertically linked industries and b) plants’
internal shipments differ from the definitions we gave in an earlier draft. We show that the results are robust to the
changes in our definitions.
         In the benchmark calculations, we defined industry J to be downstream of industry I provided at least 1
percent of industry I’s sales were purchased by establishments in industry J. In Rows 1-3 of Table A1, we consider
the effect of changing the 1 percent cutoff to 10 percent, 15 percent, or 20 percent. As the cutoff increases two
things occur: First, our sample of upstream establishments shrinks. Second, for any particular establishment in our
sample, fewer shipments are classified as being sent along an internal, vertical link. Increasing the cutoff from 1 to
20 percent reduces the size of our sample by three-fifths. At the same time, however, the distribution of
establishments’ internal shares is not substantially altered using the more restrictive definition of vertical integration.
Under the 20 percent cutoff, the 75th(90th) percentile internal shares are 4.5 percent and 28.2 percent, only somewhat
smaller than the values given in Table 1.


30
   The concordance of STCC commodities in the CFS and the commodity classifications in the Input-Output tables
is produced in a two-step process. To match STCC commodities to the corresponding SIC industries, we use a table
provided to us by John Fowler at the U.S. Census Bureau. To match SIC codes to IOIND commodities, we use the
concordance provided by the BEA. The latter table can be found at
http://www.bea.gov/industry/io_benchmark.htm.
31
  For these employment figures, see the “Establishment and Firm Size” document at
http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/92result.html.

                                                            41
         The Census of Manufacturers contains a variable, interplant transfers, which describes shipments that are
sent to other plants within the firm, for further assembly. Since the Census of Manufacturers also contains
information on each plant’s total value of shipments, it is straightforward to compute internal shares as the ratio of
interplant transfers to total value of shipments. The first row of Table A1 gives the quantiles for the 766 thousand
plant-year observations of plants’ interplant transfers. Only 2.2 percent of the observations have nonzero internal
shares. In the second row, we restrict attention to the 37,034 plants that also take part in the Commodity Flow
Survey. For this subsample, a larger fraction, 23.4 percent, have nonzero interplant transfers. The 90th percentile
interplant transfers share is 13.2 percent.
         Rows 3 and 4 of Table A1 give the corresponding statistics, using our benchmark definitions of plants’
internal shares (i.e., using data from the Commodity Flow Survey and the algorithm specified in Section 3 of the
paper). Row 3 restricts the benchmark sample to plants in the manufacturing sector. For this subsample, the 75th
(90th) percentile internal share is 6.2 percent (33.7 percent), slightly lower than the values given in Table 1 (7.0
percent, and 37.6 percent, respectively).
         The difference between Rows 5 and 6 originates from differences in what is defined as an internal
shipment. Interplant transfers, which are shipments to other plants for further assembly, only includes shipments
sent to plants in the manufacturing sector. Our definition, using data from the Commodity Flow Survey, includes
shipments sent to same-firm plants in any sector.
         In Row 4, we only count a shipment as internal if there is a downstream plant, from the same firm, that is
also in the manufacturing sector. 32 The 75th(90th) percentile internal shares are 0.3 percent and 11.7 percent,
reasonably close to the values given in Row 5.
         To summarize, the interplant transfers variable yields smaller values for internal shipments, compared to
the variable constructed from the Commodity Flow Survey, because it omits shipments sent to non-manufacturing
establishments. If it were not for this difference, the two variables would be similar to one another.
         Our definitions over which industries are vertically linked and when shipments are counted as internal were
slightly different in an earlier draft of the paper (Hortacsu and Syverson, 2007b). It turns out that results are
qualitatively similar whether one uses the old or new definitions of vertically linked industries or internal shipments.
For completeness, we review these old definitions, as well as the internal shares that resulted from these definitions.
         In the previous draft, we had a less stringent definition for internal shipments. We did not require that the
shipment be destined to an establishment that is in an industry directly downstream to the shipping establishment,
only that the destination be a plant that is on the downstream end of any vertical link in a firm.33 In Row 8 of Table
A1, we recomputed internal shares for the benchmark sample, with this less strict definition of internal shipments.


32
  Consider the following example of a plant, sending a shipment of auto parts to zip code, z. Suppose there is a
same-firm auto parts wholesaler (SIC=5013), but no manufacturing plants in an industry that consumes auto parts, in
zip code z. This shipment would be classified as internal according to the calculations of Row 3, but in not the
calculations corresponding to Row 4.
33
  For instance, suppose a firm has two upstream establishments U1 and U2, and two downstream establishments D1
and D2, and U1-D1and U2-D2 are separate vertical links. According to the old definitions, a shipment from U1 would
be classified as internal if it is destined to either D1 or D2’s ZIP codes, not just D1’s.

                                                           42
The median plant has an internal share of 3.0 percent, and only 29.1 percent of plants have no internal shipments.
Compared to the benchmark calculations, the mean internal share is almost 6 percent larger (16.1 percent, compared
to 10.2 percent). Thus, under our old definitions, we were being very liberal when computing internal shipments.34
           A second difference, compared to the previous draft, originates from the way in which vertically linked
industries are defined. In the previous draft, we defined two industries to be vertically linked only using information
from the BEA input-output tables. Specifically, a substantial link exists between Industry A (using the BEA
definition of input-output industries) and any industry from which A buys at least five percent of its intermediate
materials, or any industry to which A sells at least five percent of its own output. As we discuss in Section 3, the old
definition is potentially problematic if the downstream industry is retail or wholesale. For wholesalers and retailers,
the BEA doesn't keep track of the gross shipments by sent to wholesalers/retailers. Instead, the BEA measures the
industries which are used by wholesalers/retailers in the "production" of wholesale/retail services. Because of this
issue, there are several pairs of industries that are, in reality, linked with one another, but are not classified as such
under the old definition.
           In Row 9 of Table A1, we compute internal shares using the old definition of vertically linked industries
(but retain the new definition of when shipments are internal to the firm). With the old definition of vertically linked
industries, the sample of vertically integrated establishments is less than half as large, 29893 compared to 67552
plant-years. The 75th percentile (90th percentile) internal share is 1.0 percent (17.4 percent). These are considerably
less than corresponding values of the benchmark calculations for the 75th and 90th percentiles, 7.0 percent and 37.6
percent.
           In the final row, Row 10, of Table A1, we compute internal shares using both the old definition of when
shipments are classified as internal, and the old definition of when industries are classified as vertically linked.
Under these definitions, the median establishment has an internal share of 2.5 percent, the 90th percentile plant has
an internal share of 57.7 percent, and 2.1percent of plants have a 100 percent internal share.


C.2. Is Geographic Closeness Important?
           It’s quite likely that some of the low internal shares we see above arise because a firm’s plants are too
spatially separated to make internal shipments practical. Of course, if this is the case, this may be a result as much a
cause of the lack of within-firm goods transfers along a production chain. If moving physical products down a
production chain was the only reason for vertical ownership, after all, no firm would own vertically related plants
that were located too far from one another to make intra-firm shipments impractical. The fact that firms do own
vertically linked producers that are far apart suggests other motives for ownership. 35

34
  Since a main objective of the paper is to point out that internal shipments are surprisingly small, being liberal in
defining internal shipments is innocuous.
35
  Hortaçsu and Syverson (2007) document examples of vertically integrated cement and concrete firms that own
clusters of ready-mixed concrete plants that are remotely located from their upstream cement plants. These firms, in
fact, do not internally supply these clusters with cement. The downstream concrete plants report instead buying
cement in the local market from the firm’s upstream competitors. We find evidence that the firms’ motives for
owning these concrete plant clusters is to harness logistical efficiencies in a business that shares a common final
demand sector (construction) with cement.

                                                            43
          Nevertheless, it is interesting to quantify how much distance matters. We take two approaches. The first is
to compute the distribution of internal shipment shares for firms whose plants are all located close to one another.
The second is to compare plants’ shipment distances to the distances they are from other plants in their firms.
          To see shipment patterns of closely-spaced firms, we use the subset of upstream plants from our CFS
sample where all of the plants that their firm owns are in the same county. (This is determined from the Economic
Census, which includes state and county codes for virtually all establishments. This location information is not
subject to the limitations of the EC zip code data, where codes for 10 percent of plants are missing.) This subset is
small—2254 plant-years and 199,712 shipments—and contains a large number of two-plant firms with one upstream
and downstream plant each. Nevertheless, it offers a rough gauge the role of distance.
          The results are consistent with the patterns above. Just under half (46.7 percent) of the upstream plants
report no shipments to downstream units in their firm. The 90th percentile plant ships 49.0 percent of the value of its
shipments internally. The fraction of plants with all shipments staying in the firm is above that in the benchmark
sample, however, at 2.4 percent. Thus it appears that vertically structured firms with closely located plants are less
likely to make internal shipments on average, but somewhat more likely to contain internally dedicated upstream
plants.
          We next compare the shipment distances of our entire sample of upstream plants in the CFS to their
distances from other plants in their firms (both measured in great circle terms). It’s clear from pooling shipments
across plants that internal shipments go shorter distances. In fact, the average external shipment is sent roughly
three times as far as the average internal shipment. This may reflect upstream plants “bypassing” their downstream
units with some of their shipments, but it may also reflect composition effects if internally dedicated, high-volume
upstream establishments are located close to downstream units in their firm.
          We can decompose these contributions to the pooled numbers by looking within plants. We find that for
21.9 percent of upstream shipment plants, their farthest-traveling shipment does not go as far as the distance to the
nearest downstream plant in their firm. These plants account for just under one-third of the one-half of our upstream
plants that report no internal shipments, showing the importance of distance. But this also means the other two-
thirds of plants reporting no internal shipments do send output at least as far as their nearest plant. This pattern isn’t
unusual across the broader sample. Looking across plants, the average of the within-plant medians of reported
shipment distances is 274 miles, while the average distance to the closest downstream plant within the firm is 192
miles.


C.3. Is There Vertical Integration Within Plants?
          Our definition of vertically integrated ownership links requires multiple plants by definition. A firm must
own at least one plant each in vertically related upstream and downstream industries. This definition could be
problematic if firms commonly vertically integrate production within a single plant. In such cases, the firm would
be operating a vertically integrated production process and obviously supplying its own input needs. We would
miss this type of integration, however, because we would not classify the plant as integrated. There would be no
shipments from the upstream to downstream parts of the production process in the CFS, since those goods transfers


                                                           44
never leave the plant.
         To give a concrete example, consider the two following hypothetical firms. One has two plants. The
upstream plant refines copper ore into billets which are then shipped to the downstream plant to be extruded into
pipe. The second firm operates a similar production process in a single plant: one side refines ore into billets, and
the other side turns billets into pipe. We would define the former plants as vertically integrated, but not the latter,
even though each firm operates the same production processes.
         How can we tell if this sort of misclassification is a big problem? We compare the materials purchase
patterns of plants that we classify as being in vertical structures to those in the same industry not classified as such.
In the context of the above example, we compare the two copper pipe plants. (Since plants are classified into
industries in the Economic Census based upon their outputs, both the downstream plant in the first firm and the
second firm’s plant would be classified in the same industry, SIC 3351: Rolling, Drawing, and Extruding of
Copper.) The pipe plant in the first firm—the one that we would have classified as in a vertical ownership
structure—will list copper billets as an intermediate materials purchase in the Census of Manufactures materials
supplement. The second plant, where billet production is inside the plant, will list copper ore as a materials
purchase. Hence if we see substantial differences in materials use patterns across plants (in the same industry) that
we classify respectively as vertically linked or not, we should be concerned that we are missing a lot of vertical
production that occurs “under one roof.” On the other hand, a lack of significant differences suggests this sort of
misclassification is less of a concern.
         We make three such comparisons between the materials use patterns of what we classify as vertically
linked plants and others in their industry. (Again our analysis is restricted to plants in the manufacturing sector
because of the detailed intermediate materials data requirements.) We first compute the share of each plant’s
intermediate materials purchases that is for “raw materials,” which we define as the products of the agricultural,
fisheries, forestry, or mining sectors—i.e., SIC product codes beginning with “14” or below. We then regress this
share on a set of industry-year fixed effects and an indicator equal to one if we classify the plant as in a vertical
ownership link. In essence, we test whether there are significant differences in the intensity of raw materials use
across plants that we classify as vertical and non-vertical in the same industry. We would expect that if the “under
one roof” misclassification problem were substantial, we would find that plants we designate as non-vertical would
have a larger raw materials share, since a greater portion of the production chain would be operated within the plant.
Again, to return to our example, the pipe plant in the second firm reports copper ore (a raw material) as a materials
purchase, while the plant in the first firm purchases copper billets.
         We run this regression on a sample of over 453 thousand plant-years from the Census of Manufactures.
(We don’t need the CFS for this.) The coefficient on the vertical ownership link indicator is 0.47 percent, with a
standard error of 0.05 percent. Thus plants we classify as vertical use raw materials more, not less, intensively
compared to other plants in their industry. (Recall that we would expect plants we classify as vertically linked to use
raw materials less intensively). Further, the point estimate of the share difference is small, less than one-fifteenth
the average raw materials share of 8.2 percent. Even if we restrict our comparisons only to those roughly 85,000
plants that report using positive raw materials shares, the vertically linked coefficient is -1.87 percent with a 0.19


                                                           45
percent standard error. The estimated difference is small, relative to the 44 percent average materials share, for
plants that report positive materials purchases.
         Our second check aggregates this raw materials use data to the industry level. We add up raw and total
materials use of plants classified as vertical within an industry year, and compare the ratio of the two to the same
share computed for non-vertical (again, under our classification) plants in the same industry. We then conduct a t-
test for equality of means across our sample of 1867 industry-years. The mean difference is 0.08 percent, with a
standard error of 0.22 percent. Here, there are no significant within-industry differences in raw materials usage
intensity across the two types of plants.
         Our final check is also done at the industry-year level. We separately aggregate materials purchases of our
designated vertical and non-vertical plants for each industry year. We then order materials by decreasing intensity
of use for each type of plant (as measured by their aggregate share of purchases). This yields 86,659 industry-year-
materials ranks for both vertical and non-vertical plants. We then compare these ranks within industry-year to see if
there are systematic differences. The two ranks move together; the correlation coefficient is 0.74. Table A2 shows
the frequency of relative rank orderings for the five most intensively used materials by industries’ non-vertical
plants. (Material 1 is the most intensively used.) Only ranks 1-7 of vertical plants are shown for parsimony. If
materials usage patterns were exactly the same, we would only see entries on the diagonal of the table. The most
intensively used material of an industry’s vertical plants would be the most intensively used among its non-vertical
plants; the second-most used would be so for both types of plants, and so on. Clearly, this is not the case. However,
the general pattern holds. The diagonal is the largest element of a row or column, and the frequency of other
pairings falls as they move further away from the diagonal. Hence these results suggest, as do the raw materials use
tests above, that there are not systematic differences in the mix of materials used by plants we classify as in vertical
ownership links and those we do not classify as such.


C.4. Cross-Industry Differences in Internal Shares
         Table A3 presents, for different 2 and 3-digit industries, establishments’ average internal shares. The first
three columns use data from the Commodity Flow Survey, while the final three columns use data from the Census of
Manufacturers.
         The first column gives, for all establishments surveyed in the Commodity Flow Survey, the fraction of
plants that have a positive internal share. There is substantial variation, across different goods-producing industries.
Plants in petroleum and transportation equipment manufacturing have the largest fraction of plants within positive
internal shares; furniture manufacturers and furniture and lumber wholesalers have the smallest fraction of plants
with positive internal shares. The second and third columns give the revenue-weighted average share of plants’
internal shares. Again, there is substantial variation, among industries with the highest average internal shares
(fabric and petroleum manufacturing, and chemicals and beer/wine wholesaling) and the industries with the lowest
average internal shares (furniture manufacturing and lumber, metals, drugs, and petroleum wholesaling.
         Columns 4-6 display the corresponding calculations, using data from the Census of Manufacturers. While
both the sample and the definition of internal shares differ between columns 1-3 and columns 4-6, the cross-industry


                                                           46
patterns of internal shares are similar across the two sets of calculations. Paper, transportation equipment, and
primary metals manufacturing are some of the more vertically integrated industries; furniture manufacturing and
printing are two of the least vertically integrated.
         The petroleum industry is a bit of an outlier, and deserves extra attention. Petroleum is an industry that has
one of the highest internal shares in columns 1-3, but one of the lowest internal shares in columns 4-6. This
difference results from the different definitions of internal shipments across the two datasets. The Interplant
Transfers variable, collected in the Census of Manufacturers, asks plants to give the value of shipments sent to other
manufacturing plants for further assembly. Since shipments by petroleum manufacturers are mainly sent to
wholesalers, and not to other manufacturers, the internal shares computed from the Census of Manufacturers tend to
be significantly smaller than the internal shares computed using data from the Commodity Flow Survey.


C.5. Firm Size Differences by Firm Structure
         Figure A1 plots the densities of firm size (logged total employment, since revenue is unavailable outside of
manufacturing) for three mutually exclusive and exhaustive sets of multi-establishment firms. One set includes
firms with vertical ownership structures.36 The other two multi-unit organizational structures are single-industry and
multi-industry-unintegrated firms.37
         The figure reveals that each of the (logged) employment size distributions is unimodal, though they clearly
have different central tendencies.38 Single-industry multi-unit firms are the smallest and have the most symmetric
size distribution. Vertically integrated firms are clearly the largest on average, and their distribution is more skewed
than the other firm types. (While not plotted, single-establishment firms are smaller than the multi-unit single-
industry firms, as one might expect.) Thus not only are vertically integrated plants larger, their firms are as well.


C.6. Flows of Intangible Inputs
         In our product mix and shipment destination tests, we use the following algorithm to identify plants that
experienced ownership changes. From the Longitudinal Business Database, we begin with all establishments for
which the firm identifier changes between t and t+1. Since firm identifiers may change across years for a number of
reasons, we need to discard the observations which are unrelated to mergers or acquisitions. 39 To identify actual


36
   Recall that we define vertical ownership at the plant, not firm level. For our purposes here, however, we define a
firm as vertically structured if it owns any vertically linked establishments. As a practical matter, most plants in
what we call vertically structured firms here are also in vertical chains according to our plant-specific definition.
37
  The distribution of plants across these firm sets is as follows. Over the entire manufacturing sample, multi-unit
plants of all types accounted for 19.7 percent of establishments, 71.8 percent of employment, and 86.5 percent of the
capital stock. Vertically integrated plants’ shares were, respectively, 14.3, 60.1, and 79.1 percent. Multi-unit single-
industry plants accounted for 2.8 percent of establishments and 5.1 and 3.2 percent of employment and capital, while
multi-industry unintegrated plants comprised 3.9, 8.3, and 5.5 percent of establishments, employment, and capital.
38
   We only plot the 1997 distributions rather than those pooled across years in order to remove any secular shifts in
firm sizes. Checks of other years show similarly shaped distributions.
39
  For example, legal reorganizations may cause a change in firm identifiers without an actual change in ownership.
For an additional example, multi-unit and single-unit firms are coded differently by the Census: a single-unit

                                                           47
changes in ownership, we consider the set of establishments that have the same firm identifier as that establishment
in years t and t+1. For these establishments, we say that a change of ownership has occurred if they share the same
firm identifier with some other set of establishments in period t+1, but not in period t. We define the other set of
establishments to be an acquiring firm, if their firm identifier is the same in both years t and t+1.40
         Here, we complement our analysis in the main text of summary data on changes in product mix and
shipment destinations among acquired plants with more formal analyses. In Table A4, we estimate the probability
that plant i will produce a given 7-digit product in year t as a function of the year t-5 production patterns of the
acquiring and acquired firms. We find a plant is more likely to produce a product in year t if either the acquiring or
the acquired firm was producing the product. The probability that an acquired plant produces a given 7-digit
product in year t is 6 percent higher for products that were produced by the acquiring firm in year t-5. Compared to
other products in their industry, acquired establishments are also more likely to produce the products that its original
firm was producing. The probability that establishment i produces a given 7-digit product is 7 percent higher for
products that were produced in year t-5 by some other establishments of the acquired firm.
         To further explore the evolution of acquired establishments’ shipping patterns, we run a series of logit
regressions to estimate the probability that an acquired plant i will ship to any particular zip code z in 1997. In these
regressions, the variables of interest measure the shipping patterns of the acquiring and acquired firms in 1993. In
addition, we include the following variables as controls: establishment-by-destination-county fixed effects; controls
for total sales to zip code z as well as the great-circle distance between i and z, an indicator variable equal to one if
there exists an establishment from the same firm in 1997, and an indicator variable equal to one if establishment i
shipped to z in 1993.
         Table A5 contains the results from these regressions. An establishment is significantly more likely to ship
to a zip code if either the acquiring or acquired firm sold to that zip code in previous years. The probability that
plant i sells to zip code z in 1997 is 1.2 percent higher when an establishment from the acquiring firm sold to that zip
code in 1993. The estimated marginal effect is significantly larger, 9.6 percent, if the establishment from the
acquiring firm shares the same 4-digit industry as the acquired establishment. Finally, these marginal effects are
economically meaningful. The average probability that an acquired establishment in our sample sells to a particular
zip code is 4.0 percent. Furthermore, the acquired plant i is more likely to ship to the zip codes that it used to sell to,
and to the zip codes that other plants in the acquired firm were selling to.
         We also estimate these logit regressions with different subsets of the sample of acquired establishments. In


establishment that opens a new establishment elsewhere will have its firm identifier change, again without any
change in ownership.
40
  An example will help explain how the algorithm works. Consider a two-establishment firm with establishment
identifiers I1 and I2, and firm identifier F in year t, and firm identifier G in year t+1. If there are no other
establishments in year t+1 that have firm identifier G, then the algorithm would not identify a change of ownership.
On the other hand, if there exists some establishment, I3 that had firm identifier G in year t, our algorithm would
identify I3 as the sole establishment in the acquiring firm; I1 and I2 would then be classified as members of the
acquired firm. Using a different method, Nguyen (1998) constructs a sample of acquired establishments, called the
Ownership Change Database. As a robustness check, we re-create Tables A5 and A6 using the Ownership Change
Database. The results are presented in the final columns of Tables A6 and A7.

                                                            48
Table A6, we re-estimate the probability than a plant manufacturers a given 7-digit product. Again, we cut the data
according to the year of the acquisition (column 1 versus column 2). We also run the logit regression separately for
plants that were in multi-unit firms and single-unit firms (column 3 versus column 4). Finally, we use a dataset—the
Ownership Change Database constructed by Sang V. Nguyen of the Census Bureau, as the source of acquired
establishments. Coefficient estimates are similar across the different subsamples. In particular, in each
specification, the probability that plant i manufactures a particular 7-digit product is at least 5.5 percent larger when
the acquiring firm had a plant that, in year t-5, produced that same product.
         Table A7 presents robustness checks related to the estimation of the probability that an acquired
establishment ships to a particular zip code. In the first two columns, we show that the estimated effects are similar
for plants that merge earlier or later on. In the third and fourth columns, we show that the estimated effects are
similar for establishments that were, in 1992, part of a multi-unit or a single-unit firm.41 In the fifth column, we
estimate the probability of shipping to a particular zip code for plants in the wholesale, instead of the manufacturing,
sector. For wholesalers, the coefficient on the indicator that another establishment in the same 2- (or 4-) digit SIC
sells to z in 1993 is statistically indistinguishable from 0. Finally, in the sixth column, there is no substantial
difference in the estimated effects from using the Ownership Change Database to define the set of acquired
establishments.




41
  Since, in the fourth column, the sample includes only establishments that are in single-unit firms in 1992, the I(in
1993, another establishment, from the acquired firm, shipped to z) indicator is 0 for all plants. Thus, this variable is
excluded from the list of independent variables.

                                                            49
Table A1. Plant-Level Shares of Internal Shipments: Additional Robustness Checks

                                                     Percentile
                                                                                                               Approx.
 Specification/Sample               25th      50th      75th       90th     95th    Frac. = 0    Frac. = 1      Plant-
                                                                                                                years
 1. 10% cutoff definition for
                                   0.0%      0.0%      4.4%       28.7%   58.8%       55.1%        0.8%        43,000
 VI
 2. 15% cutoff definition for
                                   0.0%      0.0%      4.3%       27.3%   55.3%       55.0%        0.7%        34,000
 VI
 3. 20% cutoff definition for
                                   0.0%      0.0%      4.5%       28.2%   55.1%       55.1%        0.7%        27,000
 VI

 4. Interplant transfers           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     0.0%       97.8%        0.1%        766,000

 5. Interplant transfers, plants
                                   0.0%      0.0%      0.0%       13.2%   51.1%       76.6%        1.1%        37,000
 surveyed in CFS

 6. Plants that are in the CMF     0.0%      0.0%      6.2%       33.7%   64.5%       50.9%        1.1%        37,000

 7. Plants that are in the CFM,
                                   0.0%      0.0%      0.3%       11.7%   33.5%       71.1%        1.1%        37,000
 shipments to manufacturers
 8. Don’t require the sending
 and receiving establishments      0.0%      3.0%     19.4%       59.2%   84.8%       29.1%        2.1%        68,000
 to be part of a vertical link
 9. Original method for
                                   0.0%      0.0%      1.0%       17.4%   44.5%       67.5%        0.8%        30,000
 defining vertical links
 10. Original method for
 defining vertical links &
 Don’t require the sending and     0.0%      2.5%     18.9%       57.7%   84.0%       33.7%        2.1%        30,000
 receiving establishments to
 be part of a vertical link.

Notes: Each row shows for a different subsample the distributions of the shares (by dollar value) of upstream integrated
establishments’ shipments that are internal to the firm. The criteria for inclusion in and size of each subsample is discussed in the
text. For data confidentiality reasons, the reported percentiles are averages of immediately surrounding percentiles; e.g., the
median = 0.5*(49th percentile + 51st percentile).
Table A2. Relative Material Use Intensity Ranks between Plants in Vertical Ownership Structures and Other Plants

                                                   Material’s intensity rank in non-vertically linked plants
                                             1                2                3                 4              5
                            1             50.5%            13.7%             8.0%             4.5%            3.3%
                            2             14.7%            26.1%            15.4%            10.1%            6.0%
   Material’s
                            3              8.1%            14.7%            19.1%            13.2%            9.8%
intensity rank in
                            4              5.6%            10.6%            12.1%            14.8%           11.8%
vertically linked
                            5              3.1%             6.5%             9.6%            11.2%           11.3%
      plants
                            6              3.2%             5.1%             6.5%             7.9%           10.4%
                            7              2.2%             4.3%             5.9%             6.4%            7.3%

Notes: This table shows, for a sample of 9545 industry-material-year cells, the ranks of materials intensity use (by share of
materials purchases) for the five most intensively used materials in plants we define as not in vertical ownership structures. The
entries in the table correspond to the fraction of cells where vertical and non-vertical plants in the same industry share a particular
pair of materials intensity rankings. For example, across all industry-years in the sample, the most intensively used (rank 1)
material by non-vertical plants in an industry-year is the most intensively used material by the industry-year’s vertical plants 50.5
percent of the time. Non-vertical plants’ rank 1 material is vertical plants’ second most intensively used material 14.7 percent of
the time, and so on.
Table A3. Plant-Level Shares of Internal Shipments, by Industry


                             Using Commodity Flow Survey Data           Using Census of Manufacturers Data

                           Fraction of                  Mean share,   Fraction of                Mean share,
        Industry            plants w/    Mean share      cond. on      plants w/    Mean share    cond. on
                            share > 0                    share > 0     share > 0                  share > 0
12, Coal Mining              26.0%          10.6%          40.8%

14, Stone                    27.7%          6.6%           23.7%

20, Food                     52.4%          11.0%          20.9%        3.7%          3.5%         13.9%

22, Fabric                   50.5%          17.4%          34.4%        8.3%          20.5%        53.1%

23, Apparel                  32.9%          6.6%           19.9%        0.8%          4.3%         46.4%

24, Wood                     31.1%          6.1%           19.5%        1.4%          4.7%         27.3%

25, Furniture                16.1%          1.6%           10.2%        0.9%          0.9%         10.1%

26, Paper                    40.4%          5.6%           13.9%        11.1%         10.0%        25.1%

27, Printing                 21.6%          2.4%           11.2%        0.3%          0.6%         16.7%

28, Chemicals                49.2%          8.3%           16.9%        6.4%          7.5%         19.4%

29, Petroleum                76.8%          28.8%          37.5%        8.8%          3.0%          6.8%

30, Plastics                 28.0%          4.4%           15.8%        4.0%          3.4%         18.0%

31, Leather                  38.0%          11.2%          29.6%        1.3%          3.7%         31.3%

32, Glass, Stone             38.5%          6.1%           15.9%        1.5%          4.0%         25.0%

33, Primary Metals           48.9%          8.4%           17.2%        7.6%          11.0%        26.1%

34, Fabr.Metals              26.7%          5.4%           20.3%        2.1%          6.1%         34.2%

35, Ind. Machinery           40.8%          4.8%           11.9%        1.3%          4.4%         18.8%

36, Elc. Equipment           46.4%          7.1%           15.3%        3.5%          6.5%         26.3%

37, Trans. Equip.            65.6%          11.2%          17.2%        4.5%          9.4%         28.6%

38, Instruments              43.8%          6.7%           15.4%        2.2%          3.3%         11.4%

39, Miscellaneous            11.9%          2.2%           18.4%        0.5%          1.1%         13.3%

501, Vehicles                52.7%          6.7%           12.7%

502, Furniture               17.5%          2.2%           12.5%

503, Lumber                  17.9%          1.5%           8.4%

504, Prof. Equip.            31.4%          5.1%           16.1%

505, Metals                  24.3%          2.0%           8.4%

506, Electrical              34.4%          3.5%           10.0%
507, Hardware                 25.3%            2.8%           10.9%

508, Machinery                29.1%            2.9%           10.0%

509, Miscellaneous             8.7%            1.1%           13.1%

511, Paper                    34.8%            2.5%           7.2%

512, Drugs                    26.5%            1.3%           5.0%

513, Apparel                  27.6%            3.5%           12.8%

514, Groceries                32.3%            6.8%           21.0%

516, Chemicals                33.1%           12.6%           38.0%

517, Petroleum                20.4%            1.8%           8.8%

518, Beer & Wine              52.9%           17.2%           32.5%

519, Miscellaneous            11.1%            1.2%           11.0%

Note: Each row shows, for a different SIC industry, the fraction of plants that have positive internal shipments, as well as the
average share of internal shipments. Industries in the mining and manufacturing sectors are averaged over 2-digit industries.
Industries in the wholesale sector are averaged over 3-digit industries.
Table A4. Logit Regression: Probability Plant i Produces a Given 7-digit Product in Year t

                                                                        1.215*           0.921*          1.058*
               I(estab. produced 6-digit product in t-5)                (0.037)          (0.038)         (0.039)
                                                                         0.086            0.052           0.063
                                                                        2.366*           2.189*          2.189*
               I(estab. produced 7-digit product in t-5)                (0.036)          (0.037)         (0.037)
                                                                         0.422            0.400           0.399
                                                                                         0.321*          0.321*
               I(in t-5, another estab. from the acquired firm
                                                                                         (0.059)         (0.059)
               produced the 6-digit product)
                                                                                          0.018           0.018
                                                                                         0.113*          0.113*
               I(in t-5, an estab. from the acquiring firm
                                                                                         (0.054)         (0.054)
               produced the 6-digit product)
                                                                                          0.006           0.006
                                                                                                         0.608*
               I(in t-5, another estab. from the acquired firm
                                                                                                         (0.054)
               produced the 7-digit product)
                                                                                                          0.052
                                                                                                         0.702*
               I(in t-5, an estab. from the acquiring firm
                                                                                                         (0.051)
               produced the 7-digit product)
                                                                                                          0.053
               Approx. N                                               140,000          140,000          140,000
               Approx. number of establishment-by-4-digit
                                                                        7,600            7,600            7,600
               industry groups
               Pseudo R2                                                0.353            0.363            0.368
               Average probability that i produces the 7-digit
                                                                        13.1%            13.1%           13.1%
               good in year t

Notes: Each column gives the results from a separate logit regression. The dependent variable equals 1 provided plant i produces
7-digit product, p, in year t. The sample includes all i-p pairs for which a) i was purchased between t-5 and t-1, and b) product p
was produced at least such acquired plant in year t. Controls for total sales in year t of the 7-digit product (minus sales of the
product by plant i) are included, but not reported. t ∈ {1987, 1992}. All regressions include establishment-by-4-digit-product
fixed effects. An asterisk denotes significance at a five percent level.
Table A5. Logit Regression: Probability that Plant i Ships to Zip Code z in 1997


                                           2.357*       2.226*        2.215*       2.212*       2.176*        2.223*
 I(estab. i sold to zip code z in 1993)    (0.017)      (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.039)       (0.020)
                                            0.178        0.156         0.154        0.153        0.155         0.153
                                           1.141*       0.988*        0.986*       0.982*       1.292*        0.794*
 I(in 1997, a estab. from the merged
                                           (0.030)      (0.031)       (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.050)       (0.039)
 firm has a physical location in z)
                                            0.047       0.0377         0.037        0.037        0.059         0.027
                                           -0.127*      -0.114*      -0.112*       -0.112*       0.007        -0.152*
 ln(distance)                              (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.037)       (0.019)
                                            -0.003       -0.003       -0.003        -0.003       0.000         -0.003
                                            1.141        0.987         0.986        0.982        1.292         0.794
 I(there is a plant in the downstream
                                           (0.030)      (0.031)       (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.050)       (0.039)
 zip code in z)
                                            0.047        0.037         0.037        0.037        0.059         0.027
                                                        1.1299*       0.802*       0.801*       0.587*        0.872*
 I(in 1993, another estab. from the
                                                        (0.024)       (0.044)      (0.044)      (0.090)       (0.051)
 acquired firm shipped to z)
                                                         0.046         0.027        0.027        0.019          0.03
                                                        0.638*        0.435*       0.432*       0.480*        0.417*
 I(in 1993, an estab. from the
                                                        (0.017)       (0.022)      (0.022)      (0.045)       (0.025)
 acquiring firm shipped to z)
                                                         0.02          0.012        0.012        0.014         0.011
 I(in 1993, another estab. in the same                                0.454*       0.155*       0.298*         0.114
 2-digit SIC, from the acquired firm                                  (0.051)      (0.068)      (0.126)       (0.082)
 shipped to z)                                                         0.027        0.008        0.014         0.006
 I(in 1993, an estab. in the same 2-                                  0.420*       0.187*       0.186*        0.182*
 digit SIC, from the acquiring firm                                   (0.029)      (0.034)      (0.064)       (0.041)
 shipped to z)                                                         0.017        0.007        0.007         0.007
 I(in 1993, another estab. in the same                                             0.406*        0.422*       0.401*
 4-digit SIC, from the acquired firm                                               (0.061)       (0.109       (0.074)
 shipped to z)                                                                      0.027         0.028        0.027
 I(in 1993, an estab. in the same 4-                                               0.526*       0.659*        0.454*
 digit SIC, from the acquiring firm                                                (0.040)      (0.071)       (0.049)
 shipped to z)                                                                      0.027        0.039         0.022

 Include establishments with (or                                                                Internal     Internal
                                            Both         Both          Both         Both
 without) internal shipments?                                                                   Share>0      Share=0
                                            1.45         1.45          1.45         1.45         0.31          1.14
 Approx. N
                                           million      million       million      million      million       million
 Number of establishment-by-
                                           46,500       46,500        46,500       46,500        10,500       36,000
 destination counties
 Pseudo R2                                  0.178        0.189        0.190         0.191        0.203         0.188
 Average probability that i ships to z
                                            4.0%         4.0%          4.0%         4.0%          4.0%         4.0%
 in 1997

Each column gives the results from a separate logit regression. The dependent variable equals 1 provided plant i ships to zip code
z in 1997. The sample includes all i-z pairs for which i was purchased between 1992 and 1996, and z was a destination zip code
for at least one such acquired plant in 1997. Controls for total sales in zip code z (minus sales from plant i) are included, but not
reported. All regressions include establishment-destination county fixed effects. An asterisk denotes significance at a five percent
level.
Table A6. Logit Regression: Probability Plant i Produces a Given 7-digit Product in Year t; Robustness Checks

                                                    1.086*          1.022*         1.066*         1.009*          1.046*
      I(estab. produced 6-digit product in t-5)     (0.051)         (0.061)        (0.042)        (0.103)         (0.034)
                                                     0.070           0.060          0.064          0.064           0.057

                                                    2.093*          2.326*         2.181*         2.241*          2.379*
      I(estab. produced 7-digit product in t-5)     (0.049)         (0.058)        (0.040)        (0.101)         (0.032)
                                                     0.391           0.427          0.399          0.418           0.427

      I(in t-5, another estab. from the             0.306*          0.336*         0.317*                         0.343*
      acquired firm produced the 6-digit            (0.074)         (0.097)        (0.059)                        (0.051)
      product)                                       0.018           0.019          0.018                          0.018

                                                     -0.054         0.343*          0.090          0.224           0.065
      I(in t-5, an estab. from the acquiring
                                                    (0.072)         (0.083)        (0.058)        (0.142)         (0.058)
      firm produced the 6-digit product)
                                                     -0.003          0.020          0.005          0.013           0.003

      I(in t-5, another estab. from the             0.599*          0.631*         0.612*                         0.644*
      acquired firm produced the 7-digit            (0.069)         (0.087)        (0.055)                        (0.047)
      product)                                       0.053           0.056          0.052                          0.052

                                                    0.752*          0.651*         0.675*         0.879*          0.787*
      I(in t-5, an estab. from the acquiring
                                                    (0.068)         (0.077)        (0.055)        (0.139)         (0.055)
      firm produced the 7-digit product)
                                                     0.054           0.056          0.050          0.073           0.055
      Year of merger                               t-5 to t-3      t-2 to t-1     t-5 to t-1      t-5 to t-1     t-5 to t-1
      Multi-unit/single unit in t-5?                 Either         Either          Multi          Single         Either
      Use Ownership Change Database to
                                                      No              No             No              No            Yes
      define mergers?
      Approx. N                                     83,000          57,000         119,000         21,000        215,000
      Approx. number of establishment-by-4-
                                                     4,700          2,900           6,600          1,000          10,600
      digit-industry groups
      Pseudo R2                                      0.353          0.391           0.375          0.322           0.385
      Average probability that i produces the
                                                     13.2%          13.0%          13.3%           11.8%          11.8%
      7-digit good in t

Notes: Each column gives the results from a separate logit regression. The dependent variable equals 1 provided plant i produces
7-digit product, p, in year t. The sample includes all i-p pairs for which a) i was purchased between t-5 and t-1, and b) product p
was produced at least such acquired plant in year t. Controls for total sales in year t of the 7-digit product (minus sales of the
product by plant i) are included, but not reported. See text for details. t {1987, 1992}. All regressions include establishment-4-
digit product fixed effects. An asterisk denotes significance at a five percent level.
Table A7. Logit Regressions: Probability Plant i Ships to Zip Code z in 1997. Robustness Checks

                                              2.184*       2.249*      2.201*       2.304*        1.489*       2.263*
 I(Estab. i sold to zip code z in 1993)       (0.023)      (0.027)     (0.019)      (0.057)       (0.027)      (0.015)
                                               0.155        0.152       0.151        0.146         0.132        0.174

                                              0.547*       0.526*      1.003*       0.600*        1.192*       0.991*
 I(in 1997, an estab. from the merged
                                              (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.031)      (0.142)       (0.055)      (0.030)
 firm has a physical location in z)
                                               0.013        0.012       0.038        0.016         0.095        0.041

                                             -0.100*       -0.126*     -0.100*      -0.228*       -0.104*      -0.096*
 ln(distance)                                (0.022)       (0.026)     (0.018)      (0.052)       (0.021)      (0.015)
                                              -0.002        -0.003      -0.002       -0.004        -0.005       -0.002

                                              0.842*       0.746*      0.805*                     0.777*       0.558*
 I(in 1993, another estab. from the
                                              (0.058)      (0.068)     (0.044)                    (0.124)      (0.037)
 acquired firm shipped to z)
                                               0.030        0.024       0.027                      0.051        0.018

                                              0.458*       0.406*      0.434*       0.408*        0.595*       0.462*
 I(in 1993, an estab. from the
                                              (0.030)      (0.032)     (0.022)      (0.085)       (0.046)      (0.024)
 acquiring firm shipped to z)
                                               0.013        0.011       0.012        0.010         0.036        0.014

 I(in 1993, another estab. in the same         0.080       0.262*      0.161*                      0.187       0.384*
 2-digit SIC, from the acquired firm          (0.090)      (0.105)     (0.068)                    (0.206)      (0.052)
 shipped to z)                                 0.004        0.013       0.008                      0.018        0.019

 I(in 1993, an estab. in the same 2-          0.162*       0.217*      0.187*        0.184         -0.025      0.158*
 digit SIC, from the acquiring firm           (0.046)      (0.051)     (0.036)      (0.129)       (0.092)      (0.038)
 shipped to z)                                 0.006        0.008       0.007        0.005         -0.002       0.007

 I(in 1993, another estab. in the same        0.538*       0.216*      0.402*                      0.015       0.450*
 4-digit SIC, from the acquired firm          (0.080)      (0.094)     (0.061)                    (0.173)      (0.047)
 shipped to z)                                 0.038        0.013       0.027                      0.002        0.033

 I(in 1993, an estab. in the same 4-          0.637*       0.381*      0.513*       0.642*         -0.013      0.552*
 digit SIC, from the acquiring firm           (0.053)      (0.062)     (0.042)      (0.133)       (0.121)      (0.045)
 shipped to z)                                 0.036        0.017       0.026        0.030         -0.001       0.032
 Year of merger                              92-94        95-96         92-96        92-96         92-96        92-96
 Multi-unit/single unit in 1992?             Either       Either        Multi        Single       Either        Either
 Manufacturing/wholesale?                   Manuf.        Manuf.       Manuf.       Manuf.        Whole.       Manuf.
 Use Ownership Change Database to
                                               No           No           No            No           No           Yes
 define mergers?
 Approx. N                                  869,000      589,000        1.31m       147,000      255,000        1.98m
 Approx. number of establishment-by-
                                             28,000       18,000       42,000        4,700        11,000       65,000
 destination counties
 Pseudo R2                                   0.192         0.190        0.193        0.179         0.138        0.183
 Average probability that i ships to z
                                              4.0%         4.0%         4.0%          4.0%         7.8%         4.1%
 in 1997

Notes: Each column gives the results from a separate logit regression. The dependent variable equals 1 provided plant i ships to
zip code z in 1997. The sample includes all i-z pairs for which i was purchased between 1992 and 1996, and z was a destination
zip code for at least one such acquired plant in 1997. Controls for total sales in zip code z (minus sales from plant i) are included
but not reported. All regressions include establishment-destination-county fixed effects. An asterisk denotes significance at a
five percent level.
Figure A1. Firm Size Distributions by Organizational Structure




Notes: This figure shows density plots of the firm size distributions (measured by logged total employees) for the three types of
multi-establishment firms: single-industry, multi-establishment firms (thick, dashed line); multi-industry, non-VI firms (thin,
dashed line); and VI firms (thin, solid line). See text for details.
