NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ANATOMY OF A CREDIT CRISIS:
THE BOOM AND BUST IN FARM LAND PRICES IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE 1920S.
Raghuram Rajan
Rodney Ramcharan
Working Paper 18027
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18027

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012

We thank Eric Hardy, Lieu Hazelwood, Fang-Yu Liang, Maxim Massenkoff, and Michelle
Welch for excellent research assistance, and for comments from participants in the Basel RTF
Conference, Cornell, Chicago Finance lunch, FDIC, Federal Reserve Board, Harvard PIEP
conference, IMF, INSEAD, the Paris School of Economics, and the NBER Macro Workshop.
Rajan benefited from grants from the Stigler Center for the Study of the State and the Economy,
from the Initiative on Global Markets, and from the National Science Foundation. Thanks to
Craig Brown, Raquel Fernandez, Paul Kupiec, Amit Seru and Amir Sufi for helpful comments,
and to Ravi, many years ago. The views in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the
Federal Reserve System, the Reserve Bank of India, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Raghuram Rajan and Rodney Ramcharan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Anatomy of a Credit Crisis: The Boom and Bust in Farm Land Prices in the United States
in the 1920s.
Raghuram Rajan and Rodney Ramcharan
NBER Working Paper No. 18027
April 2012, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G01,G21,N1
ABSTRACT
Does credit availability exacerbate asset price inflation? Are there long run consequences?
During the farm land price boom and bust before the Great Depression, we find that credit
availability directly inflated land prices. Credit also amplified the relationship between positive
fundamentals and land prices, leading to greater indebtedness. When fundamentals soured, areas
with higher credit availability suffered a greater fall in land prices and had more bank failures.
Land prices and credit availability also remained disproportionately low for decades in these
areas, suggesting that leverage might render temporary credit induced booms and busts persistent.
We draw lessons for regulatory policy.

Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
Rodney Ramcharan
University of Southern California
rramchar@marshall.usc.edu

The Anatomy of a Credit Crisis: The Boom and Bust
in Farm Land Prices in the United States in the
1920s.1

Raghuram Rajan

Rodney Ramcharan

(Chicago Booth and RBI)

(Federal Reserve Board)
Abstract

Does credit availability exacerbate asset price inflation? Are there long run consequences?
During the farm land price boom and bust before the Great Depression, we find that credit
availability directly inflated land prices. Credit also amplified the relationship between
positive fundamentals and land prices, leading to greater indebtedness. When fundamentals
soured, areas with higher credit availability suffered a greater fall in land prices and had
more bank failures. Land prices and credit availability also remained disproportionately
low for decades in these areas, suggesting that leverage might render temporary credit
induced booms and busts persistent. We draw lessons for regulatory policy.
Asset price booms and busts often center around changes in credit availability (see,
for example, the descriptions in Kindleberger and Aliber (2005) and Minsky (1986),
theories such as Geanakoplos (2009), and the evidence in Borio and Lowe (2002), Mian and
Sufi (2008), and Taylor and Schularick (2009)). Some economists, however, claim that the
availability of credit plays little role in asset price movements (see, for example, Glaeser,
1

We thank Eric Hardy, Lieu Hazelwood, Fang-Yu Liang, Maxim Massenkoff, and Michelle Welch for
excellent research assistance, and for comments from participants in the Basel RTF Conference,
Cornell, Chicago Finance lunch, FDIC, Federal Reserve Board, Harvard PIEP conference, IMF, INSEAD,
the Paris School of Economics, and the NBER Macro Workshop. Rajan benefited from grants from the
Stigler Center for the Study of the State and the Economy, from the Initiative on Global Markets, and
from the National Science Foundation. Thanks to Craig Brown, Raquel Fernandez, Paul Kupiec, Amit
Seru and Amir Sufi for helpful comments, and to Ravi, many years ago. The views in this paper do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or the Reserve Bank of India.

Gottleb and Gyourko (2010)). In this paper, we examine the boom (and bust) of farm land
prices in the United States in the early twentieth century, using the variation in credit
availability across counties in the United States to tease out the short- and long-run effects
of the availability of credit on asset prices.

The usual difficulty in drawing general lessons from episodes of booms and busts in
different countries is that each crisis is sui generis, driven by differences in a broad range of
hard-to-control-for factors. The advantage of focusing on farm lending in the United States
in the early twentieth century is that lending was local. So in effect, we have a large number
of distinctive sub-economies, specifically, counties within each state, with some common
(and thus constant) broad influences such as monetary policy and federal fiscal policy.
Ceteris paribus, the more the banks in a county, the greater is the competition for depositor
funds as well as the competition to offer credit, and closer is any bank to a potential
customer, hence greater is the potential supply of intermediated funds. So our proxy for
credit availability, through much of the paper, will be the log number of banks in a county.
We rely on differences in bank regulations across states and Federal Reserve districts to
allow us to isolate exogenous differences in credit availability.
In addition, we have an exogenous boom and bust in agricultural commodity prices
in the years 1917-1920, to which counties were differentially exposed. The reasons for the
commodity price rise are well documented. The emergence of the United States as an
economic power helped foster a worldwide boom in commodities in the early 20th century.
The boom, especially in the prices of wheat and other grains, accelerated as World War I
disrupted European agriculture, even while demand in the United States was strong. The
Russian Revolution in 1917 further exacerbated the uncertainty about supply, and
intensified the commodity price boom. However, European agricultural production
resumed faster than expected after the war’s sudden end, and desperate for hard currency,
the new Russian government soon recommenced wheat and other commodity exports. As a
result, agricultural commodity prices plummeted starting in 1920 and declined through
much of the 1920s (Blattman, Hwang and Williamson (2007), Yergin (1992)). 2

Because different counties differed in the kind of crops they were most suited to
produce, and each crop was affected to a different extent by the events in Europe, we have
county by county variation in the perceived shock to fundamentals. Correcting for
differences in the positive shock to fundamentals, we can tease out the effect of the
availability of credit on land prices in 1920 (the peak of the boom). We find that both
fundamentals and credit availability mattered, but there was also a positive interaction
effect; the shock generally boosted land prices even more in counties that had greater credit
availability. We also explore the channels through which credit might have operated –
whether it allowed marginal land to be brought into operation, facilitated the more
intensive use of existing land, allowed more investment in machinery, improved crop yields,
or facilitated more leverage. Credit availability seems to be primarily associated with higher
leverage at the peak of the boom.
2

The price of a bushel of wheat fell from $3.08 in May 1920 to $1.68 in December; corn fell from $2.00 to $0.76 over the same
period (Benner (1925)).

2

The post-1920 collapse in commodity prices, induced by the resumption of
European production, also allows us to examine the aftermath of the boom. Importantly,
agricultural incomes fell, but only to levels before the acceleration in commodity price
growth that started in 1917. This allows us to focus on the role of the financial leverage –
both at the farm level and at the bank level – that built up in the boom years. If the role of
credit is relatively benign – borrowers simply sell the assets they had bought and repay
credit – we should see relatively little independent effect of the prior availability of credit on
asset prices, other than what rises the most falls the most. But if purchased assets are
illiquid and hard to sell, and leverage cannot be brought down easily, we should see prices
fall even more in areas that had easy access to credit. Also, distress, as evidenced in bank
failures, should be more pronounced.

This is indeed what we find – bank failures were significantly greater in areas that
had greater credit availability during the commodity price boom. Perhaps most important,
we find that the credit-fueled boom and bust is associated with lower land prices, fewer
banks, and a more concentrated banking system decades after the episode, suggesting that
the role of leverage and financial institutional distress is substantial and long lasting indeed.

Our evidence clearly suggests that greater credit availability tends to make the
system more sensitive to all shocks, whether temporary or permanent, rational or
otherwise. Prudent risk management might then suggest regulators should “lean against the
wind” in areas where the perceived changes to fundamentals as well as credit availability
are seen to be extreme, so as to avoid the long-drawn fallout if the shock happens to be
temporary.

More broadly, in-state variation in the number of banks in a county represents
variations in the financial development of local credit markets. At the same time, within a
state these markets had common levels of regulation and supervision. The greater
susceptibility of more developed credit markets, given a level of supervision, to booms and
busts fueled by leverage suggests perhaps rethinking any residual confidence we may have
(after the financial crises that started in 2007) in market self-correction. More developed
credit markets need better regulation and supervision. As industrial countries recover from
the leverage built up before the crises, and recognize that the effects will be borne by future
generations, this implication from history may be worth taking seriously.
Finally, why history? Obviously, the long run consequences of financial disaster can
only be investigated for episodes from the distant past. Equally important, history offers
regulatory peculiarities (for example, the prohibition on inter-state banking) that allow us
to identify the effects of credit availability. Finally, the commodity price boom and bust
towards the end of World War I offers an exogenous temporary (and fully reversed) shock
to fundamentals that allows us to see what the consequences of financial leverage built up
in the interim might be. Clearly, the lessons from this episode are relevant today.

The rest of the paper is as follows. In section I, we provide an overview of the
theoretical literature and the main predictions, the historical episode we focus on, and the
data we use. In section II, we describe the basic tests on the importance of credit availability
for land prices during the boom. In section III, we identify the causal effect of credit
availability using the variation provided by banking regulation. In section IV we examine
3

both the dynamics of the effects of credit availability and the commodity price run up, their
interaction, as well as the other channels through which credit mattered. In section V we
focus on the collapse in commodity prices, the consequent banking sector distress, and the
long run effect on land prices and credit availability. We conclude in section VI.

I. Theories, Historical Background, and Data

1.1. Theories
Land purchases are large-ticket items. Purchasers typically require credit, which
makes the demand for land, and its price, dependent on credit availability (Stein (1995)).
Greater credit availability could also increase fundamental value; the productivity of land,
and hence its value, may increase if more people can borrow to buy land. For instance, land
ownership could migrate to the more skilled rather than the merely rich, as the skilled
become better able to finance purchases. Also, tenants or farm workers could buy land off
landlords, eliminating the agency costs associated with tenancy or employment. The
distribution of land holdings could become more efficient with more widespread credit
availability if there were other sources of scale diseconomies in farming such as intensive
farming technologies. Finally, greater credit availability makes it easier to resell the asset,
rendering the land market more liquid, and embedding a liquidity premium in the price of
land in those areas (Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Williamson (1988), as also the evidence in
Rajan and Ramcharan (2014)).

It is reasonable to expect that the positive association between any exogenous
improvement in perceived fundamentals and land prices would be enhanced in areas with
greater credit availability. For one, when credit is more freely available, potential buyers
can borrow against more of the value of the underlying collateral (that is, loan to value
ratios are higher). An increase in fundamental values then translates into higher land prices
in areas where credit is more available. 3
There are also reasons why greater credit availability could push land prices even
above fundamentals, when expectations are shocked upwards. Geneakoplos (2009)
suggests that buyers tend to be the optimists in the population, restrained in their
enthusiasm for buying only by the funds they can access; greater credit availability allows
them to pay even more for the asset.

The nature of land markets may exacerbate these effects. Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003) argue that low transaction costs and a ban on short sales play a central role in
allowing disagreement over fundamentals and overconfidence to lead to speculative
trading: Investors bid up the price of land beyond their own assessment of its fundamental
value in the hope of a future sale to someone with a more optimistic valuation. Transaction
costs (of borrowing and buying) are likely to have been lower in areas with greater access
to credit, while nationwide, short selling in the land market was extremely difficult during
3

Consider, for example, a situation where sellers sell only for liquidity reasons, so they take what competitive buyers will pay.
In that case, the price of land will be determined by how much buyers can borrow. The better the credit availability, the more
the price will reflect the fundamental value. Hence the price of land varies more with fundamentals in areas with higher credit
availability (see, for example, Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) or Adrian and Shin (2008)).

4

this period. The trading gains from these transactions, as well as expectations of further
gains, could have pushed prices above fundamentals during periods of positive sentiment.

The above theories focus on buyer sentiment. Other theories focus on lender
behavior. Rajan (1994) models the competitive interaction between banks in an
environment where credit is expanding. Banks care about how their actions reveal
information about their ability. In good times, they are reluctant to stop “ever-greening” bad
loans or generating new loans, for they might risk revealing a lack of lending opportunities,
and consequently their lower ability. Therefore good times lead to excess credit. Since
creditworthy lending opportunities are widely known to be limited in bad times, all banks
have an incentive to take advantage of the more forgiving informational environment to cut
back on credit. Thus credit tends to follow cycles that amplify real shocks, both positive and
negative, especially in areas where banks are more competitive.

Collateral-based lending and theories of debt deflation (see the theory in Fisher
(1933), Bernanke and Gertler (1989), and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) as well as the
evidence in Adrian and Shin (2008)) also result in credit cycles that tend to amplify real
shocks. An initial shock to land prices leads to more borrower net worth, a greater ability to
borrow, and thus an amplification of the demand for land. On the way down, lower land
prices mean lower net worth, lower ability to borrow, and a significant contraction in
demand for land, further amplifying the price decline as fire sales push down prices. Finally,
borrower over-indebtedness could also work through an institutional channel – by causing
lending banks to fail, it could lead to a hard-to-overcome loss of institutional and
informational capital. It may be hard to set up new institutions with equally efficient
internal procedures and tacit information. If the information and experience the new
institution’s workers have of existing clients and lending is inadequate, the loss of credit
intermediation could cause more persistent economic damage.
1.2. Historical Description

Historians argue that the boom in land prices up to 1920 had its roots in optimism
that “…European producers would need a very long time to restore their pre-war
agricultural capacity…” (Johnson (1973, p178)). The national average of farmland values
was 68 percent higher in 1920 compared to 1914, and 22 percent higher compared to 1919.
However, the rapid agricultural recovery in Europe and elsewhere led to a collapse in
commodity prices and farm incomes. Farm incomes fell 60 percent from their peak in 1919
to their depth in 1921. Farm incomes did recover steadily after that. Indeed, by 1922, farm
incomes were back to the level they reached in 1916 and by 1929 were 45 percent higher
still (though still short of their 1919 levels). So the “depression” in agricultural incomes was
only relative to the heady levels reached in the period 1917-1920 (Johnson (1973), Alston,
Grove, and Wheelock (1994)).

Credit was widely available during the boom, as local banks as well as life insurance
companies and joint stock land banks competed in some areas to provide credit (Alston
(1983a, b)). Land speculation was rampant in many areas, and land prices doubled in some
places over the course of a few months at the height of the frenzy in 1918-1919 (Boyle
(1928)). Indeed, concerned about the speculative boom in land prices and the build-up of
leverage, the Federal Farm Loan Board, which supervised the newly created Federal land

5

banks, placed stringent limits on land appraisals and lending standards in 1919, forcing
appraisers to judge the “earning power” or dividend yield of the land based on its historical
average rather than “upon a war-time basis of prices for products.” As the speculative
frenzy intensified, the Board took the additional step of directly limiting leverage,
preventing its banks from lending more than $100 per acre on agricultural land in some
areas, even if the last sale price was upwards of $400 per acre. 4

Unfortunately, the conservatism at the Federal land banks was not widespread
across the banking system, and farmers took on substantial amounts of debt as they
expanded acreage in the boom times. Mortgage debt per acre increased 135% from 1910 to
1920, approximately the same rate of increase as the per acre value of the ten leading crops
(Alston, Grove, and Wheelock (1994) citing Federal Reserve documents). 5 Borrowers often
had to put down only 10 percent of the amount, obtaining 50 percent from a bank, and
getting a second or junior mortgage for the remainder (Johnson (1973)). Loan repayments
were typically bullet payments due only at maturity, so borrowers had to make only
interest payments until maturity. And as long as refinancing was easy, borrowers did not
worry about principal repayment. The long history of rising land prices gave lenders
confidence that they would be able to sell repossessed land easily if the borrower could not
pay, so they lent and refinanced willingly. Debt mounted until the collapse in commodity
prices put an end to the credit boom. 6

Thus we have here a perceived, largely exogenous, shock to fundamentals that
reversed itself. This allows us to document the longer term effects of the build-up of debt
on land prices and on bank failures, correcting for underlying fundamentals. But we can also
examine the more persistent effects of the failure of institutions and the loss of
organizational capital.
1.3. Data.

1.3.1. How important were banks in farm lending in 1920?
Informal sources of agricultural credit remained dominant in the United States even as
late as 1920, as farmers selling highly appreciated farm land often also provided credit—for
instance, a junior mortgage at favorable rates--to facilitate the sale (see Table 1A). Credit
from merchants and local landlords was also significant. Even so, commercial banks were
the single largest formal source of mortgage credit, originating about 52 percent of all farm
mortgage credit from institutions in the United States (and 17 percent of overall mortgage
credit).
4
5

Page 9 of the 1920 Annual Report of the Federal Farm Loan Board.

In dollar terms, mortgage debt on farms operated by owners increased from $2.3 billion in 1910 to $5.4 billion in 1920. The
average interest rate on this debt was around 6.1 percent, resulting in an annual debt service burden of $193 million (Boyle
(1928)).
6

There was also considerable debate at the time about the role of tight monetary policy in amplifying the impact of the price
collapse on the banking sector. To counter the speculative frenzy of 1919, and the sharp rise in inflation during the war years,
the Federal Reserve raised interest rates early in 1920 to 7 percent—the highest level in its history to that point. However,
once commodity prices collapsed in 1920, the Fed kept the discount rate unchanged from its historic high, even as liquidity
dried up in the country side amid a wave of bank failures (Davis (1921), Benner (1925) and Wicker (1966)).

6

The need for credit in agriculture extended well beyond land purchases. Because
incremental unfarmed land was limited, and labor was increasingly scarce as workers
migrated to cities, farmers during this period relied increasingly on newly available capital
intensive technologies such as tractors and other mechanized tools in order to raise
productivity (Benner (1926)). Local banks were a key source of capital for these new
investments, while remaining major providers of the traditional seasonal credit associated
with the agricultural cycle. Table 1B shows that these personal loans, either
uncollateralized, or collateralized using livestock and other personal property and termed
chattel mortgages, were over thrice the size of the real estate mortgage credit originated by
banks. This type of lending also grew dramatically as the farm boom intensified, as both
loans secured by real estate as well as personal and collateral loans doubled from 1914 to
1920. Banks therefore were important lenders in rural areas.
1.3.2. Local Credit Markets
The banking system's aggregate exposure to the agricultural sector was largely
driven by local banks lending within the community (see, for example, Garlock (1932)).
Detailed case studies based on surveys of banks as well as farmers across disparate
agricultural regions such as the grain counties of Iowa and the cotton areas of Jefferson
county in Arkansas suggest that local country banks—largely located in the same county as
the surveyed farmers—as well as local merchants and landlords were the primary sources
of working capital on many farms. For example, commercial banks and merchants, the latter
often re-lending credit obtained from the former, accounted for about 53 percent of the new
mortgage lending in one randomly surveyed township in Arkansas (Gile and Moore (1928)).
Also, short term seasonal credit, typically lasting about 7 months, was almost exclusively
supplied by local banks and merchants. 7
Representatives from life insurance companies and other centralized credit sources
did crisscross certain regions, originating real estate loans. But to reduce information costs,
centralized lenders tended to operate in areas where farming methods and land were
relatively homogenous. And while commercial banks and other geographically proximate
local lenders tended to concentrate on information intensive real estate loan origination
and the provision of farm investment and seasonal credit, centralized lenders tended to
focus on refinancing and other secondary lending activities (Horton et. al (1942)).
The local nature of rural credit reflects in part the fact that most real estate
mortgages and other types of farm loans were of a relatively short maturity, and farmers
typically expected the local banker to base loan renewal in part on the banker's knowledge
of local conditions. In addition, high transport costs made it costly for farmers to build
credit relationships with banks located more than a few miles away and for small rural
banks to monitor borrowers carefully at a distance.
Of course, the automobile, new roads, and the telephone had even then begun to
allow for longer physical distances between the banker and farmer. However, this was most
pertinent for wealthier and larger farmers, who could now travel more easily to, or call,
towns to access credit more cheaply (Benner (1926)). Indeed, even in the modern era with
7

Data from Gile and Moore (1928) suggest that large plantation owners in Arkansas obtained about 80 percent of their credit
from local banks, while small cash and share tenants obtained most of their capital from these landowners and merchants,
who indirectly channeled bank credit at a markup.

7

much lower transport costs, there is evidence that physical distance continues to determine
credit intermediation for small borrowers (Petersen and Rajan (2002)). 8
1.3.3. Credit Availability
We use a county as the relevant local market for credit. By focusing on counties, we
can correct for state fixed effects, which enables us to remove the confounding effects of
myriad state banking regulations.

From 1920 onwards, the FDIC provides data in electronic form on the total number
of banks (a multi-branch bank counts as a single bank) and the quantity of deposits in each
county within both the state and national banking systems. We supplement these data,
hand-collecting information on the number of state and national banks in each county for
1900 and 1910 from the Rand McNally Bankers Directory and the Bankers Register for
those respective years. We also hand-collected data from the US Agricultural Census of 1920
on the average interest rate charged on farm loans as well as on mortgage debt in 1910 and
1920 (Appendix Table 1).

Ceteris paribus, the more the banks in a county, the greater is the competition for
depositor funds, as well as the competition to offer credit, and hence greater is the potential
supply of intermediated funds. Also, given county area, more banks imply that on average
any potential borrower or saver is closer to a bank, making it easier for the bank to monitor
them, as well as for the borrower to conduct frequent (and informative) transactions. So our
proxy for credit availability, through much of the paper, will be the log number of banks in a
county, or the number of banks scaled by either land area or population within a county
(see, for example, Evanoff (1988) for prior use of such measures in the literature).

Before we go further, it may be useful to recognize concerns about whether indeed
there were local credit markets, as well as concerns about our proxy for credit availability.
Davis (1960) and Eichengreen (1984) suggest that the market for credit was largely
national by the late 1800s. Specifically, Eichengreen (1984, p1013) finds that “once the
effects of risk and of statutory interest rate ceilings both have been purged from the data, no
significant differential remains [in mortgage interest rates] between the eastern states and
the rest of the country.” However, the unit of Eichengreen’s analysis is the state, which
combines a variety of local banking markets. The averaging of interest rates across local
markets within a state may make it hard to discern local effects. In contrast, our focus in this
paper is on the county, after correcting for state effects. Moreover, Eichengreen uses land
values to purge out the effects of risk and thus may purge out the very effects we are
interested in.

Turning next to our proxy for credit, the number of banks, we plot average mortgage
interest rates in a county in 1920 against the number of banks in the county in 1920 in
Figure 1. The slope is strongly negative (the correlation coefficient between the average
interest rate in 1920 and the log number of banks in 1920 is -0.31 (p-value=0.01)). In an

8

In 1992, the median distance between a household and the bank in which the household maintained a checking account was
just 2 miles. The distance between the household and its mortgage credit provider was 9 miles. Reflecting the significant
technological changes over this period, in 2004 the median distance between a household and its mortgage credit supplier
widened to 25 miles; the median checking account distance remained constant (Amel, Kennickell, and Moore (2008)).

8

OLS regression of average mortgage interest rates in a county in 1920 on the number of
banks in the county and state fixed effects, we get a negative and statistically significant
coefficient estimate on the number of banks indicating a one standard deviation increase in
the number of banks is associated with a fall in the average mortgage interest rate in the
county by 0.07 percentage points, which is 0.09 of the standard deviation in cross-county
interest rates. The number of banks in a county is also significantly positively associated
with the average debt per acre in 1920, as well as the increase in debt per acre between
1910 and 1920.

State level data on national bank loans (Flood (1998)) further suggest that the
number of banks might be a proxy for the availability of credit. There is a positive and
significant association between the log number of banks in a state and the log value of
national bank loans (results available on request). A 10 percent increase in the number of
national banks is associated with a 5 percent increase in the stock of outstanding national
bank credit in a state. And consistent with the idea that the number of banks might increase
competition and the supply of credit at the extensive margin, the state level data suggests
that more banks are associated with lower loan rates, and reduced bank profitability. All
this suggests that the number of banks might be a proxy for credit availability.

What we cannot tell as yet is whether the number of banks measures credit
availability directly or whether it proxies for a third factor such as lower risk or greater
local creditworthiness. We will offer evidence that it is not just a proxy for a third factor. Of
course, we will then need to explain why credit availability, especially as measured by the
number of banks, is exogenous and not simply a response to local demand. A number of
authors have argued that credit availability will be driven by local political economy (see,
for example, Galor et al. (2009), Haber et al. (2007), Ransom and Sutch (1972), Rajan and
Zingales (2003), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004), Rajan and Ramcharan (2011a)). One
strand in this literature suggests that the constituencies for and against finance are shaped
by economic conditions such as the distribution of farm size (see Engerman and Sokolof
(2002)), which varies with climatic and soil conditions. These constituencies then drive
bank regulation (see, for example, Rajan and Ramcharan (2011b)) including capital
requirements, branching regulations, and deposit insurance, which then determines bank
entry and credit availability. Some of these components of credit availability could, in fact,
be plausibly exogenous to local economic conditions.
We summarize our proxies for credit availability in Table 2A and report their
correlations in Table 2B. Counties in western states were generally larger and less
populated than other regions, but the number of banks scaled by area and population are
positively correlated in the cross-section. Figure 2 indicates that counties with lower
interest rates were typically in the upper Midwest; credit was costliest in the South.
1.3.2. Land Prices

The decennial Census provides survey data on the average price of farm land per
acre for roughly 3000 counties in the continental United States over the period 1900-1930.
The Census data are self-reported. As a check on the survey data, we use hand collected data
from the Department of Agriculture (DOA) on actual market transactions of farm land for an
unbalanced panel of counties observed annually from 1907-1936.
9

Table 3 summarizes the land price data from the two data sources. In nominal
terms, the Census data suggest that the average price per acre of land increased by about 60
percent from 1910 to 1920, but declined by about 22 percent from 1920 to 1930. 9 The DOA
market transactions data suggest greater gyrations, with prices rising by 80 percent during
the 1910s, and declining by over 43 percent during the 1920s. That said, as Table 3
indicates, the cross-section in both series is similar: the correlation coefficients of prices
drawn from both sources in 1910, 1920, and 1930 are 0.97, 0.96 and 0.83, respectively. We
will use the more widely available census data in much of this study.

Figure 3, using the Census data, shows that at the peak of the boom in 1920, the
price per acre of farm land was typically highest in the Mid Western grain regions,
especially in those counties around the Great Lakes. Prices were also high in parts of the
cotton belt in the South along the Mississippi river flood plain. The price level generally was
lower in those Southern counties further removed from the Mississippi River, and in the
more arid South West.
1.3.3. Agricultural Commodity Prices

To track the connection between county level land prices and world agricultural
commodity prices, we construct a simple index of each county’s “agricultural produce
deflator” over the period 1910-1930 using the 1910 Agricultural Census and world
commodity prices from Blattman et. al (2004). The census lists the total acreage in each
county devoted to the production of specific agricultural commodities. The index is
constructed by weighting the annual change in each commodity’s price over the relevant
period by the share of agricultural land devoted to that commodity’s production in each
county in 1910. The index consists of the seven commodities for which world prices are
consistently available during this period: cotton, fruits, corn, tobacco, rice, sugar and wheat.
We should expect that if the index contains information about the “dividend yield” from
land for most US counties, a rising index would generally portend a higher “dividend yield”
from the underlying land, and should be associated with higher land prices. The change in
the index is likely to be small, though, for those counties with little acreage devoted to the
commodities covered by the index.

Figure 4 plots the annual average change in the index, as well as the average annual
change in the price of land from the DOA series over the period 1910-1930. It suggests a
positive association between the index and the price of US agricultural land. The index
spiked up with the outbreak of WWI, and land prices rose soon thereafter after the
resumption of trans-Atlantic shipping circa 1915 allowed US exports to Europe. The index
peaked around 1920 and started falling after Russian and European grain and oil re-entered
world markets. There is a concomitant collapse in the price of agricultural land, with
deflation setting in for the rest of the decade.

There is also evidence that the county-level variation in exposure to the commodity
boom is positively associated with the growth in land prices. The commodity boom was
9

The Bureau of Labor Statistics Historic CPI series, ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cpi/cpiai.txt, suggests a real decline
in the price per acre of land of about 10 percent over 1920-1930; CPI data for 1910 is unavailable.

10

most pronounced from 1917-1920, and Figure 5 plots the change in land prices from 1910
and 1920 against the growth in the index from 1917-1920, after adjusting for state-fixed
effects. The point estimate suggests that a one standard deviation increase in the index is
associated with a 5.7 percentage point or 0.18 standard deviation increase in land prices. 10
Both the aggregate time series and county-level cross-section evidence suggest then that
the increase in a county’s land prices may be related to the county’s exposure to the
commodity boom. We will use the county-specific change in the commodity price index
from 1917 to 1920 as a measure of the fundamental shock throughout the paper; its
correlation with the shock between 1910 and 1920 is 0.98 and with the shock between
1914 and 1920 is 0.98.

II. Land Prices and Credit Availability
The theoretical arguments outlined earlier suggest that in the cross-section of
counties in 1920, land prices should be higher in counties with higher credit availability. We
will first test this cross-sectional prediction. We turn in the next section to variations in
regulations governing banks to provide the most powerful evidence that the availability of
credit did influence land prices.
2.1. Land Prices and Credit Availability: The Basic Regressions

We want to see if differences in credit availability can help explain the variation
across counties in the level of (log) land price per acre in a county in 1920, correcting for
obvious explanatory variables. As described earlier, we use the log of the number of banks
(state plus national) in the county as our measure of credit availability, but will use other
proxies such as the number of banks per capita or banks per square mile whenever
appropriate.

Summary statistics are in Table 4, while the regression estimates are in Table 5A. 11
In Table 5A column 1, we include state fixed effects as the only controls. The coefficient
estimate for log number of banks is significant at the 1 percent level. A one standard
deviation increase in the log number of banks in a county is associated with a 0.56 standard
deviation increase in the log price level per acre. To put this elasticity in context, moving
from a county with the number of banks at the 25th percentile level to one at the 75th
percentile in the cross section is associated with a 41 percent increase in the land price
level. This is obviously a likely upper bound to the true effect.
In column 2, we include in addition to the log number of banks and state fixed
effects, a number of variables that account for the economic conditions of the county. These
include the log of the average value of crops per acre in the county (which helps account for
10

To exclude predominantly manufacturing counties, where the index is largely unchanged, we drop counties with a share of
value added in manufacturing greater than the 95th percentile of the cross-section in plotting the graph.

11

it).

All variables are winsorized (that is, the variables are set at the 1 percentile (99 percentile) level if they fall below (exceed)

11

the current income the land produces) as well as the share of value added in the county that
comes from manufacturing (to account for land that is more urban).

We also include a number of variables that account for climatic and geographic
factors. Areas with higher average, but less volatile, rainfall may have more productive
agriculture, leading to both higher prices and a greater demand for banking services in the
cross section (Binswanger and Rosenzweig (1986)). Therefore, we include both the mean as
well as the standard deviation of rainfall in the county. Waterways were a major source of
transportation and irrigation, so we also include the log of distance from major waterways,
which, as Figure 3 suggests, could enhance the value of land. We include the log area of the
county, as well as a number of demographic variables (log total population, the log Black
population, the log urban population, the log illiterate population, and the log population
that is between 5-17 years old).

The explanatory variables are a veritable kitchen sink of variables that should help
explain land prices. Some are truly exogenous (e.g., rainfall), yet others are likely to be
driven by credit availability (e.g., the value of crops may be enhanced by access to fertilizers,
which may depend on credit availability). So this regression is primarily an attempt to
check that our proxy for credit availability matters correcting for the usual suspects, and
what its independent effect might be. The magnitudes are unlikely to represent the true, allin effect of credit availability on prices, given the various channels through which credit
availability could work, and we are probably overcorrecting.
The coefficient on the number of banks falls to about 40 percent of its value
estimated in column 1 when we include these various explanatory variables, but the
coefficient estimate remains significant at the one percent level (see column 2). The other
controls themselves also enter with intuitive signs. For example, a one standard deviation
increase in agricultural income per acre is associated with a 0.49 standard deviation
increase in land prices. Similarly, wetter, more fertile areas tend to have higher land prices;
likewise, prices are higher in those areas with many people, but lower in counties with
more land.

We identify outliers (using Cook’s D method, results available from authors), which
turn out to be largely counties with a predominant share of value added from
manufacturing. Omitting outliers does not change the results qualitatively, but given that
areas dominated by manufacturing may be different, in column 3 we retain only the
observations for counties where the share of value added in manufacturing is at or below
the 95th percentile of its share across counties. The magnitude of the coefficient estimate on
the number of banks continues to be significant at the 1 percent level. Given that our
interest is in rural counties, in what follows we will drop counties with the share of value
added in manufacturing above the 95th percentile for all counties. None of the results are
qualitatively dependent on dropping these counties.
In columns 4 and 5 of Table 5A, we substitute the log number of banks with the
number of banks per area and number of banks per capita respectively. These proxies
essentially normalize the number of banks by different measures of the potential demand
for their services. Across both specifications, the coefficient on the number of banks is
positive, statistically significant, and has similar implied magnitudes. A one standard

12

deviation increase in bank density, as defined in columns 4 and 5, is associated with a 0.12
and 0.15 standard deviation increase in the price per acre respectively.
2.2. Land Prices and Credit Availability: Robustness

An immediate question is whether the number of banks proxies for the quantity of
available credit, for the proximity of banks, or for competition between banks, all of which
should influence credit availability. While we do not have the aggregate lending by banks
locally, we do have the total amount deposited in banks in the county. This should be a good
proxy for local liquidity and the lending capacity of local banks. When we introduce the log
of the amount deposited as an explanatory variable, we find that the coefficient on the
number of banks is somewhat larger (one would expect a smaller coefficient if the number
of banks was primarily a proxy for the quantity of lending), and remains statistically
significant at the one percent level (results available from authors). This suggests the
number of banks proxies for something other than simply the quantity of available credit—
for example, proximity or competition—but we cannot say much more here.

Another concern is that our results may be driven by a specific region. So we
estimate the regression separately for the South, the East North Central, and the West North
Central, which together account for 72 percent of the observations. The coefficient on the
log number of banks is statistically significant and is of a similar order of magnitude in all
three regions (estimates available from authors).
Yet another concern with the cross-sectional analysis is that there may be some
fundamental omitted attribute of a county, such as the richness of the soil, which is
correlated with both land prices as well as, through local wealth, the number of banks. This
fundamental attribute may be driving land prices, and the number of banks proxies for it in
the basic cross-sectional regression. One way to correct for the existence of some omitted
fixed factor is to examine panel data covering counties in the years 1900, 1910, and 1920,
when land prices were rising. In Table 5B column 1, we regress log land prices over time on
our proxies for demographic and economic fundamentals, including county fixed effects as
well. County fixed effects absorb any time invariant omitted factors, including the previous
geographic controls.
The positive and significant coefficient estimate on the number of banks suggests
that the growth in land prices over time is correlated with changes in the number of banks,
after taking out the effect of changes in proxies for geographic, demographic, and economic
fundamentals, as well as any time invariant attributes of a county such as soil quality. The
coefficient estimate is, however, smaller in magnitude than the estimate in the crosssectional regression. Of course, we lose any fixed components of credit availability also in a
fixed effects regression, such as the cultural propensity to trust and be trustworthy in a
particular county, so this is not entirely surprising.

While the positive significant coefficient estimate on the number of banks in the
fixed effects estimate is reassuring, it is not sufficient to conclude that credit availability
affects land prices – it should only be seen as suggestive. Banks themselves might have
entered counties that had booming land prices—the number of U.S. banks expanded
substantially in the years prior to 1920, from 22030 in 1914 (White (1986)) to 28885 in

13

1920 (Alston, Grove, and Wheelock (1994)). In other words, the causality could run from
higher prices to credit rather than the other way round.

Perhaps we could correct for this possibility with measures of credit availability that
predate the boom. In the baseline cross-sectional regression, we substitute the number of
banks in 1920 with the number of banks in 1910, before the war-induced boom in land
prices. As the coefficient estimates in Table 5B column 2 indicate, the log number of banks
in 1910 continues to explain land prices in 1920. We could also use banks in 1910 as an
instrument for banks in 1920. In Table 5B column 3, we present the second stage estimates,
instrumenting the number of banks in 1920 with the number of banks in 1910. The
coefficient estimate of the instrumented number of banks goes up in magnitude suggesting
that the persistent component of credit availability has a large effect on land prices. All this
suggests that higher land prices are “caused”, in part, by a persistent factor, for which, the
number of banks might proxy.

We do not, however, know that that the persistent factor that the number of banks
proxies for is related to the supply of credit, rather than, for example, demand. To establish
the former, we turn now to regulation. Intuitively, if known regulatory differences in the
availability of credit correlate positively with differences in the estimated strength of our
proxy, we provide greater support to the view that the number of banks proxies for the
supply of credit.

III. Identification through Regulation
3.1. State Borders and Lending

In 1920, regulatory prohibitions on inter-state bank branching prevented in-state
banks from opening branches across state lines in order to originate out-of-state loans. To
prevent bankers from simply seeking a bank charter across state lines to gain out-of-state
business, some states, such as Florida, also imposed residency requirements on the
directorate of banks (The Bankers Encyclopedia, 1920). 12 Concerned about the illiquidity of
real estate collateral, states also severely restricted the types of mortgage related
transactions that their banks could engage in across state lines, imposing limits for example
on the types of properties that could be used as collateral, aggregate limits on out-of state
exposures, as well as more general limits on the size and duration of the mortgage portfolio
(Barnett (1911), Weldon (1910)).
State laws also typically required the recording of both real estate and chattel
mortgages in both the county in which the property was located, as well as in the county of
loan origination. For any bank seeking to originate credit across state lines, these
requirements significantly increased origination costs. Moreover, seizing collateral in the
case of non-repayment required these often small rural banks to be familiar with judicial
practices across state lines, and to retain lawyers able to practice across state lines (The
12

Florida for example required 60 percent of a bank's board to have been state residents the previous year.

14

Bankers Encyclopedia, 1920). 13These judicial practices differed dramatically across states,
largely for idiosyncratic historical reasons (Ghent (2013)). For instance, narratives around
this period observed that the cross-state variation in foreclosure costs significantly limited
the flow of mortgage credit across state borders (Bridewell (1938)).
The additional difficulty for banks in lending across state lines suggests a way to
check our hypothesis. Counties on either side of a county or state border tend to have
similar geographic fundamentals. 14 If the number of banks primarily reflects persistent
unobserved factors associated with the fundamentals of land rather than credit availability,
then the number of banks in neighboring counties should affect land prices in a county the
same way, regardless of whether the neighboring counties are within the state or out of
state. If, however, the number of banks reflects the availability of credit, then banks in
neighboring counties within-state should affect land prices much more (because they can
lend more easily across the county border) than banks in equally close neighboring counties
that are outside the state. Also, the influence of within-state banks should diminish with
distance, since it is unlikely that banks in more distant within-state counties would be
lending to buyers in the county of interest.
While we do not know where a bank is located, we do know the distance from the
centroid of the county in which it is located to the centroid of the county of interest.
Assuming that all banks in a neighboring county are located at that county's centroid, we
can ask if they have an effect on land prices in the county of interest. Again, if the number of
banks is a proxy for credit availability, the coefficient on the number of banks in nearby instate counties should be positive and greater than the coefficient on the number of banks in
nearby out-of-state counties. Moreover, the coefficients should become smaller for distant
in-state counties, because the scope for lending from banks in those distant counties
becomes small.
At first pass, we consider "nearby" counties to be counties with a centroid less than
40 miles away from the centroid of the county of interest. We start with the basic
regression from Table 5A column 2 and include in addition, the log number of banks for instate and out-of-state counties that are less than 40 miles, as well as the log number of
banks that are in state and between 40 and 80 miles distant. The sample consists of those
counties whose nearest neighbor is no further than 80 miles, centroid to centroid.
These results are reported in column 1 of Table 6. The relationship between the
number of banks within the county and the log of land prices continues to be positive and
significant. And consistent with the idea that the number of banks proxies for credit
availability, the coefficient estimate on the log number of banks within 40 miles of the
13

These legal and other impediments to the flow of credit across state lines often had strong political motives. For example,
even in the midst of the wave of Depression era banking reforms, a bill introduced by Carter Glass allowing national banks to
branch in all states, and to be able to branch up to 50 miles across the state boundary line was defeated in 1932, led by the
famous populist Huey Long (Westerfield (1939)).
14

For counties along a state border, the correlation coefficient between rainfall in border counties
and counties located in the same state up to 100 miles away is 0.94. The correlation coefficient
between rainfall in border counties and rainfall in counties up to 100 miles away across state lines is
0.92.

15

county and in the same state is positive, statistically significant, and about four times
greater than the coefficient estimate for log number of banks in counties at the same
distance but across state lines. A one standard deviation increase in the number of in-state
banks located within 40 miles of the reference county is associated with a 0.14 standard
deviation increase in the log price of land in the reference county. But a similar increase in
the number of out-of-state banks within 40 miles of the reference county is associated with
only a 0.04 standard deviation increase in land prices. 15
As expected, the point estimate for in-state banks 40-80 miles is also significantly
smaller than for banks 0-40 miles distant, consistent with more distant banks being unable
to lend because mortgage markets are local. A similar pattern emerges when using 50 mile
increments based on a sample of counties within 100 miles of a state border (column 2). We
also decrease the increments (0-30, 30-60, 60-90) in column 3 with qualitatively similar
results. 16
3.2. National vs State, Unit vs Branching, and Federal Reserve District Borders

Banks could be nationally chartered or chartered by a state. The precise rights of
national banks to make real estate loans, including making them across state borders, is a
matter of some debate (see Sylla (1969) and Keehn and Smiley (1977)). These banks had
only gained the right to make some types of real estate loans in 1914, and they accounted
for a relatively small share of the mortgage market in 1920. 17 By 1921 national banks had
originated $161 million in farm mortgages or about 11 percent of all commercial bank real
estate loans in the United States (Wall (1936)).
A second regulatory difference is between banks in states that allowed only unit
banks and banks in states that allowed banks to open branches. In unit banking states, all
credit intermediation occurred at a bank's single physical location. Banks would tend to
locate near centers of economic activity (at the extreme, clustering in the main towns),
leaving some borrowers more distance to cover. By contrast, in branch banking states, even
if banks located their head office near centers of economic activity, they could more easily
establish branches near smaller areas of potential credit demand within the county of
interest in order to overcome intermediation frictions resulting from distance. 18
15

Available upon request are similar results using the change in land prices between 1920 and 1910 as the dependent
variable. In this case, a one standard deviation increase in the number of in-state banks located within 40 miles of the
reference county is associated with a 0.16 standard deviation increase in the change in land prices. A similar increase in the
number of equidistant banks located across states lines yields an impact 4 times smaller.
16

The other functional forms for the number of banks – banks per area and per capita – are less suited for this test. More
banks per area in a neighboring county may not necessarily help farmers in this county as much. Put differently, it is not clear
that the normalization is an appropriate measure of credit availability in this county. Nevertheless, the qualitative results are
broadly similar with the other functional forms.

The extent to which national banks were subject to state banking laws was a still unresolved legal
question during this period, with the McFadden Act of 1927 providing some resolution, at least on
the branching issue (Rajan and Ramcharan (2011b)).

17

18

In many branching states, banks did have to raise additional capital to open new branches, but this was often far less than the
amount required to acquire a new bank charter (Southworth (1928)). Also, we would expect the number of unit banks to increase as
the demand for credit increased, but even the new entrants would have an incentive to cluster around population centers. Banks in
branching states may have had a better ability to cover potential borrowers through an expansion in branches. The average number of

16

Importantly, in 1920, national banks were not allowed to open branches even if state banks
were allowed to do so. 19 Finally, nationally chartered banks had different capital
requirements from state banks, and as a result were typically larger than state banks (see
Wheelock (1993)). 20
Taking all these regulatory differences into account, we might expect:

(i) Potential borrowers in unit banking states were likely to be some distance from local
banks and would be more likely to be willing to borrow from banks in nearby in-state
counties. So banks in nearby in-state counties should affect local land prices positively in a
unit banking state, and more so than do banks in nearby out-of-state counties.

(ii) Potential borrowers in branch banking states would more likely be close to a local
branch office and would therefore be less likely to borrow from banks in nearby in-state
counties. So banks in nearby in-state counties should affect local land prices less in a branch
banking state than in a unit banking state. Of course, banks in nearby out-of-state counties
should continue to have muted effects on local land prices.

(iii) National banks could not branch in either kind of state. If they had specific clienteles
(e.g., larger borrowers who banked with larger banks), we should expect a similar pattern
to that experienced by unit banks -- some cross-county border lending from in-state
counties regardless of state branching regulation.

In Table 7A column (1), we present estimates for the model in Table 6 column 1 but
including the log number of state banks and log number of national banks separately. We
present estimates for the baseline 0-40-80 distances only for reasons of space. Both the
number of state banks and national banks in the county seem to be associated with higher
land prices. Moreover, banks in neighboring in-state counties, whether state or national,
seem to be associated with higher land prices, and banks in equidistant out-of-state
counties much less so. Interestingly, the influence of banks in neighboring in-state counties
seems to fall off less with distance for national banks than for state banks. This is consistent
with national banks being larger, possibly having larger and wealthier borrowers who had
lower transactions costs of transport and communication, thus allowing national banks to
state banks in a branching county barely rose from 4.4 to 4.8 over the period 1910-1920, while unit banking counties saw an increase
in the average number from 4.5 to 6.5. However, in 1910, there were 320 branches in those states allowing some form of branching;
by 1920, the number had risen to 1,052 (Federal Reserve Bulletin (1931)).
19

More precisely, the National Bank Act did allow those state banks that converted to national banks to keep their extant
branches, and an amendment in 1918 also permitted a national bank to retain the branches of any state bank it acquired by
merger. Some national banks did use this device to acquire branches, but most did not (Westerfield (1939)).

In unit banking states, the average size of deposits per national bank was $ 545,000, while the
average in state unit banks was $275,000. In branching states, national banks were larger, perhaps to
compete with the more empowered state banks, and had an average size of deposits of $800,000,
while state banks had average size of $340,000. Overall, in 1920, the average assets held by a
national bank was around $2.9 million, while the average state bank had assets of around $1.1
million (Federal Reserve Board, 1931).
20

17

have influence over greater distance. Finally, national banks in out-of-state neighboring
counties seem to have a limited effect on land prices. This suggests that some of the same
difficulties for state banks in lending across state borders may have also extended to
national banks.

We are especially interested in how these estimates vary across unit banking and
branching states. So in Table 7A column (2), we estimate the regression in column (1) but
restrict the data only to counties in unit banking states, and in Table 7A column (3), we
restrict the data to counties in branch banking states. The estimates are very different. State
banks in neighboring in-state counties do have an influence on county land prices in unit
banking states but not in branch banking states. This is consistent with our conjecture that
state banks are better able to stay close to credit demand through branches in states that
allow branch banking, and therefore we should see less borrowing across county borders.
By contrast, national banks (which could not open branches even if state banks
could open them) in neighboring in-state counties have an influence on land prices
regardless of the state’s branching regulation. We would expect this result if national banks
catered to a somewhat different clientele than state banks. Consistent with the pattern of
state banks in unit banking states, the prohibition on national bank branching placed some
potential clientele at great distance from the bank. They probably found it easier to borrow
from national banks in neighboring in-state counties. Thus the pattern of estimates for
national banks resembles the pattern for state banks in unit bank states. 21

There is yet another useful way of cutting the data based on regulations. Federal
Reserve district borders sometimes divided states (Figure 6). National banks could not lend
across Federal Reserve district borders. 22 Therefore, if indeed the positive association
between banks and land prices is driven by credit, then for two counties in the same state
separated by a Federal Reserve district border, the number of national banks across the
district border should not influence land prices in counties on the other side of the border.
Because the restriction on cross-district lending within the same state did not apply to state
banks, we would still expect a positive association for nearby in-state state banks located in
the same Federal Reserve district. Moreover, by using this within state segmentation
induced by these restrictions, we can further address concerns about biased estimates
driven by any cross-state variation in latent regulatory and economic factors.
21

For the full sample of counties, we modify the basic distance-state border regression

We have argued thus far that to the extent that bank density proxies for credit availability, counties with more banks would
be expected to have higher average prices. Also, for neighbors that are sufficiently close, geographic fundamentals like soil
fertility and the types of crops grown are likely to be similar, as are other unobservable fundamentals. So land price
differences across county borders should be related to the difference in bank density across the border. Furthermore, since
banks are less likely to be able to lend across state borders to equalize credit conditions, we should find a given difference in
number of banks has a greater effect on land prices across state borders than across in-state county borders, especially for unit
banking counties. We find results consistent with this intuition (see Web Appendix).
22

More precisely: “The Federal Reserve Act permitted national banks for the first time to make loans on real estate. This
power was restricted to banks not in central reserve cities. Authority was given to make loans on improved farm land situated
within the Reserve district, the amount lent not to exceed 50 percent of the actual value, and the aggregate of such loans not to
exceed 25 percent of capital and surplus, or one third of deposits. Loans were not to run longer than five years. In 1916,
national banks were given permission to make loans on real estate (non-farm land) situated within 100 miles of the bank’s
domicile, the maturity of such loans not exceed one year (Bremer (1935), pg. 97).

18

to allow for segmentation by Federal Reserve district borders in column 1 of Table 7B. For
every county, we include the log number of in-district state or national banks located in instate counties up to 40 miles away, as well as 40-80 miles away, measured from the
centroid of the county of interest. Using the same distance increments, we also include the
corresponding number of state banks or national located in out-of-district but in-state
counties. We also include the same distance-border bank variables as in Table 7A.

The evidence suggests that district borders were barriers to national bank credit
flows. While the number of national banks in in-district counties up to 40 miles are
significantly associated with the price per acre in the county of interest, the point estimate
on equidistant national banks in counties separated by a district border, but in the same
state, is insignificant and negative. In contrast, the impact of the number of in-state state
banks on land prices appears unaffected by whether these banks are located in a different
Federal Reserve district than the county of interest or not.

Column 2 of Table 7A examines further the segmentation induced by Federal
Reserve district lines. Both national and state banks faced impediments when operating
across state lines, but state borders that coincided with a Federal Reserve district border
were an explicit barrier for national bank real estate lending, as these banks were
prohibited from lending across district lines. Therefore, while nearby out-of-state national
banks might still influence prices across state lines, especially given the relative size of
national banks, if this association is driven by credit, then the effect should not be present
when the state border also coincides with a Federal Reserve district border. This is indeed
what we find in column 2. That the number of neighboring banks matters only when that
bank type is allowed to lend across the relevant border is the most compelling evidence
thus far that the number of banks reflects credit availability, and that credit availability
affects land prices.
3.4. Deposit Insurance

Several states experimented with deposit insurance before the commodity boom.
Well known arguments suggest that poorly designed deposit insurance schemes can induce
moral hazard, prompting banks to finance riskier investments and extend credit more
widely, especially in those areas where banks face plentiful local competition (see, for
example, Benton, Eisenbeis, Horvitz, Kane, and Kaufman (1986)). Some have argued that
states with deposit insurance had higher bank failure rates in the 1920s (Calomiris (1990),
Wheelock and Wilson (2003)). Therefore, we might expect that if the correlation between
the number of banks and land prices reflects credit availability, then the relationship
between the number of banks and land price should be significantly larger when banks
operate under deposit insurance (because each bank is a greater source of indiscriminate
credit, and competition between banks expands credit even more strongly).
In 1920, eight states had in place some kind of deposit insurance scheme. 23 These
states had more banks on average, as these schemes generally encouraged the entry of
23

The eight states are: Oklahoma (1907-23), Texas (1909-25), Kansas (1909-29), Nebraska (1909-30), South Dakota (190931), North Dakota (1917-29), Washington (1917-29), and Mississippi (1914-30) (Wheelock and Wilson (1996)).

19

smaller banks. 24 But as Table 8 indicates, holding constant the number of banks, the
relationship between banks and land price was significantly larger in those counties located
in deposit insurance states. Column 1 includes the number of state banks (which benefited
directly from insurance) and the number of state banks interacted with an indicator if the
state had deposit insurance. The estimated coefficient on state banks is about 50 percent
larger for counties in states covered by deposit insurance than otherwise.

Although national banks operated outside the remit of state deposit insurance
schemes, they competed directly with state banks for business, and the presence of these
regulations may have also affected the lending behavior of national banks. In column 2 of
Table 8, the estimated relationship between the number of national banks and prices is
almost twice as large in deposit insurance counties, but remains lower in magnitude than
state banks. Deposit insurance, through competition, must have affected the incentives of
both types of banks, and column 3 includes both types of banks. This evidence suggests
deposit insurance regulations amplified the relationship between banks and prices.

Of the eight states with deposit insurance, three adopted these regulations during
the boom. This timing raises the possibility that, at least among these late adopters, the
passage of deposit insurance regulations may have been in response to the effects of the
agricultural boom on the banking system. Of course, relative to the other states which had
deposit insurance schemes in place for over a decade before 1920, a sample that includes
these late adopters may understate the impact of deposit insurance in amplifying the
relationship between banks and land prices.

Column 4 of Table 8 addresses these concerns by classifying as deposit insurance
states only those five states that had introduced insurance before 1910. In column 4, the
deposit insurance interaction term is now significant at the 1 percent level. It is also 56
percent larger than the previous estimates in column 3, suggesting that the impact of
deposit insurance on credit availability, and thence on land prices, may have been more
pronounced the longer the insurance was in place.

3.5. Summary

Variations in regulation have allowed us to identify the supply side effect more
plausibly – land prices were higher in areas with more banks. In the process of working
through the identification, we obtain some implications about the extent to which banks in
branch banking and unit banking covered their clientele. For instance, borrowers may have
been more distant on average from their banks in unit banking states, leading to greater
costs of exchanging information and of building a strong relationship, which may have also
led to poorer loan quality, and eventually weaker loan quality. How much this, and how
much the lack of diversification, led to greater bank failures in unit banking states (see
Wheelock (1995) for example) is left for future research.

Estimating the magnitude of the supply side effect is more difficult than verifying its
existence. We can, however, surmise it might have been large. For instance, the estimates in
24

See White (1981). The mean log number of banks in deposit insurance counties is about 20 percent higher than in counties
without deposit insurance (p-value=0.00).

20

column 4 of Table 8 suggest that for two otherwise similar counties having the mean
number of banks in the sample, land prices would have been about 1.6 times higher in the
county located in a deposit insurance state than in the county across the border in a nondeposit insurance state. To the extent that the primary effect of deposit insurance is to
augment the flow of credit from banks, this effect is large.

IV. Dynamics and Channels
Taken together, the results in the previous section suggest the number of banks is a
good proxy for credit availability, and does affect land prices. In what follows, we want to
delve into the details of the price build-up between 1910 and 1920 to understand how
credit availability and the fundamental shock interacted, and what the consequences were.
4.1. Land Price, Commodity Shock, and Credit Availability in 1920

In column 1 of Table 9 the dependent variable is the change in the price per acre
computed over the decade 1910-1920. As explanatory variables, we include the log number
of banks in 1920 linearly and as a squared term to capture the possible non-linear
association of credit availability with the change in land price; we also include the change in
the commodity index to capture the change in the “dividend” yield. To capture any
interactions between credit availability and the change in fundamentals, we include the log
number of banks in 1920 interacted with the change in the index; to capture any change in
availability, we include the change in the number of banks from 1910-1920; we also include
the standard demographic and economic controls; finally, to capture any permanent
unobservable components that may affect land price, we include the log price per acre in
1910. To the extent that there are any permanent components of credit availability (such as
a propensity to trust and be trustworthy in the area), these will get subsumed.

The estimates in Table 9 column 1 suggest credit availability as proxied for by the
number of banks has a direct effect on the growth in land prices, which is attenuated
somewhat as credit availability increases (the squared log banks term is negative). The
estimates in column 1 imply that evaluated at the mean level of the commodity index, the
marginal impact of credit availability on the growth in farm land prices is positive up to the
95th percentile in the distribution of log banks. The change in the number of banks is also
positively significantly associated with the change in prices. But this effect is small, as a one
standard deviation increase in the change in the number of banks over 1910-1920 is
associated with a 0.06 standard deviation increase in the change in prices over the same
period.

The interaction effect between the commodity index shock and credit availability is
positive, suggesting that land prices are more sensitive to the commodity index shock when
more credit is available. For a county at the 25th percentile of banks, a one standard
deviation increase in the commodity index is associated with a 0.12 standard deviation
increase in the growth in land prices; but for a county at the 75th percentile of banks, an
identical commodity shock suggests a 0.27 standard deviation increase in the growth in

21

land prices. Interestingly, the direct effect of the commodity index shock is not significant
(unlike what is suggested in Figure 5), even while the interaction effect remains strong – so
the commodity shock’s effect on land prices is mediated through credit availability.

4.2. Channels of Transmission

Next, let us examine some of the channels through which credit availability and the
commodity shock might affect real and financial activity. Consider first the acreage devoted
to agriculture. One of the effects of the commodity boom might have been to bring new land
into cultivation. To be sure, by 1910, the median county already had 77% of county area
cultivated, so the room for bringing marginal land into cultivation may have been small.
Indeed, the mean and median change in the share of county land devoted to agriculture over
the period 1910 to 1920 is essentially zero.

In Table 9 Column 2, we replicate the regression in Table 9 Column 1, replacing the
dependent variable with the change in acres under cultivation over the period 1910-1920,
(and including the log total acres under cultivation in 1910). The log level of banks in 1920,
as well as the change in the number of banks over the period are both positively associated
with the increase in new land under cultivation. A one standard deviation increase in the log
number of banks is associated with a 0.16 standard deviation increase in the growth of
acres under cultivation. A similar increase in the change in number of banks is associated
with a 0.11 standard deviation increase in the growth of acres under cultivation. The direct
effect of the commodity shock on the growth of land under cultivation is also significantly
positive. The interaction effect with credit availability is negative, however, suggesting that
the room for expanding at the extensive margin in response to the commodity shock may
have been smaller in counties with plentiful extant credit availability.
Within land that was already devoted to agricultural purposes, more land that was
fallow, devoted to pasture, or otherwise unutilized, could have been brought into cultivation
during the boom – the intensive margin could have increased. On average, there is indeed a
one percentage point increase in the land under cultivation that is “improved” between
1910 and 1920 – larger than the increase in extensive margin but not hugely so. In Table 9
column 3, the dependent variable is the growth in improved acres from 1910-1920. The
marginal impact of credit availability on changes in improved acres is positive up to the 75th
percentile of banks. And evaluated at the median level of banks, a one standard deviation
increase in the number of banks is associated with a 0.02 standard deviation increase in the
growth of improved acres. Areas with a more positive commodity shock also had a greater
expansion at the intensive margin.
We turn next to the use of farm implements and machinery. Perhaps farmers also
used credit to buy more capital equipment. The total value of farm implements and
machinery averaged across counties increased from around $850,000 in 1910 to $2.3
million in 1920—in current dollars. The dependent variable in Table 9 column 4 is the
change in the dollar value of farm implements and machinery over 1920-1910, where again
we control for the log level in 1910.

Interestingly, the factors determining spending on machinery mirror the factors that
we earlier found to determine land prices. The marginal impact of credit availability on
spending on machinery is positive up through the 95th percentile of the distribution of the

22

number of banks. The magnitudes are also economically large. Evaluated at the median
number of banks, a one standard deviation increase in credit availability is associated with a
17.6 percentage point or 0.54 standard deviation increase in investment growth. Also, both
the change in the number of banks over the decade as well as the local exposure to the
commodity shock are positively associated with investment growth. A one standard
deviation increase in the former is associated with a 0.09 standard deviation increase in
investment growth, while a similar increase in the commodity index is associated with 0.24
standard deviation increase in the dependent variable.
Consistent with contemporary narratives, this evidence implies that farmers turned
to the banking system in order to bring more new land under cultivation, use existing land
more intensively, and purchase capital equipment in order to expand output during the
boom, perhaps raising the self assessed price of land. 25

Although there is evidence that the size distribution of farms became more
concentrated in those areas that had more banks, as credit availability may have led to more
buyouts, the net effect on yields is uncertain. The new land and the use of marginal land
such as land that would otherwise be left fallow would tend to depress yields per acre, but
increased mechanization and investment in the land would tend to elevate yields. We hand
collected data from 1920 Agricultural Census on the yield per acre for eight different
commodities grown predominantly in either the agricultural belt of the Mid West or the
South: cereals, corn, oats, wheat, barley, rye, tobacco and cotton. However, using a similar
specification to that in Table 9, we found little consistent association across crops of credit
availability with productivity (see Web Appendix).

4.3 Debt Build-Up and Bank Failures

So what else changed significantly over the boom as prices, purchases, and
investment increased? Debt did! The dependent variable in column 5 of Table 9 is the
change in debt per acre between 1910 and 1920. Both credit availability and the commodity
shock are strongly and independently positively associated with the increase in debt per
acre. A one standard deviation increase in the log number of banks is associated with a 17.8
percentage point or 0.24 standard deviation increase in the change in debt per acre. A
similar increase in the change in the commodity index suggests a 0.22 standard deviation
increase in the change in debt per acre over the decade.
An increase in debt with no substantial increase in productivity would have left
farmers exposed to difficulties when incomes retreated to pre-boom levels in the 1920s.
And their inability to service their debt burden and other fixed costs once prices fell would
then be expected to lead to local financial sector distress: About 5000 banks failed between

25

There is for example evidence—available upon request—that prices increased most sharply in those areas that also had the
biggest growth in investment. And instrumenting the growth in investment with the number of banks yields estimates that are
about twice as large as the baseline OLS estimates.

23

1920 and 1929 or about 16 percent of the total number of existing banks in 1920. 26 Did the
lending during the boom lead to subsequent banking sector distress?
To investigate this hypothesis, we compute the average annual bank failure rate
(number of bank failures in the county during the year divided by number of banks in the
county at the beginning of the year) in the county between 1920 and 1929, as well as the
average annual share of deposits of failed banks (which effectively weights failures by the
share of their deposits). We examine in Table 10 how debt at the peak of the boom in 1920
affected the subsequent bank failure rate using these two different measures.

We include the explanatory variables we included in column 1 of Table 9, with debt
per acre in 1920 replacing log number of banks in 1920 wherever the latter appears; we
also include the change in debt per acre between 1920 and 1910. The estimates suggest
debt per acre in 1920 is significantly positively correlated with subsequent bank failures.

However, we are more interested in the effects of debt as induced by credit
availability, and column 2 instruments debt per acre (in the various forms it appears) with
log number of banks (in the various forms it appears). Interestingly, the coefficient estimate
of debt per acre is an order of magnitude larger, suggesting that it is the accretion of debt
driven by credit availability that seems to be particularly damaging for subsequent bank
health. A one standard deviation increase in the change in debt over the 1910s is associated
with a 0.70 standard deviation increase in the suspension rate over the 1920s. And when
evaluated at the median level of debt per acre in 1920, a one standard deviation increase in
the level of debt is associated with a 0.17 standard deviation increase in the suspension
rate.

In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the average annual share of deposits
of failed banks, and the pattern of results and economic magnitudes are similar. Financial
sector distress is higher in counties that had higher debt levels fueled by credit availability.
Interestingly, the change in the commodity index does not generally have a positive effect
on subsequent bank failures, suggesting that the impact of exposure to the commodity
boom on subsequent banking sector distress may have operated primarily through its effect
on the debt build up (see Table 9 Column 5).

One concern is that more banks may mean smaller, and hence more fragile banks,
and not more credit. The only measure of aggregate bank size we have is aggregate county
deposits per bank. When we regress this against the log number of banks, correcting for
state fixed effects, we find a positive and significant coefficient on the log number of banks,
suggesting that more banks does not automatically imply smaller banks (regression
estimates reported in web appendix).

Finally, are we merely picking up a “unit bank” effect? After all, we know that
failures in unit bank states were more numerous. When we estimate columns (3) and (4) in
26

The cost of farm labor did decline in the immediate aftermath of the commodity collapse—from $65.05 per month in 1920
to $45.58 in 1921, but then steadily increased as labor migrated to the cities. Transport costs however rose steadily during this
period: a farmer shipping hay paid 10.4 pounds out of every 100 pounds for freight in 1919. This cost doubled in 1921. And of
course, the interest cost of the debt remained constant in nominal terms over much of the collapse in land prices (Boyle
(1928)).

24

Table 10 again, but allowing the slopes for branch banking states to differ, we find the
coefficient estimates of the differences are small and statistically insignificant. So counties
in branch banking states also suffered from debt buildup, especially counties with more
banks in 1920.

To summarize then, the debt build up appears to have been driven by credit
availability, and is associated with subsequent bank failures, even though incomes quickly
returned to pre-boom levels (bank failures increased over the 1920s, with only 816 failures
in1921-23 when incomes were more depressed and 2486 failures in 1927-29, when
incomes had recovered significantly). 27 It also seems that not all debt was equally
problematic. An increase in debt per acre seemed particularly problematic for bank health
in areas where banks were plentiful. This may be because more of the debt in areas where
banks were plentiful was bank debt, and because more was lent relative to the inflated
fundamentals at the peak, possibly because of greater inter-bank competition.

V. The Long Run Consequences
Commodity prices collapsed starting in 1920, as European production revived. The
correlation between the commodity price index rise for a county between 1917-1920 and
the subsequent fall in the commodity price index for that county between 1920 and 1929 is
-0.96. So counties that experienced a greater run up also experienced a greater fall. But as
we described earlier, by 1922 farm incomes had recovered to the levels they had before the
1917-20 boom. So abstracting from the effects of debt build up, farm distress should have
been temporary, and the effects should not have been seen beyond 1922. We first document
long run adverse effects on land prices associated with credit availability in 1920, and then
offer suggestive evidence on the sources of these long run effects.
5.1. Long Run Effects on Land Prices

Bank debt is not easily paid down, especially when loans are made against illiquid
assets like farm land. In Table 11, we focus on whether credit availability had long run
effects on the price of farm land over time. The census bureau changed its estimate of land
values to also include the value of buildings in 1940. To have the longest series possible, we
calculate the value of this variable for each decade from 1920 to 1960—after 1960 the
census ceased reporting land values. We then replace the dependent variable in the model
estimated in Table 9 Column 1 with the change in the (augmented) land price, holding the
explanatory variables the same, and controlling for the log level of prices in the base year.
As we see in Column 1 of Table 11, evaluated at the mean level of the commodity
index, the marginal impact of credit availability in 1920 on the change in land prices
between 1920 and 1930 is now negative up to the 95th percentile in the distribution of log
27

The escalating rate of bank of failures throughout the decade may have also been compounded by the rapid liquidation of
failed bank assets—primarily land—by state and national regulators, leading to local firesales that depressed local land prices
further and engendered greater banking sector fragility (Upham and Lamke (1934)).

25

number of banks. Counties with greater credit availability in 1920 suffered a greater price
decline in the subsequent decade, as did counties that experienced a greater commodity
shock.

As we move to 1930-1940, we see that areas that had higher credit availability
before 1920 experienced a faster decline in land prices during the 1930s also. A one
standard deviation increase in the number of banks in 1920 is associated with a 0.26
standard deviation decline in land price growth during the period 1930-1940. The
coefficient estimates for the commodity price shock is still large and negative but no longer
statistically significant.

A similar pattern emerges in the 1940s. However, credit availability in 1920 is no
longer associated with the growth in land prices between 1950 and 1960 (the point
estimate is small and positive). But, when we look at price levels in 1960 (column 5) rather
than changes in prices, the effects of credit availability at the peak of the boom in 1920
continue to be very strong. In 1960, land price in a county that was at the 75th percentile of
credit availability in 1920 is about 30 percent lower than the land price in a county that was
at the 25th percentile of credit availability in 1920.
5.2. Organizational Collapse

We have already seen that in addition to pushing up local prices and facilitating
productive investment, credit availability led to a sizeable debt build up. And with the
collapse of commodity prices and the means to service that debt, the boom-time build-up of
leverage is also associated with financial sector distress. Where do the long-term price
declines stem from, however?
One possibility is that areas that turned out to have too much debt suffered distress
and persistent debt-deflation as debt was not written down. Long-term debt deflation may
also have caused behavioral scars among borrowers and lenders that led to long-term local
cultural aversion to debt (Malmendier, Tate, and Yan (2012)). A not mutually exclusive
possibility is that in areas with many banks, over-indebtedness caused financial distress,
which in turn led to bank closures and a loss of organizational capital in the financial sector
(see Bernanke (1983)). Surviving incumbents may also have been better able to cartelize
and keep out entry. Regardless of the reason, the loss in organizational capital may have
kept land prices depressed over the long term.

In Table 12 Column 1, we consider the lost organizational capital hypothesis: the
bank failures of the 1920s may have altered the local bank market structure, leaving a
persistently smaller number of banks to support economic activity in the wake of the
collapse. The dependent variable in column 1 is the log number of banks in 1972—the
earliest date after 1937 for which we could find this information. Although the banking
industry was already in flux by this time due to regulatory and technological changes (see
Kroszner and Strahan (1999)), the number of banks had not fully recovered from the
distress of the 1920s even by the early 1970s: A one standard deviation increase in the
failure rate in 1920-29 is associated with a 4 percent or 0.07 standard deviation decline in
the number of banks in 1972.

In 1972, when most banking was still local, the Herfindahl index based on deposits

26

is likely a reasonable proxy for the concentration of credit availability inside a county. To
understand better the long run impact of these failures, we collected additional data from
the Survey of Consumer Deposits on the distribution of bank deposits across banks inside a
county in 1972—the first year in which these data are available. We construct the
Herfindahl index of banking competition in a county (computed by first squaring the market
share of each bank, based on deposits in the county, and then taking the sum of these
squares for each county). Lower values generally imply less concentration in the county’s
banking market, while a value close to one would suggest a local banking monopoly.
From column 2 of the Table 12, there is a significant positive association between
the bank suspension rate in the 1920s and the Herfindahl index in 1972. A one standard
deviation increase in the failure rate is associated with a 0.05 standard deviation increase in
the 1972 Herfindahl index. This suggests that the crisis might have left less credit available
in its wake.
Column 3 shows that these failures are also negatively associated with the land
price level in 1960: a one standard deviation increase in the failure rate is associated with a
4.6 percent decline in the land price level in 1960. The IV estimate in column 4, where bank
failures in 1920-29 are instrumented with log number of banks in 1920, is an order of
magnitude larger than its OLS counterpart, suggesting that as before, the collapse of the
banking sector stemming from credit availability during the boom may have had especially
pernicious long run effects.
5.3. Discussion

The evidence when taken together suggests that the areas that had the highest
credit availability in 1920 also endured persistent and disproportionate land price declines.
They also had disproportionately lower credit availability in 1972, decades after the bust.
The temporary boom and bust, when modulated by credit availability and debt build-up,
had adverse long run effects. Long run effects play out across generations and are therefore
hard for agents to internalize when lending decisions are made. This then may suggest a
role for policy intervention.

V. Conclusion
How important is the role of credit availability in inflating asset prices? Our
evidence suggests it matters. Of course, the influence of credit availability on the asset price
boom need not have implied it would exacerbate the bust. Continued easy availability of
credit in an area could in fact have cushioned the bust. However, our evidence suggests that
the rise in asset prices and the build-up in associated leverage were so substantial that bank
failures (resulting from farm loan losses) were significantly more in areas with greater ex
ante credit availability. Moreover, the areas that had greater credit availability during the
commodity price boom had depressed land prices and lower credit availability many
decades after the bust– probably because farm loan losses resulted in the failure of banks
that lent to farmers, and altered banking market structure in subsequent decades.
27

The implication of our work is clear. Greater credit availability tends to make the
economy sensitive to all fundamental shocks, whether temporary or permanent. Because
the associated leverage build-up tends to project the effects through generations, not all
effects are likely to be internalized by the agents negotiating the leverage. Prudent risk
management might suggest regulators could “lean against the wind” in areas where the
perceived shocks to fundamentals are seen to be extreme, so as to dampen the long run
fallout if the shock happens to be temporary.

28

Tables and Figures

TABLE 1A. MORTGAGE CREDIT BY LENDER TYPE ($1,000)

Year

1910
1914
1918
1920

Federal

Life Insurance

Joint stock

Commercial

Individuals

---

386,961

---

406,248

2,414,654

Land Banks
---

39,112

296,386

Companies
597,462
955,591
974,826

Source: Horton, Larsen and Wall (1942)

land banks
---

1,888

60,038

Banks

723,787

1,008,492
1,447,483

Total

and others

3,207,863

3,386,109

4,707,358

4,531,777

6,536,860

5,913,139

8,691,872

TABLE 1B. COMMERCIAL BANK AGRICULTURAL CREDIT ($1,000)

Year

Loans Secured
by Farm Real Estate

Personal and Collateral Loans

1918

1,008,492

3,517,373

1914
1920

Source: Wall (1936)

723,787

1,447,483

2,347,470
5,317,374

29

FIGURE 1. INTEREST RATE AND THE NUMBER OF BANKS.

Figure 1 presents a scatter plot of the average interest rate on farm mortgage credit in a county, and
the number of banks in that county, all data observed in 1920.

30

TABLE 2A. SUMMARY STATISTICS: BANKS, 1900-1920.

Log Banks

Banks Per Square Mile Banks per 1000 persons
1900

Mean

1.137

0.006

0.168

Observations

2716

2708

1910

2611

Mean

1.91

0.013

0.38

Observations

2832

2824

1920

2817

Mean

2.107

0.007

0.507

Observations

3015

2970

1900-1920

2975

Mean

1.735

0.009

0.360

Observations

8563

8502

8403

Standard Deviation

Standard Deviation

Standard Deviation

Standard Deviation

0.793

0.009

0.71

0.169

0.015

0.757

0.29

0.007

0.861

0.381

0.011

0.329

TABLE 2B. CORRELATION: BANKS, 1900-1920.

Log Banks

Banks Per Square Mile

Banks per 1000 persons

Log Banks

Banks
Per Square Mile

0.5820*

1

1

0.4637*

*denotes significance at the 5 percent level or better.

0.0876*

Banks
per 1000 persons

1

31

FIGURE 2. AVERAGE INTEREST RATE ON FARM LOANS, 1920 US CENSUS.

Figure 2 shows the average interest rate on farm mortgage credit across US counties in 1920.

TABLE 3. LAND PRICE PER ACRE, 1910-1930, SUMMARY STATISTICS.

US Census Data

Department of Agriculture Data
US Census Data

Department of Agriculture Data
US Census Data

Department of Agriculture Data

Observations

Mean

Standard
Deviation

3009

41.80

146.55

132

3117

329

3149

436

1910

42.41

1920

66.59
75.82

1930

51.03
42.72

34.13

Correlation
0.97

136.62

0.96

149.68

0.83

67.43

37.52

Notes to Table 3. This table presents summary statistics for the two sources of land price data from
1910-1930. The column entitled “Correlation” reports the correlation coefficient for land prices
between the Census and Department of Agriculture in the 1910, 1920 and 1930 cross section.

FIGURE 3. LAND PRICE PER ACRE ACROSS US COUNTIES, 1920 US CENSUS.

Figure 3 shows the average price of farm land in US counties in 1920.

FIGURE 4. CHANGES IN THE COMMODITY PRICE INDEX AND IN THE PRICE OF LAND PER ACRE, 1910-1930.

Figure 4 shows the median annual change in land prices across US counties, and the annual change in
the commodity index.

FIGURE 5. CHANGES IN LAND PRICE IN 1910-1920 VS CHANGE IN COMMODITY INDEX, 1917-1920.

Figure 5 shows the regression coefficient from a regression of the change in the price per acre of land
over 1910-1920 on the change in the commodity index 1917-1920 for US counties. State fixed effects
are the only other controls. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.

36

Variables

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

7.50

2.72

Average rainfall

2744

36.91

Area, log

2744

7.33

Standard deviation, rainfall
Mississippi distance, log
Atlantic distance, log

Great Lakes distance, log
Pacific distance, log

Black population, log

Urban population, log

Illiterate population, log

Population 5-17 years, log
Total population, log

Manufacturing share
land concentration

Value of crops per acre
log number of farms

Average annual change in
commodity index, 1917-1920

2744
2744

13.39

2744

13.71

2744
2744
2744
2744
2744
2744
2744
2744
2744

13.98
14.98

5.48
7.22
6.61
8.63
9.86
0.39
0.43

8.60

63.50

0.72

4.96

9.64

1.11

2.38

17.42

9.68

15.10

1.02

10.06

15.18

2.95

0.00

1.15
0.77
6.93
1.51
0.85
0.87
0.30
0.09

18.08

11.66

2656

4.31

3.05

7.48

Max

13.09

2744
2744

Min

0.76

9.69

10.95

0.00
2.16

15.57
15.61
10.47
17.26

9.86

5.69

11.34

0.01

0.99

6.96
0.20

12.77

0.69

0.28

67.67

0.01

12.36

3.22

8.75

Notes to Table 4. Distance is in kilometers, area is in square miles, and value is in dollars. All
variables are calculated by county.

37

TABLE 5A. LAND PRICE PER ACRE AND BANKS—BASELINE

Variables
log number of banks, 1920

(1)

(2)

(3)

no controls

controls

Manufacturing<95%

0.603***

0.234***

0.213***

(0.0351)

(0.0387)

Average rainfall

0.000674

(0.00191)

Standard deviation, rainfall

0.0126**

(0.00596)

Area, log

-0.277***

(0.0384)

(4)

(5)

banks per
square mile

banks per
capita

0.000910

8.77e-05

(0.00196)

0.000316

(0.00197)

(0.00198)

0.0131**

(0.00607)

0.0113*

(0.00623)

0.0130**

(0.00613)

(0.0434)

-0.269***

(0.0482)

-0.262***

0.0357

(0.0501)

-0.185***

0.0350

(0.0329)

0.0310

(0.0332)

0.0332

(0.0309)

0.0719*

(0.0368)

0.0734*

(0.0393)

0.0707*

(0.0371)

-0.0905*
(0.0489)

-0.0936*
0.0154

(0.0492)

Mississippi distance, log

(0.0334)

Atlantic distance, log

0.0602*

(0.0337)

Great lakes distance, log

-0.0758*
(0.0429)

-0.0924*

Pacific distance, log

0.00638

(0.0693)

0.00618

-0.0125

(0.0680)

(0.0738)

Black population, log

-0.00269
(0.0124)

-0.00161

-0.000387
(0.0124)

-0.00127

Urban population, log

0.00174

0.00133

(0.00154)

0.00190

(0.00158)

0.00227

(0.00162)

-0.0247

(0.0228)

-0.0443*
(0.0224)

-0.0276

(0.0220)

(0.00147)
-0.0313

(0.0485)
(0.0722)
(0.0118)

(0.0479)

(0.0122)

Illiterate population, log

(0.0228)

Population 5-17 years, log

-1.009***
(0.265)

-1.126***

-1.053***
(0.286)

-1.161***

Total population, log

1.160***
(0.239)

1.281***

1.312***
(0.264)

1.488***

Manufacturing share

-0.251***
(0.0534)

-0.263***

-0.337***
(0.0616)

-0.267***

Value of crops per acre

0.0335***

0.0342***

0.0340***

0.0349***

(0.00265)

(0.273)
(0.244)

(0.0486)

(0.00268)

(0.00277)

(0.280)

(0.263)

(0.0520)

(0.00270)

38

number of banks, 1920,
scaled by land area

18.63***
(4.403)

number of banks, 1920,
scaled by population

Observations
R-squared

332.2***
(57.99)

3,008
0.612

2,744
0.845

2,584
0.855

2,584
0.852

2,584
0.854

Notes to Table 5A. The dependent variable is the log price per acre in 1920. All standard errors clustered at the state level.
***,**,* denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns include state fixed effects. All variables are measured
at the county level. In column 2, we exclude counties with a manufacturing share larger than 95%; in columns 4 and 5, we
scale the number of banks by area and population respectively.

39

TABLE 5B. LOG LAND PRICE PER ACRE AND BANKS—ROBUSTNESS.

Variables
log banks
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

County and year
fixed effects
OLS

1920
cross- section
OLS

(0.0373)

0.277***

1920
cross-section
IV

(0.0379)

0.587***
(0.0775)

8,137

2,478

2,464

0.0925**

0.954

0.742

0.752

Notes to Table 5B. The dependent variable is the log price per acre in 1920. All standard errors
clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. Column 1 is
based on a panel of counties from 1900-1920, and includes county and year fixed effects, along with
the demographic variables used Table 5A column 2. Column 2 regresses the 1920 price per acre (log)
on the log number of banks in the county in 1910, along with the controls in Table 5A column 2 cross
section. Column 3 estimates Table 5A column 2 using the log number of banks in 1910 as an
instrument for the log number of banks in 1920.

40

TABLE 6. BANKS, BORDERS AND DISTANCE.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Variables

all banks

all banks

all banks

log number of banks, 1920

0.202***

0.187***

0.192***

in-state banks, 0-40 miles

0.107***

in-state banks, 40-80 miles

0.0129

out-of-state banks, 0-40 miles

40 miles
(0.0372)

50 miles
(0.0365)

30 miles
(0.0378)

(0.0210)

(0.0419)
0.0234***
(0.00741)

in-state banks, 0-50 miles

0.117***

in-state banks, 50-100 miles

0.00694

(0.0295)

(0.0440)

out-of-state banks, 0-50 miles

0.0240***
(0.00788)

in-state banks, 0-30 miles

0.0576***

in-state banks, 30-60 miles

0.0833**

in-state banks, 60-90 miles

-0.0145

(0.0355)

out-of-state banks, 0-30 miles

0.0168**

(0.00714)

out-of-state banks, 30-60 miles

0.0158*

(0.0158)

(0.0342)

(0.00802)

Observations

1,962

2,226

2,122

F test: x=0

18.08

11.58

6.741

R-squared

0.866

0.865

0.867

41

Prob > F

0.000109

0.00143

0.0128

Notes to Table 6. The dependent variable is the log price per acre in 1920. All standard errors
clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns
include state fixed effects, and the baseline controls in Table 5A, column 2. The F-test assesses
whether the nearest within-state and out-of-state counties are statistically different at conventional
levels. Column 1 includes only those counties whose nearest out of state neighbor is less than 80
miles away—centroid to centroid. Columns 2 and 3 restrict the sample to border windows of 100 and
90 miles respectively. “In state banks 0-x miles” refers to the average log number of banks in in-state
counties whose centroid is less than x miles from the centroid of the county of interest. “Out of state
banks 0-x miles” refers to the average log number of banks in out-of-state counties whose centroid is
less than x miles from the centroid of the county of interest.

42

TABLE 7A. NATIONAL AND STATE BANKS, AND BRANCHING REGULATIONS.

Variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

national and state banks

national and state banks

national and state banks

0.0965***
(0.0209)

0.0847***
(0.0190)

0.0854*

(0.0415)

log of number of state banks in county

0.145***
(0.0245)

0.130***
(0.0234)

0.136***

In-state state banks, 0-40 miles

0.0447**
(0.0196)

0.0565***
(0.0198)

0.00982

(0.0286)

In-state state banks, 40-80 miles

-0.0520

(0.0509)

-0.0249

(0.0492)

-0.0870
0.00532

log of number of national banks in county

(unit banking counties)

(branching counties)

(0.0348)

(0.112)

Out-of-state state banks, 0-40 miles

0.0127

(0.0137)

0.0124

(0.0168)

(0.0277)

In-state national banks, 0-40 miles

0.0871***
(0.0226)

0.0589**
(0.0253)

0.107**

(0.0377)

In-state national banks, 40-80 miles

0.0807*

(0.0454)

0.112**

(0.0476)

-0.0299

(0.0937)

0.0232

0.0303

-0.00999

Out-of-state national banks, 0-40 miles

(0.0189)

(0.0247)

(0.00929)

Observations
R-squared

1,963
0.871

1,460
0.894

503

0.782

Notes to Table 7A. The dependent variable is the log price per acre in 1920. All standard errors clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance
at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns include state fixed effects, and the baseline controls in Table 5A, column 2. All columns include those
counties whose nearest out of state neighbor is less than 80 miles away—centroid to centroid. “In state banks 0-x miles” refers to the average log
number of banks in in-state counties whose centroid is less than x miles from the centroid of the county of interest. “Out of state banks 0-x miles” refers
to the average log number of banks in out-of-state counties whose centroid is less than x miles from the centroid of the county of interest. "National
banks" denotes banks with a national charter, while "state banks" denote banks with a state charter.

44

Figure 6.

Table 7B. Federal Reserve District Borders
(1)

(2)

Segmentation: In-state,
district

Segmentation: All

ntl banks, in-county

0.0969***

0.0983***

state banks in-county

0.143***

0.147***

VARIABLES

(0.0191)
(0.0220)

(0.0183)
(0.0228)

in-state, in-district, state banks, 0-40 miles

0.0430**

0.0450**

in-state, in-district, state banks, 40-80 miles

-0.0489

-0.0436

in-state, out-of-district, state banks, 40 miles
in-state, out-of-district, state banks, 40-80 miles

(0.0187)

(0.0178)

(0.0466)

(0.0449)

(0.0288)

(0.0263)

(0.0226)

(0.0238)

0.0495*
0.0164

0.0506*
0.0139

in-state, in-district, ntl banks, 0-40 miles

0.0909***

0.0895***

in-state, in-district, ntl banks, 40-80 miles

0.0761*

0.0695*

in-state, out-of-district, ntl banks, 40 miles
in-state, out-of-district, ntl banks, 40-80 miles
out-of state ntl banks, 40 miles
out-of state state banks, 40 miles
out-of-state, in-district, state banks, 40 miles

(0.0218)

(0.0208)

(0.0427)

(0.0406)

(0.0627)

(0.0564)

-0.0319
-0.0116

(0.0393)
0.0198

-0.0436

-0.00702
(0.0391)

(0.0194)
0.0155

(0.0140)

-0.0116

46

(0.0147)

out-of-state, out-of-district, state banks, 40 miles

0.0458

(0.0292)

out-of-state, in-district, ntl banks, 40 miles

0.0432*

(0.0228)

out-of-state, out-of-district, ntl banks, 40 miles
Observations
R-squared

0.000152
1,943
0.873

NOTES TO TABLE 7B. THE DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS THE LOG PRICE PER ACRE IN 1920. ALL STANDARD
ERRORS CLUSTERED AT THE STATE LEVEL. ***,**,* DENOTES SIGNIFICANCE AT THE 1, 5 AND 10
PERCENT LEVEL. THE ESTIMATION INCLUDES STATE FIXED EFFECTS, AND THE BASELINE CONTROLS IN
TABLE 5A, COLUMN 2. IT INCLUDES THOSE COUNTIES WHOSE NEAREST OUT OF STATE NEIGHBOR IS LESS
THAN 80 MILES AWAY—CENTROID TO CENTROID. “IN (OUT-OF)-STATE, IN (OUT-OF)-DISTRICT, STATE
(NTL) BANKS, X MILES” REFERS TO THE AVERAGE LOG NUMBER OF STATE (NATIONAL) BANKS IN IN(OUTOF)-STATE COUNTIES IN THE SAME (DIFFERENT) FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT WHOSE CENTROID IS LESS
THAN X MILES FROM THE CENTROID OF THE COUNTY OF INTEREST. "NATIONAL BANKS" DENOTES BANKS
WITH A NATIONAL CHARTER, WHILE "STATE BANKS" DENOTE BANKS WITH A STATE CHARTER.

(0.0337)
1,943
0.876

47

TABLE 8. DEPOSIT INSURANCE, BANKS AND PRICES

Variables

(1)

(3)

(4)

Log number of banks

0.218***
(0.0411)

0.218***

Log banks*Deposit
Insurance

0.0865**
(0.0406)

0.134***

2,743

2,743

Log number of state banks

0.131***

Log state banks*Deposit
Insurance

0.0771**

(0.0255)

(0.0364)

Log number of national
banks

0.0644***
(0.0227)

Log national banks*Deposit
Insurance

Observations
R-squared

(2)

0.0625*

(0.0323)

2,743
0.843

2,743
0.839

0.846

(0.0394)

(0.0436)

0.846

Notes to Table 8. The dependent variable is the log price per acre in 1920. All standard errors clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance at
the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns include state fixed effects, and the baseline controls in Table 5A, column 2. The “Deposit Insurance” indicator

variable in columns 1-3 equal one for counties in the eight states that had deposit insurance in 1920. In column 4, the indicator variable equals one only
for counties in the 5 states with deposit insurance before 1914.

49

TABLE 9. CHANNELS OF TRANSMISSION

Variables

log banks
log banks, squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Change in prices:
1920-1910

Change in new acres
in farming: 1920-1910

Change in improved acres
in farming: 1920-1910

Change in investment:
1920-1910

Change in debt
per acre:

0.215***
(0.0493)

0.0600*

(0.0328)

0.216***
(0.0589)

0.398***

0.259***

-0.0411***
(0.0107)

-0.00979

(0.00965)

-0.0452***
(0.0140)

-0.0624***
-0.00143

(0.0493)

(0.0111)

1920-1910

(0.0827)
-0.0361

(0.0215)

log banks*commodity index

0.0148**

(0.00578)

-0.00957**
(0.00397)

-0.00615

(0.00497)

(0.00608)

change in banks, 1920-1910

0.0593**
(0.0270)

0.0762***
(0.0229)

0.107***
(0.0271)

0.0849***

0.0100

(0.0176)

0.0276**
(0.0120)

0.0224*

(0.0131)

0.0311*

(0.0182)

0.0637**

2,583

2,581

2,582

2,582

2,333

commodity index, 1917

R-squared

0.572

0.463

0.461

(0.0292)

0.432

0.00998

(0.00942)
0.0133

(0.0230)
(0.0278)
0.863

Notes to Table 9. All standard errors clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns include state
fixed effects, and the baseline controls in Table 5A, column 2. Column 1 includes the log price per acre in 1910; while columns 2-5 include respectively
the log acres in farming; improved acres; farm investment and mortgage debt per acre, all observed in 1910.

50

51

TABLE 10. DEBT AND BANKING SECTOR DISTRESS

(1)

VARIABLES
commodity index, 1917
change in mortgage debt per
acre, 1920-1910

OLS

(2)
IV

suspended banks, 1920-1929
0.000131

-0.00380

(3)

OLS

(4)
IV

suspended deposits, 1920-1929
-0.000228

-0.00259

(0.000914)

(0.00340)

(0.000819)

(0.00308)

(0.00215)

(0.0131)

(0.00206)

(0.0125)

0.00221

0.0303**

0.00204

0.0194

debt per acre

0.000487**

0.00543***

0.000534**

0.00454***

debt per acre, squared

-4.40e-06**

-5.10e-05***

-4.56e-06***

-3.58e-05***

-1.68e-06

-5.18e-05

-1.36e-06

-9.07e-05

debt per acre*commodity
index
Observations
R-squared

(0.000203)
(1.70e-06)

(0.00133)

(1.57e-05)

(0.000208)
(1.67e-06)

(0.00111)

(1.19e-05)

(1.16e-05)

(0.000103)

(1.15e-05)

(8.94e-05)

2,353

2,324

2,350

2,323

0.392

-0.100

0.334

0.037

Notes to Table 10. All standard errors clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns include state
fixed effects, and the baseline controls in Table 5A, column 2. The instruments in columns 3 and 5 are the log number of banks in 1920, its squared term,
interacted with the commodity index, and the change in the number of banks, 1910-1920.

52

TABLE 11. LAND PRICES AND PAST CREDIT AVAILABILITY

Variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

change in prices:
1930-1920

change in prices:
1940-1930
(0.0499)

-0.532***

change in prices:
1960-1950

(0.0511)

-0.145***

change in prices:
1950-1940

log banks 1920, squared

0.0287**

log banks 1920

-0.235***

(5)

level
1960

(0.124)

0.122*

(0.0682)

-0.464***

(0.0136)

0.0187

(0.0112)

0.105***
(0.0299)

-0.00223
(0.0169)

0.0823***

log banks 1920*commodity index 1917

0.00958**
(0.00443)

0.00428

(0.00794)

0.0123

(0.0134)

0.000698

(0.00987)

0.00921

(0.00863)

change in banks, 1920-1910

-0.00631
(0.0207)

0.00861

(0.0199)

-0.0101

(0.0344)

0.0262

(0.0265)

0.0387

(0.0310)

commodity index, 1917

-0.0775***

-0.0315

-0.0142

0.0396

-0.0565**

price per acre, 1920, log

-0.0827**

(0.0137)

(0.0239)

(0.0371)

(0.0293)

(0.0639)

(0.0173)

(0.0269)

(0.0394)

53

price per acre, 1930, log

-0.169***
(0.0295)

price per acre, 1940, log

-0.317***
(0.0679)

price per acre, 1950, log

Observations
R-squared

-0.468***
(0.0314)

2,573
0.646

2,572
0.648

2,572
0.724

2,572
0.810

2,572
0.819

Notes to Table 11. All standard errors clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns include state
fixed effects, and the baseline controls in Table 5A, column 2.

54

Table 12. Organizational Collapse
(1)

(2)

log number of
banks,1972

HerfindahlHirschman Index,
1972

Bank suspension rate,
1920-1929

-1.283***

0.328*

-1.485***

-8.126**

commodity index, 1917

0.00345

-0.004

-0.0146

-0.0151

VARIABLES

Observations
R-squared

(3)

(4)

OLS

IV

price level,
1960

(0.414)

(0.187)

(0.00799)

(0.003)

(0.0161)

(0.0149)

0.732

0.552

0.805

0.750

2,470

2464

(0.345)

2,458

(3.800)

2,458

Notes to Table 12. All standard errors clustered at the state level. ***,**,* denotes significance at the
1, 5 and 10 percent level. All columns include state fixed effects, and the baseline controls in Table
5A, column 2. Columns 1 and 2 include the log number of banks in 1920, while columns 3 and 4
include the log price per acre in 1920. The instrument in column 4 is the log number of banks in
1920.

References

Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin, “Liquidity and Leverage”, Staff Reports 328, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale. Competition and Financial Stability. Journal of Money,
Credit & Banking (2004) vol. 36 (3)
Alston, Lee. “Farm Foreclosure Moratorium Legislation: A Lesson from the Past”, American
Economic Review, vol 74, No. 3, June 1984, pp 445-457.
Alston, Lee J. “The Role of Financial Institutions as Sources of Farm Mortgage Credit: 19161940,” in D. Martin and G.T. Mills eds., Dictionary of the History of American Banking,
Westport: Greenwood Press.
Alston, Lee, Wayne Grove and David C. Wheelock. Why do banks fail? Evidence from the
1920s. Explorations in Economic History (1994) vol. 31 (4) pp. 409-431
Amel, Dean, Arthur B Kennickell and Kevin B Moore. 2008. “Finance and Economics
Discussion Series Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs Federal Reserve
Board, Washington, D.C.Banking Market Definition: Evidence From the Survey of Consumer
Finances .” 1–27.
Barnett, George. 1911. State Banks and Trust Companies Since the Passage of the National
Bank Act. Washington: Government Printing Office.
The Bankers Encyclopedia, 1920. Bankers Encyclopedia Company: New York.
Benner, Claude L. “Credit Aspects of the Agricultural Depression, 1920-1921”, Journal of
Political Economy, Vol 33, 1925, 217-233.
______. 1926. “The Federal Intermediate Credit System”. The Macmillan Company: New York.

56

Benton, George, Robert A. Eisenbeis , Paul M. Horvitz, Edward J. Kane and George G.
Kaufman, 1986, Perspectives on Safe and Sound Banking: Past, Present, and Future , MIT
Press, Cambridge.
Bernanke, Benjamin, 1983, Non-monetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of
the great depression, American Economic Review 73, 257-276.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Gertler, Mark. ‘‘Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations.’’ A.E.R. 79 (March 1989): 14–31.

Blattman, Chris, Jason Hwang and Jeffrey Williamson. 2007. Winners and Losers in the
Commodity Lottery: The Impact of Terms of Trade Growth and Volatility in the Periphery,
1870-1939, Journal of Development Economics.
Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe, 2002, “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability:
exploring the nexus”, Working Paper 114, Bank for International Settlements.
Binswanger, Hans P., “Attitudes towards Risk: Experimental Measure- mint in Rural India,”
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 62 (1981), 395–407.
Binswanger, Hans P., Klaus Feininger, and Garson Feder, “Power, Distortions, Revolt and
Reform in Agricultural Land Relations” (pp. 2659–2772), in Jere Behrman and T. N.
Srinivasan (Eds.), Handbook of Development Economics (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1995).
Boyle, James. 1928. Farm Relief. (New York: Doubleday, Doran & Company, Inc).
Bridewell, David A. 1938. “Effects of Defective Mortgage Laws on Home Financing, the.” Law
& Contemporary Problems. 5: 545.
Calomiris, Charles. 1990. “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary? A Historical Perspective”, Journal
of Economic History, 50, 283-295.
Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach and Douglas Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference with Multi-way
Clustering, Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, 29(2), pp. 238-249.
57

Chesterfield, Ray B. 1939. Historical Survey of Branch Banking in the United States. New
York: American Economists Council for the Study of Branch Banking.
Davis, Joseph. “World Banking, Currency, and Prices, 1920-1921”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol 3, No 9, 1921, pp 304-325.
Davis, Lance E., 1965, The investment market, 1870-1914: The evolution of a national
market, The Journal of Economic History 25, 355-399.
Eichengreen, Barry., 1984, Mortgage interest rates in the populist era. American Economic
Review 74, 995–1015.

Eastwood, Robert, Michael Lipton, and Andrew Newell, “Farm Size” (pp. 3323–3397), in R.
Evenson and P. Pingale (Eds.), Handbook of Agricultural Economics (Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 2010).
Economic Policy Commission of the American Bankers Association. 1935. The Bank
Chartering History and Policies of the United States.
Evanoff, Douglas, 1988, Branch banking and service accessibility, Journal of Money Credit
and Banking 20, 191-202.
Federal Farm Loan Board. Annual Report, 1920. House of Representatives Document No.
553. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1920.
Federal Reserve Committee on Branch, Group and Chain Banking. 1931. “Changes in the
Number and Size of Banks in the United States, 1834-1931”.
Flood, Mark D., U.S. Historical Data on Bank Market Structure, 1896-1955, (Computer file);
Charlotte, NC: Mark D. Flood (producer), 1998; Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium
for Political and Social Research (distributor), 1998.
58

Fisher, Irving. ‘‘The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.’’ Econometrica
1 (October 1933): 337–57.

Gan, Jie. Banking market structure and financial stability: Evidence from the Texas real
estate crisis in the 1980s. Journal of Financial Economics (2004) vol. 73 (3) pp. 567-601
Galor, Oded, Omer Moav, and Dietrich Vollrath, “Inequality in Land Ownership, the
Emergence of Human Capital Promoting Institutions and the Great Divergence,” Review of
Economic Studies 76 (2009), 143–179.
Gardner, Bruce L., American Agriculture in the Twentieth Century: How It Flourished and
What It Cost (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002).
Garlock, Fred L. 1932. “Effect of Seasonality of Agriculture on Iowa Banking”. Washington
DC: US Department of Agriculture.
Geneakoplos, John "The Leverage Cycle." In D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff and M. Woodford, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2009, vol. 24: 1-65, University of Chicago Press [plus erratum]
[CFP 1304]
Ghent, Andra. The Enduring Legacy of Populism: A Brief History of America's Mortgage
Laws, (2013), unpublished manuscript.
Glaeser, Edward, Joshua Gottleb and Joseph Gyourko (2010), “Can Cheap Credit explain the
Housing Boom”, mimeo, Harvard Economics Department.
Gile, B.M. and A.N. Moore. 1928. Farm Credit in a Plantation and an Upland Cotton District in
Arkansas. Bulletin no. 228: University of Arkansas, College of Agriculture.
Guiso, Luigi, Paula Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, “Does Local Financial Development
Matter?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119.
Heady, Early O., Economics of Agricultural Production and Resource Use (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1952).
Holmes. The effect of state policies on the location of manufacturing: Evidence from state
borders. Journal of Political Economy (1998) vol. 106 (4) pp. 667-705

59

Holmes, Thomas J., Sanghoon Lee. Economies of Density versus Natural Advantage: Crop
Choice on the Back Forty, forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics.
Hong, Harrison and Jeremy Stein. Disagreement and the stock market. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives (2007) vol. 21 (2) pp. 109-128
Horton, Donald, Haarald C. Larsen, Norman J Wall. 1942. Farm Mortgage

Credit Facilities in the United States. Miscellaneous Publication No. 478, United States
Department of Agriculture, 1942
Keeley, Michael. Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking. The American
Economic Review (1990) vol. 80 (5) pp. 1183-1200.
Kindleberger, Charles, and Robert Z Aliber (2005), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of
Financial Crises (Wiley Investment Classics)
Kroszner, R. And P. Strahan, 1999, “What drives Deregulation? Economics and Politics of the
Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1437-1467, 114.
Malmendier, U., G. Tate, and J. Yan, 2012, Overconfidence and Early-life Experiences: The
Effect of Managerial Traits on Corporate Financial Policies, mimeo, University of California,
Berkeley.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009, 124(4),
1449-1496
Minsky, Hyman (1986), Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, Yale University Press, New Haven,
CT.
O’Hara, M. 1983. “Tax exempt Financing, Some lessons from History” Journal of Money Credit
and Banking 15, 425-441.
60

Petersen, Mitchell A., and Rajan, Raghuram G. 1995. The Effect of Credit Market Competition
on Lending Relationships. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.110, No. 2, pp. 407-443.
Rajan, Raghuram and Rodney Ramcharan, 2011a, “Land and Credit: A Study of the Political
Economy of Banking in the United States in the Early 20th Century”, Journal of Finance,
December.
Rajan, Raghuram and Rodney Ramcharan, 2011b, “Constituencies and Legislation: The Fight
over the McFadden Act of 1927”, mimeo, University of Chicago.
Rajan, Raghuram and Rodney Ramcharan, 2014, “Financial Fire Sales: Evidence from Bank
Failures”, mimeo, University of Chicago.
Rajan, Raghuram, 1994, "Why Bank Credit Policies Fluctuate: A Theory and Some Evidence",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 109, pp 399-442.
Scheinkman, Jose and Wei Xiong. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. Journal of
Political Economy (2003) vol. 111 (6) pp. 1183-1219.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach. Journal of Finance (1992) vol. 47 (4) pp. 1343-1366
Southworth, Donald Shirley. 1928. “Branch Banking in the United States”. McGraw Hill: New
York.
Stein, Jeremy. Prices and trading volume in the housing market: A model with downpayment effects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics (1995) vol. 110 (2) pp. 379-406
Taylor, Allan and Moritz Schularick. 2009. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870-2008”. NBER Working Paper 15512.
Upham, Cyril B. and Edwin Lamke. 1934. Closed and Distressed Banks: A Study in Public
Administration. The Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C.
61

Wall, J. Norman. 1937. Agricultural loans of commercial banks. Technical Bulletin No. 521,
and supplement: Recent Agricultural credit developments relating to commercial banks
(Feb. 1937). US Department of Agriculture,
Weldon, Samuel. Digest of State Banking Statutes. 1910. Government Printing Office.
Wheelock, David. 1995, Regulation, Market Structure, and the Bank Failures of the Great
Depression, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, March-April pp 27-38.
Wheelock, David and Paul Wilson. 1995. Explaining Bank Failures: Deposit Insurance,
Regulation, and Efficiency. The Review of Economics and Statistics, November, 77(4), pp 689700.
White, Eugene, 1981, “State-Sponsored Insurance of Bank Deposits in the United States,
1907-1929”, The Journal of Economic History Vol. 41, No. 3 (Sep., 1981), pp. 537-557
White, Eugene, 1982, “The Political Economy of Banking Regulation, 1864-1933”, The
Journal of Economic History Vol. 42, No. 1, The Tasks of Economic History (Mar., 1982), pp.
33-40
Wicker, Elmus. “A Reconsideration of Federal Reserve Policy During the 1920-1921
Depression”, Journal of Economic History, vol 26, No. 2, 1966, pp. 223-238.
Williamson, O.E. 1988. Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance, Journal of Finance, 43,
567-592.
Yergin, Daniel. 1991. The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power. New York: Simon
and Schuster.

62

