                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PRUDENTIAL POLICY FOR PEGGERS

                                    Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
                                         Martin Uribe

                                       Working Paper 18031
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18031


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe and Martin Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Prudential Policy for Peggers
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe and Martin Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 18031
May 2012
JEL No. E31,E62,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper shows that in a small open economy model with downward nominal wage rigidity pegging
the nominal exchange rate creates a negative pecuniary externality. This peg-induced externality is
shown to cause unemployment, overborrowing, and depressed levels of consumption. The paper characterizes
the optimal capital control policy in this model and shows that it is prudential in nature. For it restricts
capital inflows in good times and subsidizes external borrowing in bad times. Under plausible calibrations
of the model, this type of macro prudential policy is shown to lower the average unemployment rate
by 10 percentage points, reduce average external debt by more than 50 percent, and increase welfare
by over 7 percent of consumption per period.


Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu

Martin Uribe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

Fixed-exchange rate arrangements are often part of broader economic reform programs that
include liberalization of international capital flows. For small emerging economies, such a
policy combination has been a mixed blessing. A case in point is the European currency
union, which imposes capital account liberalization as a prerequisite for admission. In the
early 2000s, a number of small peripheral members of the eurozone enjoyed large capital

inflows, which through their expansionary effect on domestic absorption, led to sizable ap-
preciations in hourly wages (see figure 1). With the onset of the global recession in 2008,

                          Figure 1: Boom-Bust Cycle in Peripheral Europe: 2000-2011
                          Current Account / GDP                               Labor Cost Index, Nominal                      Unemployment Rate
                 −2                                                   110                                           14

                                                                                                                    13
                 −4                                                   100
                                                                                                                    12
                                                  Index, 2008 = 100




                 −6                                                    90
                                                                                                                    11
       Percent




                                                                                                          Percent
                 −8                                                    80                                           10

                                                                                                                     9
                 −10                                                   70
                                                                                                                     8
                 −12                                                   60
                                                                                                                     7

                 −14                                                   50                                            6
                       2002 2004 2006 2008 2010                             2002 2004 2006 2008 2010                     2002 2004 2006 2008 2010
                                 Date                                                 Date                                         Date




      Data Source: Eurostat. Data represents arithmetic mean of Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia,
      Greece, Lithuania, Latvia, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia, and Slovakia.



however, capital inflows dried up and aggregate demand collapsed (see the left panel of fig-

ure 1). At the same time nominal wages remained at the level they achieved at the peak of
the boom (see the middle panel of figure 1). The combination of highly depressed levels of
aggregate demand and high nominal wages led to a massive increase in involuntary unem-
ployment (see the right panel of figure 1). In turn, local monetary authorities were unable

to reduce real wages via a devaluation because of their commitment to the currency union.
    This narrative evokes several interrelated questions. One is what is the connection be-
tween capital mobility and the economic performance of fixed exchange rate regimes. An-

                                                                                      1
other is whether emerging-country peggers might be better off imposing capital controls.
And, if so, whether optimal capital controls are prudential in nature. The goal of this paper
is to address these questions in the context of a dynamic, stochastic, optimizing model of an
emerging economy. The central counterfactual situation considered in our analysis, i.e., the

imposition of capital controls, serves as a way to highlight the costs imposed by the current
institutional arrangement in the European Union that insists on free capital mobility. The
main point that emerges from our analysis is that the combination of free capital mobility
and currency pegs is likely to result in substantial losses of output and welfare for peripheral
members of the union. Our theoretical laboratory is the Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011)

model of an open economy with tradable and nontradable goods, downward nominal wage
rigidity and a fixed exchange rate. The model economy is driven by exogenous and sto-
chastic disturbances to the endowment of tradable goods and to the country interest rate.
We show that in the context of that model, the combination of downward nominal wage

rigidity, a fixed exchange rate, and free capital mobility creates a negative pecuniary exter-
nality. The nature of the externality identified in this paper is as follows. Expansions in
aggregate demand drive up wages, putting the economy in a vulnerable situation. For in the
contractionary phase of the cycle, downward wage rigidity and a fixed exchange rate prevent

real wages from falling to the level consistent with full employment. Agents understand
this mechanism, but are too small to internalize that their individual expenditure decisions
collectively cause inefficiently large increases in wages during expansions, which exacerbate
unemployment during contractions.
   The existence of the pecuniary externality creates a rationale for government intervention.

We focus on capital controls as a second-best instrument. In particular, we assume that the
government levies a proportional tax (subsidy) on net external debt holdings. The tax
is equivalent to an interest rate markup on net foreign liabilities. We then characterize
analytically and numerically optimal capital control policy under commitment. We show

that the implied tax on external debt is positive on average and highly procyclical. Thus,


                                               2
the optimal capital control policy is prudential in nature, as it seeks to mitigate the pecuniary
externality by restricting capital inflows in good times and subsidizing external borrowing
in bad times.
   Using a calibrated version of the model, we show that the optimal capital control policy

achieves significant reductions in unemployment (about 10 percentage points) and that the
welfare gains from macro prudential policy are large, amounting to over 7 percent of con-
sumption per period. By contrasting the aggregate allocation under optimal capital controls
with the one resulting under free capital mobility, we find that the unregulated economy
displays significant overborrowing. The average external debt-to-output ratio in the econ-

omy with free capital mobility is more than twice as large as the one induced under optimal
capital controls.
   Capital controls are not the only instruments through which the policymaker can address
the inefficiencies arising from the combination of a currency peg and downward nominal wage

rigidity. Elsewhere, we have shown that the first-best allocation can be achieved by means of
optimal labor or consumption subsidies (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011, 2012). A natural
question is then why bother characterizing optimal capital controls, if, after all, they achieve
only a second-best allocation. The reason is that policymakers may find that capital controls

is the only instrument that they can implement in practice. The use of labor subsidies to
achieve the first best may be difficult from a political point of view. In Schmitt-Grohé
and Uribe (2011, 2012) we show that the labor subsidy scheme that implements the first
best inherits the stochastic properties of the underlying shocks, which in emerging countries
like those in the periphery of Europe, are highly volatile. Thus the optimal labor subsidy

scheme would require large variations in wage subsidies at a quarterly frequency. This may
be highly problematic in light of the fact that the institutional arrangements (especially the
legislative process) that govern the determination of income taxes is highly inertial, making
large swings in labor subsidies on a quarter-to-quarter basis unrealistic. By contrast, capital

controls can be politically portrayed as taxes on foreign speculators. As a result the executive


                                               3
branch of the government typically is given much more leeway to set capital income taxes
at business-cycle frequency.
   In the case of Europe, all three policy options for addressing the inefficiencies brought
about by downward nominal wage rigidity, namely devaluation, labor/production subsidies,

and capital controls, are limited by existing supranational arrangements. If peripheral Eu-
rope is to achieve stability central aspects of these arrangements are likely to change. It
is therefore of interest to fully characterize the business-cycle implications of each of these
three policy alternatives. The contribution of the current paper is to investigate the poten-
tial benefits of moving away of free capital mobility toward a policy of optimally designed

capital controls.
   We view our work as most closely related to the Mundellian literature on the trilemma
of international finance, according to which a country cannot have at the same time a fixed
exchange rate, free capital mobility, and an independent interest rate policy. (For a recent

treatment, see Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor, 2010.) We present an explicit articulation
of this view in the context of a dynamic, optimizing model of a small open economy with
downward nominal wage rigidity. We take a fixed exchange rate regime as a given, because we
wish to understand the policy options available to the peripherical members of the eurozone

short of breaking away from the common currency arrangement. In our model economy, the
benevolent government has an incentive to vary the effective interest rate (through capital
controls) as a way to insulate the nontraded sector from external shocks. The existing
theoretical literature on optimal capital controls based on the trilemma of international
finance is quite informal and reduced form. By contrast, the building blocks of our theoretical

framework are welfare maximizing households, profit maximizing firms, and a benevolent
government operating in a dynamic and uncertain environment. Consequently, our model,
once calibrated to capture key elements of actual emerging economies, allows us to derive
sharp predictions about the welfare-maximizing capital control process and its associated

real allocation.


                                              4
   A second strand of the related literature stresses financial distortions, such as collat-
eral constraints on external borrowing as a rationale for capital controls (Auernheimer and
Garcı́a-Saltos, 2000; Uribe, 2006, 2007; Lorenzoni, 2008; Korinek, 2010; Benigno, Chen,
Otrok, Rebucci, and Young, 2011; and Bianchi, 2011). A third, more recent, line of work, is

based on the observation that large countries can affect the interest rate, or the intertemporal
price of consumption (Costinot, Lorenzoni, and Werning, 2011). As a result, governments of
large countries have incentives to apply capital controls as a means to induce households to
internalize the country’s market power in financial markets. Our theory of capital controls is
distinct from the above two in that it does not assume the existence of collateral constraints

or market power in financial markets. Instead, in our formulation the government levies
taxes on external debt as a way to mitigate the distortion in the labor market created by
the combination of downward nominal wage rigidity and a fixed exchange rate. Because
consumption of tradables acts as a shifter of the demand for nontradables, and because the

nontraded sector is labor intensive, the government can indirectly affect employment in the
nontraded sector by manipulating the intertemporal price of tradables (the interest rate)
via capital controls. Thus, the government in a fixed-exchange-rate economy determines the
optimal capital control policy as the solution to a trade off between intertemporal distor-

tions (caused the capital controls themselves) and static distortions (caused by downward
real wage rigidity).
   The remainder of the paper is organized in seven sections. Section 2 embeds capital
controls into a small open economy model with downward nominal wage rigidity and a fixed-
exchange rate. Section 3 characterizes optimal capital control policy under commitment. It

shows analytically that the optimal capital-conrol policy is prudential. Section 4 analyzes
quantitatively the behavior of the economy with and without capital controls undergoing a
boom-bust cycle. Section 5 presents the effects of optimal capital controls on first and second
unconditional moments of key macroeconomic aggregates. Section 6 identifies and quantifies

overborrowing induced by the combination of a currency peg and downward nominal wage


                                               5
rigidity. Section 7 investigates the welfare losses due to free capital mobility in fixed exchange
rate economies. Section 8 concludes.



2     An Open Economy With Downward Wage Rigidity

We embed capital controls into the small open economy model with downward nominal wage
rigidity developed in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011). We assume that the nominal wage

rate, denoted Wt , must satisfy the following restriction


                                          Wt ≥ γWt−1 ,                                        (1)


where γ is a nonnegative parameter governing the degree of downward nominal wage rigidity.
The larger is γ, the more stringent is the downward rigidity in nominal wages. In Schmitt-
Grohé and Uribe (2011), we present empirical evidence suggesting that γ is close to unity.

    Throughout the present analysis, we assume that the central bank pegs the nominal
exchange rate. Specifically, letting Et denote the domestic-currency price of one unit of
foreign currency, we impose
                                             Et = Ē                                          (2)

for all t, where Ē is a positive constant. The combination of a fixed-exchange-rate regime
and downward nominal wage rigidity introduces a real rigidity. Specifically, the wage rate
in terms of foreign currency, denoted wt ≡ Wt /Et is downwardly rigid. This rigidity makes
the economy vulnerable to any shock that requires a fall in real wages. The inability of the

real wage to fall will in general cause unemployment and therefore a loss of welfare.
    The inefficiency introduced by the combination of downward nominal wage rigidity and a
fixed exchange rate, opens the door to welfare-improving fiscal policy. In the present inves-
tigation, we study the extent to which capital controls can help ameliorate this inefficiency.

We model capital controls as a proportional tax on gross capital inflows.


                                                6
   The model features two types of good, tradables and nontradables. Tradable output is
exogenous and stochastic, while nontraded output is produced with labor services. The econ-
omy is driven by two exogenous shocks. One is the endowment of tradables just described.
The second shock emerges from the assumption that the interest rate charged to the small

open economy in international financial markets is exogenous and stochastic.


2.1    Households

The economy is populated by a large number of identical households with preferences de-
scribed by the utility function
                                              X
                                              ∞
                                         E0         β t U (ct ),                            (3)
                                              t=0

where ct denotes consumption. The period utility function U is assumed to be strictly
increasing and strictly concave and the parameter β, denoting the subjective discount factor
resides in the interval (0, 1). The symbol Et denotes the mathematical expectations operator

conditional upon information available in period t. The consumption good is a composite of
tradable consumption, cTt , and nontradable consumption, cN
                                                          t . The aggregation technology is

of the form
                                         ct = A(cTt , cN
                                                       t ),                                 (4)

where A is an increasing, concave, and linearly homogeneous function.
   We assume full liability dollarization. Specifically, households have access to a one-
period, internationally traded, state non-contingent bond denominated in tradables. We let

dt denote the level of debt assumed in period t − 1 and due in period t and rt the interest rate
on debt held between periods t and t + 1. The sequential budget constraint of the household
is given by
                                           y                         dt+1 (1 − τtd )
                  cTt + pt cN                   T
                            t + dt = (1 + τt )[yt + wt ht + φt ] +                   ,      (5)
                                                                        1 + rt

where pt ≡ PtN /PtT denotes the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables, with
PtN and PtT , denoting, respectively, the nominal prices of nontradables and tradables. We

                                                    7
assume that the law of one price holds for tradables. Specifically, we let PtT ∗ denote the
foreign currency price of tradables and Et the nominal exchange rate, defined as the domestic-
currency price of one unit of foreign currency. Then, the law of one price implies that


                                         PtT = PtT ∗ Et .


We assume that the foreign-currency price of tradables is constant and normalized to unity,

PtT ∗ = 1.
   The variable τtd denotes the tax rate on debt acquired in period t. For each unit of
tradable good that the household promises to pay in period t + 1, it receives (1 − τtd )/(1 + rt )
units in period t. The government intervention in the international financial market alters
the effective gross interest rate paid by the household from 1 + rt to (1 + rt )/(1 − τtd ). The

rate τtd can take positive or negative values. When it is positive, the government discourages
borrowing by raising the effective interest rate. In this case, we say that the government
imposes capital controls. On the other hand, when τtd is negative, the government subsidizes
international borrowing by lowering the effective interest rate. As we will see shortly, a

benevolent government will make heavy use of cyclical adjustments in capital controls to
stabilize consumption and employment.
   The variable τty denotes a proportional income subsidy rate (tax rate if negative) deter-
mined by the government. It serves as a channel for the government to rebate the fiscal

revenues created by the imposition of capital controls. Because all of the components of
nonfinancial individual income are taken as exogenous by the household, the income tax
τty is nondistorting. Specifically, nonfinancial household income is given by ytT + wt ht + φt ,
where ht denotes hours worked and φt denotes profits from the ownership of firms. House-
holds supply inelastically h̄ hours to the labor market each period. However, because of the

presence of downward nominal wage rigidity, they may not be able to sell all of the hours
supplied. As a result, households take employment, ht ≤ h̄, as exogenously given.



                                                8
   Households are assumed to be subject to the following debt limit, which prevents them
from engaging in Ponzi schemes.
                                                     ¯
                                              dt+1 ≤ d,                                          (6)

where d¯ denotes the natural debt limit. Households choose contingent plans {ct , cTt , cN
                                                                                         t , dt+1 }

to maximize (3) subject to (4)-(6) taking as given wt , ht , φt , ytT , rt , τtd , τty , and pt . The
optimality conditions associated with this problem are (4)-(6) and

                                         A2 (cTt , cN
                                                    t )
                                                        = pt ,                                   (7)
                                         A1 (ct , cN
                                               T
                                                    t )



                                      λt = U 0 (ct )A1 (cTt , cN
                                                               t ),

                                   λt (1 − τtd )
                                                 = βEt λt+1 + µt ,
                                      1 + rt

                                               µt ≥ 0,

                                                    ¯ = 0,
                                         µt (dt+1 − d)

where λt and µt denote the Lagrange multipliers associated with (5) and (6), respectively.

   Equation (7) describes the demand for nontradables as a function of the relative price
of nontradables, pt , and the level of tradable absorption, cTt . Given cTt , the demand for
nontradables is strictly decreasing in pt . This is a consequence of the assumptions made
about the aggregator function A. It reflects the fact that as the relative price of nontradables

increases, households tend to consume relatively less nontradables. The demand function
for nontradables is depicted in figure 2 as a downward sloping solid line. (Notice that in the
figure, the demand function is plotted in the space (ht , pt ), rather than in the space (cN
                                                                                           t , pt ).

As will become clear shortly, we are jumping ahead and using the fact that under market

clearing in the nontraded sector, cN
                                   t = F (ht ) at all times. We refer to the depicted locus as the

demand function for nontradables, even though strictly speaking it is not.) An increase in the
absorption of tradables shifts the demand schedule up and to the right, reflecting normality.


                                                   9
               Figure 2: Pecuniary Externality
                                                  W boom/ Ē
                                                   F 0 (h)
        A2 (cT
             boom, F (h) )
        A1 (cT   , F (h))
p            boom




                                                      W 0 / Ē
        A2 cT
           (0 , F (h)   )                C            F 0 (h)
pboom
           (
        A1 cT           )                         B
            0 , F (h)




pbust
                             D
   p0                                    A




                                 hbust       h̄             h




                             10
This shift is shown with a dashed downward sloping line in figure 2, for an increase in traded
consumption from cT0 to cTboom . It follows that absorption of tradables can be viewed as a
shifter of the derived demand for labor. Of course, cTt is itself an endogenous variable, which
is determined simultaneously with all other endogenous variables of the model.


2.2    Firms

Nontraded output is produced by perfectly competitive firms. Each firm operates a produc-
tion technology given by F (ht ), which uses labor services as the sole input. The function F
is assumed to be strictly increasing and strictly concave. Firms choose the amount of labor
input to maximize profits, given by


                                      φt ≡ pt F (ht ) − wt ht .


The optimality condition associated with this problem is


                                         pt F 0 (ht ) = wt .


This condition represents the supply of nontradable goods. It is depicted with a solid upward
sloping line in the space (h, p) in figure 2. Ceteris paribus, the higher is the relative price of
the nontraded good, the higher is the demand for labor and therefore the larger the supply of
nontradable goods. Also, all other things equal, the higher is the labor cost wt , the smaller

are the demand for labor and the supply of nontradables at each level of the relative price
pt . Figure 2 displays with a broken upward sloping line the shift in the supply schedule
that results from an increase in the nominal wage rate from W0 to Wboom > W0 , holding the
nominal exchange rate constant at Ē.




                                                 11
2.3    Closure of the Labor Market

The following three conditions must hold at all times:


                                          wt ≥ γwt−1 ,


                                             ht ≤ h̄,

and
                                  (ht − h̄)(wt − γwt−1 ) = 0.

The first two constraints were already introduced. The third is a slackness condition stating
that whenever there is underemployment the lower bound on wages must bind, and that
whenever this lower bound is not binding, the labor market must operate at full employment.


2.4    The Government

The government imposes a proportional tax (subsidy) on debt, τtd , and a proportional subsidy
(tax) on income, τty . Given τtd , whose determination we will discuss shortly, the government
sets income subsidies to balance the budget period by period. Specifically, τty satisfies

                                                                dt+1
                               τty (ytT + wt ht + φt ) = τtd
                                                               1 + rt


2.5    Competitive Disequilibrium Dynamics

Because product prices are assumed to be fully flexible, the market for nontraded goods
must clear at all times. That is, the condition


                                          cN
                                           t = F (ht )




                                               12
holds for all t. Combining this condition, the household’s budget constraint, the government’s
budget constraint, and the definition of firms’ profits, we obtain the following market-clearing
condition for traded goods:
                                                                dt+1
                                      cTt + dt = ytT +                .                     (8)
                                                               1 + rt

The complete set of conditions describing the competitive disequilibrium dynamics is then
given by (8) and
                                       P (cTt , ht )F 0 (ht ) = wt ,                        (9)

                                                    ht ≤ h̄,                               (10)

                                              wt ≥ γwt−1 ,                                 (11)

                                                       ¯
                                                dt+1 ≤ d,                                  (12)

                              λt = U 0 (A(cTt , F (ht )))A1 (cTt , F (ht )),               (13)

                                   λt (1 − τtd )
                                                 = βEt λt+1 + µt ,                         (14)
                                      1 + rt

                                                    µt ≥ 0,                                (15)

                                                     ¯ = 0,
                                          µt (dt+1 − d)                                    (16)

                                    (ht − h̄)(wt − γwt−1 ) = 0,                            (17)

                                                    dt+1 /(1 + rt )
                                  τty = τtd                                ,               (18)
                                              ytT   + P (cTt , ht )F (ht )

where
                                                      A2 (cTt , F (ht ))
                                    P (cTt , ht )   ≡
                                                      A1 (cTt , F (ht ))

denotes the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables expressed as a function of
consumption of tradables and employment.




                                                       13
3     Optimal Capital Controls

The combination of downward nominal wage rigidity and a currency peg creates a negative
pecuniary externality. The nature of this externality is that in periods of economic expansion,
elevated demand for nontradables drives real wages up placing the economy in a vulnerable
situation. For in the contractionary phase of the cycle, downward nominal wage rigidity and
the currency peg hinder the downward adjustment of real wages, causing unemployment.

Individual agents understand this mechanism, but are too small to internalize the fact that
their own expenditure choices collectively exacerbate disruptions in the labor market.
    The pecuniary externality can be visualized in figure 2. The initial position of the econ-
omy is at point A, where the labor market is operating at full employment, ht = h̄. In

response to a positive external shock, traded absorption increases from cT0 to cTboom causing
the demand function to shift up and to the right. If nominal wages stayed unchanged, the
new intersection of the demand and supply schedules would occur at point B. However, at
that point, employment would exceed the available supply of labor h̄. The excess demand for

labor drives up the nominal wage from W0 to Wboom causing the supply of nontradables to
shift up and to the left. The new intersection of the demand and supply schedules occurs at
point C, where full employment is restored and the excess demand for labor has disappeared.
    Suppose now that the external shock fades away, and that, therefore, absorption of
tradables goes back to its original level cT0 . The decline in cTt shifts the demand schedule

back to its original position. However, the economy does not immediately return to point A,
because, due to downward nominal wage rigidity, the nominal wage stays at Wboom and, as
a result, the supply schedule does not move. The new intersection is at point D. There, the
economy suffers involuntary unemployment equal to h̄ − hbust . Over time, the economy will

return to point A. However, the convergence is inefficient because it features unemployment
throughout. Consequently, the government has an incentive to prudentially regulate capital
flows to curb the initial expansion in tradable consumption in response to positive external
shocks. Such policy would dampen the initial increase in nominal wages and in that way

                                              14
mitigate the subsequent unemployment problem as the economy returns to its initial state.
   In the present study, we focus on a second-best type of government intervention that
takes the form of capital controls. Specifically, we assume that the instruments available
to the government are the tax rate on debt τtd and the income subsidy τty . The latter tax

is merely used as a vehicle to rebate in a nondistorting fashion the revenues generated by
capital controls. The government is assumed to be benevolent and to be endowed with full
commitment. We therefore refer to the fiscal authority as the Ramsey planner. It is worth
noting that the battery of fiscal instruments available to our Ramsey planner is limited to
capital controls, and, in particular, does not include wage-subsidy schemes in labor markets

afflicted by downward wage rigidity. Elsewhere (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011) we show
that appropriately designed wage subsidies can fully eliminate the distortions arising from
the combination of downward wage rigidity and a currency peg.
   The Ramsey planner’s optimization problem consists in choosing a tax scheme {τtd , τty }

to maximize the household’s lifetime utility function (3) subject to the complete set of con-
ditions describing the competitive dynamics, equations (8)-(18). The strategy we follow to
characterize the Ramsey allocation is to drop conditions (13)-(18) from the set of constraints
of the Ramsey planner’s problem and then to show that the solution to this less constrained

problem satisfies the omitted constraints.
   Accordingly, the Lagrangian of the less constrained Ramsey problem is given by

                                       X
                                       ∞
                                                 
                            L = E0            β t U (A(cTt , F (ht )))
                                        t=0
                                                                      
                                                  dt+1
                                    +λct   T
                                          yt +                  T
                                                           − ct − dt
                                                 1 + rt
                                                                    
                                    +λpt P (cTt , ht )F 0 (ht ) − wt
                                                 
                                    +λht h̄ − ht

                                    +λw
                                      t [wt − γwt−1 ]
                                                 
                                    +λdt d¯ − dt+1 ,



                                                 15
                                             p
where λct > 0, λht ≥ 0, λw       d
                         t ≥ 0, λt ≥ 0, and λt are Lagrange multipliers.

       The first-order optimality conditions with respect to λct , λpt , λht , λw    d    T
                                                                                t , λt , ct , ht , dt+1 , wt ,

and associated slackness conditions are, respectively, (8)-(12) and


                        U 0 (A(cTt , F (ht ))A1 (cTt , F (ht )) = λct − λpt P1 (cTt , ht )F 0 (ht )                    (19)


    U 0 (A(cTt , F (ht ))A2 (cTt , F (ht ))F 0 (ht ) = λht − λpt [P2 (cTt , ht )F 0 (ht ) + P (cTt , ht )F 00 (ht )]   (20)

                                                 λct
                                                        = βEt λct+1 + λdt                                              (21)
                                              (1 + rt )
                                                                  p
                                                λw         w
                                                 t = βγEt λt+1 + λt                                                    (22)

                                                    (ht − h̄)λht = 0                                                   (23)

                                                 λw
                                                  t (wt − γwt−1 ) = 0                                                  (24)

                                                           ¯ d=0
                                                   (dt+1 − d)λ                                                         (25)
                                                               t


       We now show that allocations {cTt , ht , wt } that satisfy the optimality conditions of the
less constrained Ramsey problem, that is, conditions (8)-(12) and (19)-(25), also satisfy the
constraints that were omitted from the Ramsey problem, namely, conditions (13)-(18). To
see this, first pick λt to satisfy (13). Next, set µt = 0 for all t.1 It follows that (15) and

(16) are satisfied. Pick τtd to satisfy (14). To ensure that the Ramsey policy is revenue
neutral, pick τty to satisfy (18). It remains to be shown that (17) is also implied by the set of
Ramsey optimality conditions. To see that this is the case, consider the following proof by
contradiction. Suppose, contrary to what we wish to show, that in the Ramsey allocation
ht < h̄ and wt > γwt−1 at some date and state. Then, by (23) and (24), it must be the case

that λht = λw                                                   T                 00
            t = 0. But then, by (20) and by the facts that P2 (ct , ht ) < 0 and F (ht ) < 0,
   1
    Note that in states in which the Ramsey allocation calls for setting dt+1 < d,     ¯ µt must be chosen to be
                                                                          ¯
zero. However, in states in which the Ramsey allocation yields dt+1 = d, µt need not be chosen to be zero. In
these states, any positive value of µt could be supported in the decentralization of the Ramsey equilibrium.
Of course, in this case, τtd will depend on the chosen value of µt . In particular, τtd will be strictly decreasing
in the arbitrarily chosen value of µt and will be smaller than the one given in equation (26).


                                                             16
we have that λpt > 0. This implication contradicts condition (22), which indicates that
λpt = −βγEt λw                     w
             t+1 ≤ 0 (recall that λt ≥ 0).

       From the arguments presented above, we have that the optimal capital control policy
must deliver tax rates on debt satisfying

                                                     β(1 + rt )Et λt+1
                                         τtd = 1 −                     ,                                    (26)
                                                           λt

where λt ≡ U 0 (ct )A1 (cTt , cN
                               t ) denotes the marginal utility of consumption of tradables. It

follows from the above expression that, all other things equal, capital controls are positive
when the marginal utility of tradables is expected to fall. That is, capital controls are more
likely to be put into place when either total consumption or consumption of tradables or both
are expected to grow.2 Conversely, all other things equal, the Ramsey fiscal authority loosens

capital restrictions when aggregate consumption or consumption of tradables or both are
expected to decline. It follows that the optimal capital control policy is essentially prudential,
in the sense that restrictions to capital inflows are imposed during the expansionary phase
of the cycle and loosened during the contractionary phase.

       An implication of the previous analysis is that one can characterize the Ramsey allocation
as the solution to the following Bellman equation problem:

                                                                                                   
               v(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ) = max U (A(cTt , F (ht )) + βEt v(yt+1
                                                                           T
                                                                               , rt+1 , dt+1 , wt )         (27)


subject to (8)-(12), where v(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ) denotes the value function of the representative
household. We exploit this formulation of the Ramsey problem in our numerical analysis.

       We close this section by pointing out that the model with Ramsey optimal capital controls
is equivalent to one in which a benevolent government chooses the level of external debt
and households cannot participate in financial markets but are hand-to-mouth agents. In
   2
    Strictly speaking, the marginal utility of consumption of tradables is decreasing in total consumption
only if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is smaller than the intratemporal elasticity of substitution.




                                                        17
this formulation, households receive a transfer from the government each period and their
choice is limited to the allocation of expenditure between tradable and nontradable goods.
The government then chooses the aggregate level of external debt taking into account the
pecuniary externality created by the combination of downward nominal wage rigidity and a

currency peg.



4     Dynamics Under Optimal Capital Controls

We wish to characterize aggregate dynamics under optimal capital controls. Of particular
interest is to compare the model’s predictions with and without capital controls. Given
the complexity of the model, this question must be addressed using numerical methods.

Specifically, using a calibrated version of the model, we compare aggregate dynamics and
welfare associated with free capital mobility and with the optimal capital control policy.
    We assume a CRRA form for the period utility function, a CES form for the aggregator
function, and an isoelastic form for the production function of nontradables:

                                                    c1−σ − 1
                                        U (c) =              ,
                                                      1−σ

                                    h                                      i ξ−1
                                                                              ξ
                           T   N          T 1− 1ξ                N 1− 1ξ
                       A(c , c ) = a(c )            + (1 − a)(c )                  ,

and

                                          F (h) = hα .

    We calibrate the model at a quarterly frequency. All parameter values are taken from
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011) and are shown in table 1. The single most relevant pa-

rameter in our model is γ, governing the degree of downward nominal wage rigidity. In
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011), we present empirical evidence suggesting that nominal
wages are downwardly rigid, and that our calibration of 0.99 for γ is conservative, in the
sense that the empirical evidence points to values of γ greater than 0.99.

                                                  18
                                          Table 1: Calibration
 Parameter        Value    Description
     γ             0.99    Degree of downward nominal wage rigidity (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011)
     σ               5     Inverse of intertemporal elasticity of consumption (Ostry and Reinhart, 1992)
    yT               1     Steady-state tradable output
     h̄              1     Labor endowment
     a             0.26    Share of tradables (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011)
     ξ             0.44    Intratemporal Elasticity of Substitution (González Rozada, 2004)
     α             0.75    Labor share in nontraded sector (Uribe, 1997)
     β            0.9375   Quarterly subjective discount factor (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011)

      Note. See Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011) for details.


   We also borrow from earlier work (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011) the stochastic process
driving aggregate fluctuations in our economy. Specifically, we assume that tradable output
and the country interest rate, denoted rt , follow a bivariate, first-order, autoregressive process
of the form                                                          
                                    ln ytT        
                                                                 T
                                                             ln yt−1    
                                               = A                    + νt ,                     (28)
                                     ln 1+r
                                        1+r
                                           t
                                                            ln 1+rt−1
                                                                1+r


where νt is a white noise of order 2 by 1 distributed N (∅, Σν ). The parameter r denotes

the deterministic steady-state value of rt . The country interest rate rt represents the rate at
which the country can borrow in international markets. In Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011),
we estimate the system (28) using Argentine data over the period 1983:Q1 to 2001:Q4. Our
OLS estimates of the matrices A and Σν and of the scalar r are
                                                                                
          0.79 −1.36                              0.00123 −0.00008 
       A=            ;                      Σν =                   ;               r = 0.0316.
           −0.01 0.86                                −0.00008 0.00004


We discretize the AR(1) process given in equation (28) using 21 equally spaced points for
ln ytT and 11 equally spaced points for ln(1 + rt )/(1 + r). For details, see Schmitt-Grohé and
Uribe (2011).
   We numerically approximate the equilibrium dynamics under the optimal capital control


                                                       19
policy by applying the method of value function iteration over a discretized state space.
The state of the economy in period t ≥ 0 consists of the exogenous variables ytT and rt , the
endogenous state dt , and the endogenous predetermined variable wt−1 . The welfare of the
representative household under the optimal capital control policy can be approximated by

solving the functional equation (27) subject to (8)-(12).
   Approximating the dynamics of the model economy under free capital mobility is compu-
tationally more demanding than doing so under optimal capital control policy. The reason
is that, because of the distortions introduced by the combination of downward nominal wage
rigidity and a currency peg, aggregate dynamics can no longer be cast in terms of a Bellman

equation without introducing additional state variables. We therefore approximate the solu-
tion by policy function iteration over a discretized version of the state space (ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ).
For details see Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011).
   In approximating the aggregate dynamics of the economies with and without capital

controls, we discretize the endogenous dimensions of the state space using 501 equally spaced
points for the level of dt and 500 equally spaced points for the logarithm of wt−1 .


4.1     Capital Controls During a Boom-Bust Episode

To illustrate the prudential nature of optimal capital controls in an economy undergoing a
currency peg, we simulate a boom-bust episode. We define a boom-bust episode as a situation

in which tradable output, ytT , is at or below trend in period 0, at least one standard deviation
above trend in period 10, and at least one standard deviation below trend in period 20. To
this end, we simulate the model economy for 20 million periods and select all subperiods
that satisfy our definition of a boom-bust episode. We then average across these episodes.

   Figure 3 depicts the model’s predictions during a boom-bust cycle. Solid lines correspond
to the economy with free capital mobility and broken lines to the economy with optimal
capital controls. The two top panels of the figure display the dynamics of the two exogenous
driving forces, tradable output and the country interest rate. By construction, ytT and rt


                                                  20
Figure 3: Prudential Policy For Peggers: Boom-Bust Dynamics With and Without Capital
Controls
                           Traded Output, ytT                                             Annualized Interest Rate, rt
         1.2                                                                    20

        1.15                                                                    18

         1.1                                                                    16




                                                                   % per year
        1.05                                                                    14
level




          1                                                                     12

        0.95                                                                    10

         0.9                                                                     8

        0.85                                                                     6
               0      10          20            30   40                               0    10         20          30     40
                                quarter                                                             quarter


                      Capital Control Rate, τtd                                             Trade Balance, ytT − cTt
          8                                                              0.15


          6                                                                     0.1


          4                                                              0.05
                                                           level
    %




          2                                                                      0


          0                                                        −0.05


         −2                                                             −0.1
               0      10          20            30   40                               0    10         20          30     40
                                quarter                                                             quarter


                     Unemployment Rate, 1 − ht                                                  Consumption, ct
         30                                                                      1

         25
                                                                         0.95

         20
                                                                                0.9
                                                               level
    %




         15
                                                                         0.85
         10

                                                                                0.8
          5

          0                                                              0.75
               0      10          20            30   40                               0    10         20          30     40
                                quarter                                                             quarter

                   No Capital Controls                    21                                    Optimal Capital Controls
are unaffected by capital controls. The middle left panel of the figure shows that capital
controls increase significantly during the expansionary phase of the cycle, from about 2
percent at the beginning of the episode to almost 7 percent at the peak of the cycle. During
the contractionary phase of the cycle, capital controls are drastically relaxed. Indeed at the

bottom of the crisis, capital inflows are actually subsidized at a rate of about 2 percent.
   The sharp increase in capital controls during the expansionary phase of the cycle puts
sand in the wheels of capital inflows, thereby restraining the boom in consumption (see the
bottom right panel of figure 3). Under free capital mobility, during the boom, consumption
increases significantly more than under the optimal capital control policy. In the contrac-

tionary phase, the fiscal authority incentivates spending by subsidizing capital inflows. As
a result consumption falls by much less in the regulated economy than it does in the un-
regulated one. During the recession, the optimal capital control policy, far from calling for
austerity in the form of trade surpluses, facilitates large trade balance deficits as shown in

the middle right panel of figure 3. In this way, the capital control policy is able to sta-
bilize the absorption of tradable goods (not shown in figure 3) over the cycle. We note
that the first-best policy (which, as discussed earlier, could be implemented via an optimal
exchange-rate regime or with appropriate labor subsidies) calls not for running large deficits

during crises, but, on the contrary, for a trade surplus (see Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011).
This difference in the behavior of the trade balance highlights the fact that the second-best
allocation does not mimic the business cycle induced by the first-best allocation.
   Because unemployment depends directly upon variation in the level of tradable absorption
through their role as a shifter of the demand schedule for nontradables, and because optimal

capital controls stabilize the absorption of tradables, unemployment is also stable over the
boom-bust cycle. Specifically, as can be seen from the bottom left panel of figure 3, in the
absence of capital controls, unemployment increases sharply by over 20 percentage points
during the recession. By contrast, under optimal capital controls the rate of unemployment

rises relatively modestly by about 3 percentage points.


                                              22
              Table 2: Optimal Capital Controls: Level and Volatility Effects
                                                     Mean           Standard Deviation
                                               Optimal     No       Optimal       No
                                               Capital Capital Capital         Capital
    Variable                     Symbol        Controls Controls Controls Controls
                                      d
    Capital Control Rate             τt          2.4        0          5.2         0
    Unemployment Rate             h̄ − ht        3.1      13.5         7.6       11.7
    Consumption                      ct         0.97      0.89        0.08       0.10
    Trade Balance                ytT − cTt      0.05      0.11        0.12       0.07
    Real Wage                     Wt /Et         2.1       2.3         0.6        0.7
                                      T
    Traded Output                    yt          1.0       1.0         0.1        0.1
    Interest Rate                    rt         13.2      13.2         7.4        7.4
    External Debt                    dt          0.9       3.4         2.3        0.7
    Debt-to-Output Ratio dt /4/(y T + pt cNt )  11.2      26.0        22.1       12.6
    Welfare Cost of Free Capital Mobility         9.0 (mean)            7.5 (median)

Note. τtd , h̄ − ht , and dt /4/(ytT + pt cN
                                           t ) are expressed in percent, rt is expressed in percent per year,
and ct , ytT − cTt , Wt /Et , ytT , and dt are expressed in levels. The welfare cost of free capital mobility
is measured as the percent increase in consumption that the representative household living in
the economy with free capital mobility must receive every period to be as well off as living in the
economy with optimal capital controls.


    Summarizing, the optimal capital control policy is prudential. It calls for restricting
capital inflows during booms and encouraging them during contractions. In this way, the
optimal capital control policy strengthens the role of the current account as a vehicle to

stabilize domestic absorption over the business cycle. Optimal government intervention
results in trade deficits during recessions and trade surpluses during booms of a much larger
scale than would occur under free capital mobility.



5     Level and Volatility Effects of Optimal Capital Con-

      trols

Table 2 displays unconditional first and second moments of macroeconomic indicators of
interest for the economies with optimal capital controls and free capital mobility.
    On average, the Ramsey planner imposes a positive tax on external debt of 2.4 percent.


                                                     23
This figure implies large average levels of capital controls, for the effective interest rate faced
by domestic debtors, given by (1 + rt )/(1 − τtd ), increases from 13.2 percent per year under
free capital mobility to 24.8 percent per year under optimal capital controls. The main
reason why the Ramsey planner finds it optimal to impose capital controls on average is to

lower the average level of external debt holdings. We postpone an explanation of why this
is optimal until section 6.
   Table 2 also shows that the tax on debt is highly volatile, with a standard deviation of 5.2
percentage points per quarter. The main payoff of imposing highly cyclical capital controls
is an enormous reduction in the average rate of unemployment from 13 percent under free

capital mobility to 3 percent under the optimal capital control policy. This reduction in
unemployment is welfare increasing because it raises the average level of production, and
hence also absorption, of nontradables, which provide utility to domestic households.
   The reduction in unemployment is mediated by a significant reduction in the volatility

of the growth rate of tradable absorption. The standard deviation of the growth rate of
tradable consumption, cTt /cTt−1 , not shown in the table, falls from 5.3 percent under free

capital mobility to 2.9 percent under optimal capital controls. The connection between the
volatility of tradable consumption growth and unemployment follows from the fact that

consumption of tradables plays the role of a shifter of the demand for nontradables. In
turn, the Ramsey planner succeeds in curbing the variance of tradable expenditure growth
by raising the cost of external borrowing during booms and lowering it during recessions.
The correlation between traded output ytT and the capital control rate τtd is 0.54 and the
correlation between the interest rate rt and τtd is -0.58. Furthermore, the Ramsey planner

engineers an effective interest rate that is positively correlated with traded output in spite
of the fact that the interest rate itself is highly negatively correlated with the latter.
   Table 2 shows that the first and second moments of the real (and nominal) wage rates
are not significantly affected by the presence of capital controls. This prediction of the

model might appear as surprising because downward wage rigidity is the sole friction in


                                                24
the present model, and because unemployment behaves markedly differently across capital
control regimes. A reason why the unconditional moments of real wages are so similar in the
two regimes is that the lower bound on wages is binding most of the time in both economies
(85 percent of the time under free capital mobility and 65 percent of the time under optimal

capital controls), and, when this happens, the wage rate falls at the common gross rate γ.
A reason why the first and second moments of unemployment are so different across regimes
in spite of the similarity in the corresponding moments of real wages is that when the wage
constraint is binding the magnitude of the unemployment rate depends on the strength of
the domestic absorption of tradables, which is significantly different across regimes.

    An important distinction in wage dynamics across capital control regimes that is not
captured by the unconditional moments shown in table 2 is the behavior of wages during
booms. During economic expansions, the Ramsey fiscal authority, through capital controls,
limits the appreciation of real wages. In this way, it also reduces the need for large decreases

in the real wage once the boom is over. To visualize the role of optimal capital controls in
limiting wage increases during booms, figure 4 displays the cumulative probability distribu-
tion of positive wage changes under free capital mobility and under optimal capital controls.
Under optimal capital controls the vast majority of wage increases are small. Specifically,

90 percent of wage increases are less than 5 percent in magnitude. By contrast, only about
half of all wage increases that occur under free capital mobility are smaller than 5 percent.
This difference underlines the prudential nature of optimal capital controls.



6     Peg-Induced Overborrowing

Table 2 shows that the average level of external debt in the economy with free capital mobility

is more than three times higher than it is in the economy with optimal capital controls.
This prediction of the model is also evident from figure 5, which shows the unconditional
distribution of external debt under free capital mobility (solid line) and under optimal capital



                                              25
Figure 4: Cumulative Probability Distribution of Positive Wage Changes
                                        1


                                      0.95


                                       0.9


                                      0.85
     Cumulative Probability Density




                                       0.8


                                      0.75


                                       0.7


                                      0.65


                                       0.6


                                      0.55
                                                                                                           Free Capital Mobility
                                                                                                           Optimal Capital Controls
                                       0.5
                                             5            10                  15               20              25                     30
                                                                                Wage Growth (%)




                                                 Figure 5: The Distribution of External Debt
                                      0.018
                                                   Free Capital Mobility
                                                   Optimal Capital Controls
                                      0.016


                                      0.014


                                      0.012


                                       0.01
      Density




                                      0.008


                                      0.006


                                      0.004


                                      0.002


                                         0
                                         −6          −4            −2            0              2      4              6               8
                                                                               External Debt (level)




                                                                                  26
controls (dashed line). The Ramsey planner induces a lower average level of external debt
by taxing borrowing at a positive rate. Recall that the average tax rate on debt is 2.4
percent per quarter. It follows that pegging economies with free capital mobility accumulate
inefficiently large amounts of external debt. In other words currency pegs in combination

with free capital mobility lead to overborrowing.
    The reason why the average level of external debt is lower under optimal capital controls
than under free capital mobility is that the Ramsey planner finds it optimal to induce an
external debt position that is significantly more volatile than the one associated with free
capital mobility. As shown in table 2, the standard deviation of external debt is 2.3 under

optimal capital controls, but only 0.7 under free capital mobility. Similarly, figure 5 shows
that the distribution of external debt is significantly more dispersed under optimal capital
controls than under free capital mobility. A more volatile process for external debt requires
centering the debt distribution further away from the natural debt limit, for precautionary

reasons. In turn, the reason why the Ramsey planner finds wide swings in the external debt
position desirable is that such variations allow him to insulate the domestic absorption of
tradable goods from exogenous disturbances buffeting the economy. Put differently, in the
Ramsey economy, external debt plays the role of shock absorber to a much larger extent

that it does in the economy with free capital mobility.



7     Welfare Costs of Free Capital Mobility for Peggers

We have established that in the present economy, free capital mobility entails excessive
external debt and unemployment. Both of these factors tend to depress consumption and
therefore reduce welfare. In this section, we quantify the welfare losses associated with free

capital mobility in economies subject to a currency peg.
    For a given state of the economy in period t, (ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ), we define the welfare
cost of free capital mobility, denoted λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ), as the permanent percent increase in



                                                 27
consumption required by an individual living in the economy with free capital mobility to be
as well off as living in the economy with optimal capital controls. Formally, λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 )
is implicitly given by

                     X
                     ∞                                                          X
                                                                                ∞
                Et         β s U (cFt+s
                                      CM
                                         (1 + λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ))) = Et         β s U (cOCC
                                                                                              t+s ),
                     s=0                                                        s=0


where cFt CM and cOCC
                  t   denote, respectively, consumption in the economy with free capital

mobility and consumption in the economy with optimal capital controls in period t.
    Table 2 shows that the welfare cost of free capital mobility for a pegging economy is
enormous. The representative household living in the economy with free capital mobility
requires a median increase of 7.5 percent in consumption every period to be indifferent

between living under free capital mobility and living under optimal capital controls. Thus,
the present model speaks with a strong voice against allowing capital to flow freely across
borders in economies with fixed exchange rates and downwardly rigid wages.



8     Conclusion

The first contribution of this paper is to identify a negative pecuniary externality afflicting

economies with downward nominal wage rigidity and fixed exchange rates. In this type of
economic environment, private absorption expands too much in response to favorable shocks,
causing inefficiently large increases in real wages. No problems are manifested in this phase
of the cycle. However, as the economy returns to its trend path, wages fail to fall quickly

enough because they are downwardly rigid. In addition, the central bank, having its hands
tied by the commitment to a fixed exchange rate, cannot deflate the real value of wages via
a devaluation. In turn, high real wages and a contracting level of aggregate absorption cause
involuntary unemployment. Individual agents are conscious of this mechanism, but are too
small to internalize it. The government, on the other hand, does internalize the distortion

and therefore has an incentive to intervene.

                                                        28
   The second contribution of the present study is to analyze the ability of capital controls
to ameliorate the distortions introduced by the peg-induced pecuniary externality. We char-
acterize both analytically and numerically the Ramsey optimal capital control policy. We
show that, although capital controls cannot bring about the first-best allocation, they go a

long way toward easing the pains of pegs. Under plausible calibrations of our model, we find
that the representative household living in the economy with free capital mobility requires a
7.5 percent permanent increase in consumption to be indifferent between continuing to live
in that environment and migrating to one with optimally set capital controls.
   The third contribution of the present investigation is to establish that in the context of our

model the optimal capital control policy is prudential in nature. The benevolent government
taxes capital inflows in good times and subsidizes external borrowing in bad times. As a
result, the economy experiences trade surpluses during booms and deficits during recessions.
The key role of capital controls is to insulate the domestic absorption of tradable goods from

external shocks. In this way, the government avoids that external disturbances spill over
into the nontraded sector where they would otherwise cause unemployment.
   The fourth important finding of our inquiry is to establish that pegging economies are
prone to overborrowing. In our calibrated model, the average debt-to-output ratio falls from

26 percent in the economy with free capital mobility to 11 percent in the economy with
optimal capital controls. The regulated economy accumulates a war chest of assets (or a
reduced level of debt) in order to be able to stabilize traded consumption when the economy
is buffeted by negative external shocks.
   In summary, the results of the present study strongly suggest that, when labor markets

suffer from downward nominal wage rigidity, coupling fixed exchange rate arrangements
with free capital mobility can undermine macroeconomic stability. On the contrary, in
such economies, capital controls can be a highly effective instrument for macroeconomic
stabilization. More importantly, the predictions of our model suggest that, if the goal is to

maximize welfare, governments of fixed-exchange-rate economies should concentrate effort


                                              29
not on crisis management, but rather on crisis prevention.




                                            30
References

Auernheimer, L. and R. Garcı́a-Saltos,     “International Debt and the Price of Domestic
   Assets,” IMF Working Paper wp/00/177, October 2000.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R.
   Young, “Revisiting Overborrowing and Its Policy Implications,” in Cespedes, Luis Felipe,
   Roberto Chang, and Diego Saravia (Eds.), Monetary Policy under Financial Turbulence,

   Central Bank of Chile, 2011, 145-184.
Bianchi, Javier, “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,” Amer-
   ican Economic Review 101, December 2011, 3400-3426.
Costinot, Arnaud, Guido Lorenzoni, and Iván Werning, “A Theory of Capital Controls

   as Dynamic Terms-of-Trade Manipulation,” NBER Working Paper 17680, December
   2011.
González Rozada, Martı́n, Pablo Andrés Neumeyer, Alejandra Clemente, Diego Luciano
   Sasson, and Nicholas Trachter, “The Elasticity of Substitution in Demand for Non-

   Tradable Goods in Latin America: The Case of Argentina,” Inter-American Development
   Bank, Research Network Working paper #R-485, August 2004.
Korinek, Anton, “Excessive Dollar Borrowing in Emerging Markets: Balance Sheet Effects
   and Macroeconomic Externalities,” manuscript, University of Maryland, 2010.
Lorenzoni, Guido, “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies 75, 2008, 809-

   833.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh, and Alan Taylor, “Financial Stability, the Trilemma,
   and International Reserves,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, April
   2010, 57-94.

Ostry, Jonathan D. and Carmen M. Reinhart, “Private Saving and Terms of Trade Shocks:
   Evidence from Developing Countries,” IMF Staff Papers, September 1992, 495-517.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe,    “Pegs and Pain,”    Columbia University,
   November 2011.

                                            31
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Managing Currency Pegs,” Columbia Uni-
   versity, January 2012.
Uribe, Martı́n, “Exchange-Rate-Based Inflation Stabilization: The Initial Real Effects of
   Credible Plans,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, June 1997, 197-221.

Uribe, Martı́n, “On Overborrowing,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
   96, May 2006, 417-421.
Uribe, Martı́n, “Individual Versus Aggregate Collateral Constraints and the Overborrowing
   Syndrome,” NBER working paper 12260, May 2007.




                                           32
