NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UP IN SMOKE: THE INFLUENCE OF HOUSEHOLD BEHAVIOR ON THE LONG-RUN
IMPACT OF IMPROVED COOKING STOVES
Rema Hanna
Esther Duflo
Michael Greenstone
Working Paper 18033
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18033

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012
This project is a collaboration involving many people and organizations. Foremost, we are deeply
indebted to Gram Vikas and especially to Joe Madiath, who made this research possible. We are grateful
for insightful comments from Jessica Cohen, Pascaline Dupas, Edward Glaeser, Seema Jayachandran,
Margaret McConnell, Grant Miller, Mushfiq Mobarak, Rohini Pande, and Rebecca Thornton and seminar
participants at Harvard, Michigan, UC San Diego, and the NBER Environmental Economics Meetings.
We thank John McCracken for advice on emissions monitoring and Dr. Vandana Sharma for training
the team on health monitoring. We thank Yusuke Taishi, Raymond Guiteras, Ritwik Sakar, Annie
Duflo, Reema Patnaik, Anup Kumar Roy, Shobhini Mukerji, Mihika Chatterjee, Trevor Bakker, and
KB Prathap for their excellent work coordinating the fieldwork. Sarah Bishop, Gabriel Tourek, Mahvish
Shaukat, and Samuel Stopler provided superb research assistance. For financial support, we thank
the MIT Energy Initiative, the Centre for Microfinance at the Institute of Financial Management and
Research, the Institut Veolia Environement, and the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation. A portion
of this work was conducted while Dr. Hanna was a fellow at the Science Sustainability Program at
Harvard University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Rema Hanna, Esther Duflo, and Michael Greenstone. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Up in Smoke: The Influence of Household Behavior on the Long-Run Impact of Improved
Cooking Stoves
Rema Hanna, Esther Duflo, and Michael Greenstone
NBER Working Paper No. 18033
May 2012
JEL No. I15,I18,O10,O12,O13,Q0,Q23,Q3,Q51,Q53,Q56
ABSTRACT
It is conventional wisdom that it is possible to reduce exposure to indoor air pollution, improve health
outcomes, and decrease greenhouse gas emissions in the rural areas of developing countries through
the adoption of improved cooking stoves. This belief is largely supported by observational field studies
and engineering or laboratory experiments. However, we provide new evidence, from a randomized
control trial conducted in rural Orissa, India (one of the poorest places in India), on the benefits of
a commonly used improved stove that laboratory tests showed to reduce indoor air pollution and require
less fuel. We track households for up to four years after they received the stove. While we find a
meaningful reduction in smoke inhalation in the first year, there is no effect over longer time horizons.
We find no evidence of improvements in lung functioning or health and there is no change in fuel
consumption (and presumably greenhouse gas emissions). The difference between the laboratory and
field findings appear to result from households’ revealed low valuation of the stoves. Households
failed to use the stoves regularly or appropriately, did not make the necessary investments to maintain
them properly, and usage rates ultimately declined further over time. More broadly, this study underscores
the need to test environmental and health technologies in real-world settings where behavior may temper
impacts, and to test them over a long enough horizon to understand how this behavioral effect evolves
over time.

Rema Hanna
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Rema_Hanna@hks.harvard.edu
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-252G
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu

Michael Greenstone
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mgreenst@mit.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Half of the world’s population, and up to 95 percent in poor countries, rely on solid fuels,
including biomass fuels (e.g., wood, dung, agricultural residues) and coal, to meet their energy
needs.

The World Health Organization lists “indoor air pollution (IAP) from primitive

household cooking fires as the leading environmental cause of death in the world,” stating that
“it contributes to nearly 2.0 million deaths annually,” about as many deaths as malaria and
tuberculosis combined (Martin, Glass, Balbus, and Collins, 2011). Moreover, cooking with
biomass fuels is a key source of climate change through its releases of carbon dioxide (CO2) and
black carbon (Kandlikar, Reynolds, and Grieshop 2009). In response, improved cooking stoves
are increasingly seen as a tool to improve respiratory health and combat climate change.1 For
example, in September 2010, Hillary Clinton announced the formation of the Global Alliance for
Clean Cookstoves (GACC), which calls for 100 million homes to adopt clean and efficient
stoves and fuels by 2020. However, this big push for improved cooking stoves has occurred
despite surprisingly little rigorous evidence on their efficacy on health and fuel use.2
This paper reports the results from a randomized evaluation of improved cooking stoves
on individuals' behavior and well-being. Specifically, we evaluate the effect of distributing an
inexpensive, improved stove on health and fuel use in Orissa, India. Gram Vikas (GV), an award
winning nongovernmental organizations (NGO), obtained funding to subsidize stove
construction for 15,000 households over five years, independent of the research.3 GV chose
stoves designed with an enclosed cooking chamber (to keep the flame separate from the food)
and a chimney to direct smoke away from the user. The stoves had been proven to reduce IAP
and energy consumption in laboratory settings and could be constructed with locally sourced
materials, facilitating distribution at a large scale. At a total cost of about US$12.50, these stoves
fall within the “lower end” of improved stove technologies. However, these stoves represent the
vast majority of improved stoves that have been distributed: the World Bank (2011) reports that

1

These benefits are cited regularly in leading publications, including The New York Times, and they have a range of
proponents from Bill Clinton to Julia Roberts.
2
According to the GACC website, the stoves (1) reduce child pneumonia by 50 percent, (2) save the equivalent of
1–2 tons of CO2 per year, and (3) produce fuel savings that families can use to pay for the stove. However, as we
discuss, none of the evidence, to date, fully supports these claims.
3
Gram Vikas has won numerous awards, including being listed in the Global Journal's "Top 100 Best NGOs in the
World" in 2012, and has attracted considerable international funding.
1

stove programs have typically distributed improved stoves in this category and over 166 million
of them are in use today.
We used a public lottery to randomly assign the order in which stoves were constructed
within each village for 2,600 households that were part of GV’s stove program. The first third of
households within each village received the stoves at the start of the project, the second third
received the stoves about two years after the first wave, and the remaining households received it
at the end of the study. Households were followed for four years after the initial stove offers,
which allows for an examination of the long-run use and impacts of the stoves. This long-run
follow-up is virtually unprecedented in evaluations of health interventions or other new
technologies where households learn about the benefits and maintenance needs over time.
There are four primary results. First, initial household take-up and usage of the (almost
free) new stoves was far from universal and then declined markedly over time as households
failed to make the maintenance investments (e.g., cleaning the chimney) necessary to keep them
fully operational. Several measures document this, but perhaps the most salient is that treatment
households that received the GV improved stoves still continued to use their traditional stoves in
conjunction with the new ones—even early on, when the majority of the stoves were functional.
In the early years, treatment households only cooked 3.5 more meals per week (or 25 percent of
total meals) with a good condition, improved stove than the control households.4 This difference
was halved to about 1.8 meals per week in year 3, as the stoves deteriorated.
Second and correspondingly, the stoves failed to achieve their primary goal of reducing
exposure to hazardous air pollutants. While there was a significant effect on smoke inhalation
during the first year for the primary cooks in the household, the treatment effect became
statistically indistinguishable from zero in subsequent years as proper stove usage declined.
Further, even in the first year, the resulting effect (a 7.5 percent decrease in the carbon monoxide
concentration of exhaled breath) was smaller than the reduction observed in laboratory-style
settings with properly maintained stoves and near perfect usage rates.5

4

Levine and Beltramo (2010) observed the same phenomenon with solar ovens (another type of stove used to
reduce smoke exposure and energy consumption) in Senegal: even households that chose to use the solar oven
generally cooked only a few of their meals on them, continuing to cook the remaining meals on their standard
stoves.
5
We were also unable to detect an effect on females more generally or on children who were frequently near stoves
during cooking.
2

Third, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the stoves failed to affect health across a
wide set of health outcomes.

For example, there is no difference in lung functioning (as

measured by spirometry tests) between women who regularly cook in the treatment and control
groups. Furthermore, we fail to find a positive impact on a wide variety of measured and selfreported health outcomes, including infant birth weight, infant mortality rates, probability of a
cough, blood pressure, or even the probability of any illness in the last 30 days.
Fourth, the treatment group appears to have experienced modest declines in their living
standards and there is no evidence of a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. Specifically,
treatment households spent substantially more time repairing their stoves. Furthermore, the
treatment did not affect fuel costs or time spent cooking, which is consistent with the energy
consumption results of "health-improving" stoves studied by Miller and Mobarak (2011) and
Burwen and Levine (2011).

There is also no evidence of potential climate benefits from

reductions in deforestation since there is no change in total wood used for cooking. It is
noteworthy that these findings contrast self-reported satisfaction of improved stoves and
laboratory test results that show reduced time and energy used to boil the same quantity of water
with an improved stove.
Besides demonstrating the importance of human behavior in assessing the effectiveness
of new technologies, this study builds upon and contributes to the literature on indoor air
pollution. Most evidence on IAP comes from observational studies that compare fuel use and
health status of users and nonusers (Bruce, Perez-Padilla, and Albalak, 2000).

However,

households that cook with improved stoves are typically different in other respects as well, such
as income levels and health preferences (Bruce, Neufeld, Boy, and West, 1998; Mueller, Pfaff,
Peabody, Liu and Smith, 2011).

Thus, despite the positive effects of reducing indoor air

pollution in this literature, it is unclear whether these results reflect the impact of improved
stoves or unobservable characteristics.
Recently, more rigorous evidence has emerged from the RESPIRE study, a randomized
experiment of a concrete stove in Guatemala (Smith-Sivertsen, Diaz, Pope, Lie, Diaz,
McCracken, Bakke, Arana, Smith, and Bruce, 2009). Our paper complements this study in at
least two important ways. First, we followed households for four years after the receipt of the
stoves, compared to the RESPIRE's follow-up of 12 months for the full sample and 18 months
for a subset, to measure long-run impacts. Our extended evaluation may be important for at least
3

several reasons. First, the treatment effects on health may change considerably over time, as
households learn about the value of the stoves and subsequently change their usage rates and
maintenance investments, as well as experience a general depreciation of the technology. 6
Second, the effect on health may be cumulative over several years. Third, we found meaningful
effects on CO for primary cooks in the first year; had we ended the study after learning this, we
would have projected the effect for several years in benefit-cost calculations. In reality, this
effect was short-lived.7
Second, we study an actual program run by a local non-profit with no assistance by the
research team. The stoves are locally made and relatively cheap (roughly $12.50), implying that
they would be practical for large scale distribution and presumably affordable for the target
population if sold (annual per-capita consumption of households in our sample is $145). The
RESPIRE stoves cost between $100 and $150, which makes them prohibitively expensive for
most households where indoor air pollution is a problem. Furthermore, although the RESPIRE
study is conducted in the field, trained fieldworkers inspected the stoves weekly for proper use
and maintenance and then arranged for repairs as needed (Smith, McCracken, Thompson,
Edwards, Shields, Canuz and Bruce, 2010). In this respect, the RESPIRE study shuts down
households’ ability to reveal their valuation through usage rates and decisions about shifting
resources from other goods to stove maintenance. Thus, the results from the RESPIRE study
likely provide upper bound effects, while our estimates more closely resemble real-world
impacts, where households may not use the technology appropriately or may choose not to use
the technology at all. The mixed results on health from the RESPIRE study (discussed in depth
below) and the lack of health impacts found in our study, which derive from limited and
improper use, suggests that, in the context of evolving stove technologies, the new generation of
stoves (e.g. envirofit and rocket stoves) need to be evaluated in field settings to understand if
they will actually provide the benefits measured in the laboratory before valuable resources are
devoted to their deployment.

6

For example, Dupas (2012) shows that a one-time subsidy can boost the purchase of malaria bednets because it
gives individuals a chance to learn about the technology and positively update their beliefs. However, take-up and
use of the stoves may also decline over time, if households learn that the product does not perform to their
expectations, either because the technology does not provide the promised benefits or the signal on the benefits is
noisy.
7
Note that our study’s sample included over 4,000 women and 3,000 children, compared to the 500 women and
children in the RESPIRE study, which provides us with greater precision in detecting any health and fuel effects.
4

More generally, this paper contributes to the literature on the adoption of health and
environmental technologies.

Many times, new technologies are evaluated in laboratory

experiments or through field experiments in controlled settings where researchers ensure high
compliance in terms of use and maintenance. These studies are vital because they provide an
upper bound effect on the possible treatment effects of the technologies. However, as Chassang,
Padro-i-Miguel, and Swoberg (2011) discuss, perfectly controlling individual choices and actions
produces an impact estimate that is internally valid, but may lack external validity to the large
scale distribution of the technology, where field implementation may be less than ideal. This is
especially true for health and environmental technologies whose benefits often stem from proper
and sustained use.8 This study demonstrates the additional value of evaluating a technology in
real-world settings and for long enough to understand how individuals’ behavioral responses
influence the technology’s effectiveness.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the experimental
design. The data is described in Section III, while the empirical framework is laid out in Section
IV. The findings are presented in Section V. Section VI provides a discussion of the state of
knowledge on improved stoves to date, as well as lessons that can be learned for future research
and evaluation. Section VII concludes the paper.

II. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
A. Setting
This project took place in India, where about 70 percent of the population burn solid fuels—
firewood, crop residue, or cow dung—in traditional stoves (see Appendix Figure 1, Panel A) to
meet their cooking needs (Census of India, 2001). The reliance on traditional fuels is even
higher (90 percent) in poorer, rural regions. Indoor air pollution (IAP) levels from traditional

8

In Indonesia, Thomas et al. (2006) test the effect of iron supplementation on work outcomes, where compliance is
carefully monitored. They find large effects on work, providing an upper bound on the effect in large scale
distributions where individuals may not regularly take the supplements. Similarly, key randomized evaluations of
bed nets (Alonso et al., 1991; Phillips-Howard et al., 2003; Binka, 1998; Nevill et al., 1996) typically send project
staff to re-treat the nets every six months, where presumably households are also reminded to use them. In PhillipsHoward et al. (2003), households signed forms that the nets remained the property of the project until after the study
was concluded, which could have induced households to keep the nets in better condition than if they had been told
that the nets were their own. This issue extends beyond the developing world: Duggan (2005) argues that in the
United States anti-psychotic drugs are less effective in practice than in FDA trials due to several factors, including
short-run follow-up, small sample sizes that make it difficult to detect some important side effects, and prescribing
these drugs for people that differ from the individuals enrolled in the clinical trials.
5

stoves are high. For example, Smith (2000) reports that the “available data show a distribution
of indoor PM10 24-h concentrations measured in Indian solid-fuel-using households ranging to
well over 2000 µg/m3.” To put these figures into context, the Central Pollution Control Board of
India states that ambient levels of PM10 should not exceed 100 µg/m3.
In response to the health threats from solid fuel use in traditional stoves, as well as
concerns about deforestation, both governments and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)
have been implementing clean stove programs for several decades. For example, during the
1980s and 1990s, the Indian government alone subsidized and distributed 32 million improved
stoves. However, many of these stoves had life spans that were less than two years, and as Smith
(2000) has pointed out, only a small fraction of the stoves built before 1990 still existed at the
time of his article. In fact, this campaign is widely acknowledged to have been a failure, with
stoves laying unused or rapidly falling into disrepair (Block 2011).9 The renewed interest in IAP
worldwide has prompted a new wave of interest in India as well, with NGOs, local governments,
and private foundations investing in the design and distribution of improved stoves, and the
launch in 2011 of a new large-scale government program with an improved design.
This paper evaluates an improved stove program run by Gram Vikas, an NGO that
operates in the state of Orissa. Orissa is one of the poorest states in India, with 40 percent of the
population living below the poverty line. Poverty is significantly worse in the western and
southern districts of the state where this project took place. Independent of the researchers,
Gram Vikas obtained funding from the Inter-Community Church Organization (ICCO) to
subsidize the construction of improved stoves to roughly 15,000 households over five years.
The stove considered in this study is a relatively inexpensive improved stove technology.
It was developed and tested by the Appropriate Rural Technology Institute (ARTI), an NGO
specializing in energy innovation for rural areas. Like the traditional stoves, it is largely made
out of mud (see Appendix Figure 1, Panel B). However, the constructed base encloses the
cooking flame and it includes a chimney to direct smoke away from the user. Moreover, it
allows for two pots, instead of the one pot in traditional stoves, to potentially reduce cooking
time.

9

Rita Colwell, the former director of the US National Science Foundation, is cited in this article as saying "You
can't drop a stove into a household and walk away. You need to do follow-up. You need implementation."
6

The chosen stove was considered appealing because it is constructed with local materials
and is low cost, at roughly US$12.50. Gram Vikas subsidized the stove cost by contributing
stove materials (chimney), design, and a skilled mason to supervise the construction.
Households were responsible for providing mud for the stove base, labor and a payment of about
US$0.75, which was used to pay the mason who assisted in building and maintaining the stoves,
as well as a fund for new stoves if a new house is built in the village. As the stove is made from
locally available materials, it can be easily constructed in these remote, rural areas of India.
In laboratory settings, the ARTI stove burns more efficiently than a traditional stove,
leading to lower biofuel requirements and less indoor smoke. However, obtaining this outcome
requires that the stoves are maintained appropriately, which involves repairing cracks and
regularly removing chimney obstructions. Moreover, households must place the pots on the
openings correctly, and cover the second pot when it is not in use in order to avoid smoke from
escaping.
In addition to providing the stoves, Gram Vikas conducted the standard information
campaigns that NGOs run when they introduce a new program. Specifically, during construction
they held training sessions on proper use and maintenance (see Appendix Figure 2 for an
example of the training materials). Among households that received a stove in the first wave,
almost 70 percent report that they attended a training session. Moreover, Gram Vikas identified
individuals in each village who used their stoves correctly and hired (with a small stipend) them
to promote proper use and alert Gram Vikas when the stoves were in need of repair. Of those
who received a stove in the first wave, 62 percent report knowing who this “promoter” is, 48
percent report that they attend a meeting with the promoter, and another 47 percent state that
they received a visit from the promoter to discuss stove use. In total, about 86 percent report
either having Gram Vikas or the promoter provide training on the stove (either through a meeting
or visit).

B. Sample, Timeline and Experimental Design
In the summer of 2005, Gram Vikas obtained permission from 42 villages to participate in the
study. Unrelated to the study, three villages decided to withdraw from all Gram Vikas activity.10

10

Gram Vikas’s main activity is the construction of village sanitation systems (a toilet and a tap for each house).
This requires the cooperation of the entire village (across caste lines). This occasionally leads to the breakdown of
7

As a result, we added five additional villages in June 2007.

Therefore, a total of 2,651

households in 44 villages participated in the study.
After we completed the baseline survey in each village (in 2006 for the majority of
villages, and in 2007 for the additional five villages; see timeline in Appendix Figure 3), a
village meeting was conducted. At each meeting, Gram Vikas explained that the stoves were
being built in three waves, and that the households would be randomly assigned to each wave.
Next, a public lottery (monitored by the research team) was conducted to choose the first third of
households in the village that would be offered a GV improved stove. Gram Vikas completed
the first wave of stove construction and user training between September 2006 and March 2007.
After we conducted the midline survey, the second round of village meetings occurred. A
lottery was conducted to choose households that would be offered a stove in the second wave of
construction. From May 2009 to April 2010, the second round of stove construction and training
occurred. Note that during this time, there was also a big push by Gram Vikas to repair or
rebuild stoves from the first wave of construction.

III. DATA
A. Data Collection
Throughout the study, we conducted a series of surveys to create a panel dataset on stove use,
smoke exposure, health, stove breakages and repairs, and fuel use. Appendix Figure 4 provides a
summary of the surveys and their sample sizes, while the data appendix describes each survey
that we conducted in more detail. Here, we provide a summary of the key variables of interest.
We collected comprehensive data on the socio-demographic characteristics of each
household. This data includes household composition (size, as well as each member’s age, sex,
and relationship to the head of household), demographics (education levels, caste, religion),
economic indicators (assets, indebtedness), and consumption patterns. In addition, for each
household member, we collected individual measures of productivity, such as employment
status, time-use patterns for adults over the last 24 hours, and school enrollment and attendance
for children.
Through a series of surveys, we collected information on stove use. This included the

their relationship with villages. See Duflo, Greenstone, and Guiteras (2011) on the benefits of their sanitation
program.
8

types of stoves a household owned, meals cooked with each type of stove over the past week,
repairs and maintenance activities surrounding the stoves, and fuel expenditures (both money
and time). In addition, we collected information on beliefs about the efficacy of the stoves (for
example, do they use less fuel) and on satisfaction with the stoves.
To measure smoke exposure, the team measured exhaled carbon monoxide (CO) with a
Micro Medical CO monitor. 11 CO is a biomarker of recent exposure to air pollution from
biomass combustion, and therefore it can be used to proxy an individual’s personal exposure to
smoke from their stoves. Furthermore, it is an inexpensive way to proxy for inhalation of
particulate matter, which has been shown to be an important determinant of infant mortality and
life expectancy (see, for example, Chay and Greenstone 2003a, 2003b; Chen et al., 2012; Currie
and Neidell, 2005; Jayachandran, 2009; Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva, 2012).
Finally, we collected two types of health data. First, we conducted detailed health recall
surveys where we enquired about symptoms (coughs, colds, etc.), infant outcomes, and health
expenditures.

We complemented these data with physical health checks for biometric

measurements, such as height, weight, and arm circumference. During the physical health check,
we administered spirometry tests that are designed to gauge respiratory health by measuring how
much air the lungs can hold and how well the respiratory system can move air in and out of the
lungs. In contrast to peak flow tests, which are easier to administer, spirometry readings can be
used to diagnose obstructive lung disorders (such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
[COPD] and asthma), and also restrictive lung disorders.12 Further, this test is the only way to
obtain measurements of lung function that are comparable across individuals (Beers et al., 1999).
The tests were conducted using the equipment directions, as well as guidelines from the
11

Note that we did not measure ambient pollutants (neither CO nor PM). Ambient measures alone are less
interesting to measure than exposure, as individuals may undertake fewer behaviors to protect themselves from
smoke if ambient measures fall and thus could, in fact, end up with a higher level of exposure. If we conducted only
ambient measures we could see a decline, even though their actual exposure may not have decreased due to these
behavioral changes. We focused on CO, which has been argued to be a good proxy for PM. Collecting data on PM
exposure is difficult in this setting: tubes must be attached to the subjects for 24 hours and the equipment requires
controlled temperature, careful transferring of samples, and proper laboratories for testing. Given the conditions of
rural Orissa, controlling the samples would be near impossible on such a large scale. However, McCracken and
Smith (1998) report a strong correlation between the average concentrations of CO and PM2.5 in the kitchen during
water boiling tests. They conclude that this implies “the usefulness of CO measurements as an inexpensive way of
estimating PM2.5 concentrations,” even if it is not an exact proxy (see Ezzati (2002) for a discussion of this).
12
According to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease, the results can be used to assess whether
participants have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There are two main forms of COPD, chronic
bronchitis and emphysema; complications from the disease include heart failure, pneumonia, severe weight loss, and
malnutrition.
9

American Association for Respiratory Care.13
Lastly, throughout the study, we compiled Gram Vikas’s administrative data on program
functioning. Specifically, we collected data on lottery participation and outcomes.

B. Sample Statistics
Table 1 provides information on household-level baseline demographic characteristics and stove
usage. For each variable, means are provided in Column 1, standard deviations in Column 2, and
the sample sizes in Column 3. As Panel A indicates, the households were very poor, with an
average monthly per capita household expenditure of about US$12 (Rs 475). Forty-three percent
of households belonged to a disadvantaged minority group. A little less than half had electricity,
making electric stoves an impractical option. Schooling outcomes are discouraging: only 69
percent of the household heads had attended school, and just 58 percent self-reported being able
to read. Similarly, only 32 percent of the female household heads (or spouses of one) had
attended school, with just 20 percent self-reporting that they are literate.
There was a large dependence on traditional stoves and fuels for cooking (Panel B).
Most households (99 percent) owned at least one traditional cooking stove (see Appendix Figure
1, Panel A). About a quarter of households owned any type of low polluting stove, primarily
electric (11 percent) and kerosene (10 percent).

Only 23 out of 2,480 households had an

improved stove from a previous program that Gram Vikas had conducted several years earlier.
Despite the fact that many households owned a low-polluting stove, most (93 percent) continued
to use the traditional stove as their primary stove, with an average of 12.6 meals (or 91 percent
of all meals) cooked on one over the last week. Unsurprisingly, out of those who primarily cook
household meals, 96 percent were female.
Given that households often had more than one stove, they tended to cook in more than
one location (Panel C). On average, about one meal per week was cooked in an enclosed area,
and about five meals per week were cooked in a semi-enclosed area. About 7.5 meals per week
were cooked outside. It is noteworthy that open fire stoves pollute enough that they produce
significant exposure even when used outdoors (Smith, 2000).
13

A manual spirometer was used in the baseline, continuous health survey, and a portion of the midline. The
enumerators would take up to seven readings for each individual, until there were at least three satisfactory readings
and at least two FEV1 readings within 100mL or 5 percent of each other. Electronic spirometers were adopted
halfway through the midline. The new machines indicated when satisfactory readings had been completed and
saved the best reading for each individual.
10

Households relied heavily on wood for fuel (Panel D), with 99 percent reporting having
ever used wood as fuel. On average, about 5kg of wood was used to cook the household’s last
meal. Fuel was typically obtained by a combination of collection and purchases: 83 percent
report having ever gathered wood, and 35 percent report having ever bought wood for cooking.
About 20 percent of households also report having ever sold wood. About 10 percent report
having collected wood the previous day, spending about five hours, on average, if they did so.
Table 2 presents baseline health statistics. Panel A reports on adults (all women in
Columns 1–3 and households members who identified themselves as primary cooks in the
baseline in Column 4–6), while Panel B reports on children (all children in Columns 1–3, and
children aged 5 and under in Columns 4–6).
Women had high levels of smoke exposure: the average CO reading is 7.55 ppm, where
a reading between 6–9 ppm indicates smoke within the lungs and a reading of 10 ppm or more
indicates a high level of smoke within the lungs.14 About 27 percent of women score a reading
of 10 ppm or more, which, following the back-of-the-envelope calculation by Levine and
Beltramo (2010), suggests that these women had exposure levels that were equivalent to smoking
10 cigarettes per day (note that few women reported that they smoked). In contrast, lung
function measurements are in the normal range. We observe a mean FEV1/FVC of about 90,
which suggests that, on average, participants did not have COPD.
In general, self-reported illness levels among women were high. Almost 90 percent
report having had any type of symptoms in the past 30 days. Symptoms that are typically
associated with smoke exposure were abundant: about half self-reported having had a cough or
cold in the last 30 days, about 49 percent report having had a headache, and about 30 percent
report having had sore eyes. In contrast, very few individuals report that they experienced
tightness in their chest (5 percent) or wheezing (2 percent).

Relatively speaking, health

expenditures were high, with females reporting that they spent about US$1.63 in the last
month.15 Note that the baseline health statistics for household primary cooks are similar to those
for the sample of adult women.

14

The baseline CO in exhaled breath is slightly lower than in the RESPIRE study, which found a baseline CO rate
of about 9 ppm (Diaz et al., 2007). However, it is similar to the control group mean in the RESPIRE study of about
7 ppm that was observed throughout the course of that study (Smith-Sivertsen et al., 2009).
15
Banerjee, Duflo, and Deaton (2004) find similar health results in Rajasthan, India.
11

Children had high levels of CO exposure and poor health outcomes in the baseline (Panel
B). Their CO levels were, on average, 6.48 ppm.16 This suggests that they had an average CO
level similar to someone who smokes about 7 cigarettes per day. About 20 percent of the
children had a reading of 10 ppm or higher, which is equivalent to being a heavy smoker.
Children were malnourished, with an average BMI nearly two standard deviations below the
norm, according to the 2000 US Centers for Disease Control measurement of the child
population (two standard deviations below the norm is generally considered an indicator of
stunting). Parents report that 73 percent of the children had some form of illness in the past
month. About a quarter of parents consulted a health care provider for a child’s fever in the last
month, with an average of US$1.15 spent on all healthcare costs during this period. Coughs
were the most prevalent symptom, with about 40 percent of all children having had one in the
last 30 days. Other illnesses that could be associated with indoor air pollution include ear
infections (9 percent), skin irritation (13 percent), and vision problems (1 percent). In general,
children 5 years of age and younger (Columns 4 to 6 of Panel B) look similar in terms of
baseline characteristics to the sample of all children.

C. Is Cooking on a Clean Stove Associated with Better Health? Baseline Correlations
Most of the evidence on health improvements from reductions in indoor air pollution is based on
the association between clean stove usage and health in observational data. In Table 3, we
present the coefficient estimates from regressions of baseline CO and health variables on the
number of meals cooked with a low polluting stove in the last week at baseline, conditional on
village fixed effects and several demographic variables (indicators for whether households
belong to a disadvantaged minority; the household has electricity; the male household head has
attended school; the male household head is literate; the female household head (or wife of male
household head) has attended any school and is literate; any female member within a household
has a savings account; and monthly household per capita consumption).17
16

Panel A presents

Note that in the baseline and CHS, only children approximately 9 years and older were tested for CO exposure, as
it is difficult to test younger children. Based on a doctor’s assessment and field testing, we lowered the age
restriction and collected CO measures for children older than 5 years in the midline and endline.
17
Appendix Table 1 presents these estimates unconditional on any control variables. In these specifications, we
observe that meals are also positively correlated with health expenditures and negatively correlated with wheezing
for women and primary cooks. In general, the coefficient estimates for women and primary cooks tends to be a bit
larger in magnitude and significance when we do not include the control variables, but they are not qualitatively
different from those presented in Table 3. The estimates for children are also similar to those presented in Table 3.
12

these results for females, while Panel B reports them for the primary cooks.

Panels C and D

present results for all children and those aged five and under, respectively. The standard errors in
all regressions are clustered at the household level.
Consistent with the literature, cooking with a clean stove is associated with better health.
As shown in Panel A, women who cooked more meals with any type of low-polluting stove had
better lung functioning (Column 3), higher BMI (Column 4), fewer coughs or colds in the last
week (Column 5), and a lower likelihood of sore eyes (Column 6) and wheezing (Column 9).
The coefficient estimates are similar for the primary cooks (Panel B). Note that while we
observe that cooking an additional meal with an improved stove is associated with lower smoke
exposure, as measured by CO for both women and primary cooks (Column 1), this is not
significant at conventional levels.
For the children who were tested in the baseline for CO exposure, there is a significantly
negative correlation between each additional meal cooked with a clean stove in the last week and
smoke exposure. However, we do not observe a relationship between meals and health for either
the full sample of children or those who are aged five and under. The signs of the coefficients
suggest improved health outcomes, but they would not be judged to be statistically significant by
conventional criteria, despite the relatively large sample sizes.
Overall, Table 3 suggests that women who use cleaner stoves are in better health, but we
cannot conclusively state whether there is a correlation between the stoves and children’s health.
Despite controlling for basic demographic characteristics, these estimates may still be biased due
to a number of unobservable factors. For example, those who choose to use a clean stove may
generally value health more than those who do not and thus may also undertake other health
investments, either of which would lead to better health. In this case, our estimated coefficients
would be biased upwards. Alternatively, the improved stoves may be disproportionately used by
the sick, which would cause the estimated relationships to be biased downwards.

IV. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND EXPERIMENTAL VALIDITY
A. Empirical Framework
The experimental design allows us to solve these endogeneity problems by comparing winners
and losers from the stove lottery. We begin by estimating the reduced form effect of winning the

13

stove on a series of outcomes, including stove use, CO exposure, health, and other non-health
stove outcomes (such as fuel use and cooking time). Specifically, we estimate:
(1)
where

is the outcome of interest for individual i in household h in village v at time t.

is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the household was in the treatment group at time t. As we
stratified the sample by village during the randomization, and treatments and control households
were surveyed at about the same time within each village, we include village
year fixed effects (

survey month-

), i.e., there are separate fixed effects for all observations from a

village in a given month-year (e.g., January 2010).18 For CO exposure, health, and non-health
stove outcomes (when possible) we additionally include the baseline value of the outcome to
gain additional precision.19
ensures that

is our key parameter of interest; the random assignment of

will be an unbiased estimate of the effect of being offered a stove.

To fully exploit the four years of follow-up, we additionally estimate how the treatment
effect varies over time. The effect of being offered a stove may change throughout time for a
variety of reasons. The effect may decline over time if the stoves break or fall into disrepair,
proper use declines, or if individuals feel healthier and compensate with other unhealthy
behavior (i.e., smoking). Alternatively, the effect may increase if households learn how to use
the stoves better, or use them more as they learn about the benefits of the stoves over time. To
capture this change, we interact the treatment effect

) with a set of indicator variables (

for whether the observation falls within a given year after stove distribution k={1,2,3,4}:
(2)

∑

In equation (2) there are now four parameters of interest

,

,

, which capture the

effect of having won the lottery within one year of the stove being built, within 13 to 24 months
of the stove being built, etc. Due to the timing of Lottery 2 and the surveys,

is identified from

winners of both Lottery 1 and 2, but the other ’s are only identified from the Lottery 1 winners.
18

The survey month also controls for the survey wave in which the data was collected. The results are virtually
unchanged when we control for survey wave x village. These results are available from the authors upon request.
19
We have also run all of the models without the baseline variables. The results, both in terms of the magnitude of
the coefficient estimates and statistical significance, are unchanged. These results, omitted for brevity, are available
from the authors upon request.
14

Finally to scale the results, we also estimate the effect of using any type of low-polluting
stove on CO exposure using an instrumental variables strategy. We estimate:
(3)
where

is a either a measure of whether the household owns a low-polluting stove or the

number of meals cooked with a good condition, low-polluting stove over the last week. As
selected individuals may choose whether to take up a stove, an OLS estimate of
biased. Thus, we use the treatment variable (

) as an instrument for

Finally, note the following specification details.

would be

in equation (3).

First, for some of the subsequent

analysis, we allow the treatment effects to differ between the Lottery 1 and 2 treatment groups.
For example, it is possible that households updated their beliefs on the stoves based on their
neighbors’ experiences, and so take-up and use may have differed between the lotteries. Second,
the household level equations are weighted to account for household splits and mergers. Third,
for all regression analysis, the standard errors are clustered at the household level, which is the
unit at which the treatment was assigned.

B. Verification of Experimental Validity
There are two primary threats to the empirical design. First, the randomization may have
produced imbalanced groups either by chance or if the randomization process was somehow
corrupted. It is unlikely that the process was corrupted as the lotteries were publically conducted
and our research team monitored each of them. Nonetheless, in Appendix Table 2A and 2B, we
provide test results of the randomization across baseline demographics, stove use, and health for
the primary cooks and children across Lottery 1 winners, Lottery 2 winners, and those who lost
both lotteries. The groups are well-balanced across the 59 baseline characteristics that we
consider, with only 10 percent of the differences across groups significant at the 10 percent level
or more (as predicted by chance). Further details are described in the appendix.
Second, poor areas are often characterized by seasonal migration. Moreover, individuals
may not have been home when our enumerators visited them if they were working in the fields,
etc. Attrition would be most problematic if it is correlated with treatment status (e.g., households
that obtained a new stove were less likely to migrate). We tried to minimize overall attrition by
revisiting households that we could not initially locate, as well as conducting the surveys in the
15

evening when individuals were likely to be at home. Nonetheless, results in Appendix Table 3
(details are provided in the appendix) fail to produce any meaningful evidence of differential
attrition across the treatment and control groups, implying that differential attrition is not a
source of bias in the subsequent regressions.

V. RESULTS
This section is broken into four segments. We begin by examining the relationship between
stove ownership and usage (Section A). Next, we explore the relationship between treatment
status and CO exposure (Section B) and health (Section C). Finally, we explore the relationship
between the stoves and household expenditures on fuel and repairs (Section D).

A. Improved Stove Ownership and Use
In many laboratory studies, improved stoves are evaluated in ideal conditions, with the stoves in
flawless condition and used properly. However, the health gains and fuel savings that are
observed in the laboratory may not be achieved in the real-world if households choose not to take
up a stove, the stove is not kept in good condition, the stove is not used properly, or the stove is
not used regularly (see Figure 1 for the causal chain). Moreover, the initial treatment effect may
change over time, as stoves may deteriorate, and/or individuals may update their beliefs about
how to use the stoves or their expected benefits. Therefore, it is of vital importance to understand
how households use these technologies in practice under normal field conditions.
We begin the analysis by exploring the effect of treatment status (i.e., being offered a GV
improved stove) on stove ownership and use over time. Figure 2 plots the βk's and their 95
percent confidence intervals from a specification where we interact the treatment status indicator
with indicators for months since stove construction in the village in six-month intervals, after
adjustment for the village

survey month-year fixed effects (this is a modified version of

equation (2)). We explore the effect of treatment status on whether households currently owned
an improved GV stove (Panel A), currently had any type of low-polluting stove (Panel B), and
currently had an improved stove in good condition, defined as an enumerator observed measure
(Panel C). The effect of the treatment status on the number of meals cooked over the last week
with any type of good condition, low-polluting stove is documented in Panel D.

16

As shown by Panel A, over 70 percent of households that won Lottery 1 built a GV stove
during the first six months of the program. In the first six months, Lottery 2 winners were
modestly less likely to take up a stove than Lottery 1 winners, but had the same level of stove
construction by 6 to 12 months after the initial construction period in their village.20 The fraction
of households with installed GV stoves, regardless of their condition, began to decline to less
than 50 percent. In the final year, the rate of stove ownership increased again as Gram Vikas
made an effort to repair broken stoves from Lottery 1 during the construction of stoves for
Lottery 2 winners. Appendix Table 4 illustrates that the reasons for not building/rebuilding a
stove changed over time as households learned about the stoves: the fraction of households who
claimed they were not interested in the stove increased from 7 percent in Year 1 to about 26
percent in Year 4. Further, the fraction of households that destroyed their stove, presumably to
create space in their homes, increased from 2 percent in Year 1 to 32 percent by Year 4.
The stove condition may deteriorate over time due to normal wear and tear, coupled with
insufficient maintenance. This deterioration could lead to increased levels of smoke within the
household. Figure 2, Panel C reveals that the percent of treatment households with a GV
improved stove in good condition was about half of that expressed in Panel A. Appendix Figure
5 helps to explain this finding by showing that the percent of Lottery 1 household winners that
report ever having had a crack in the stove was 74 percent and the comparable figure for Lottery
2 is 67 percent, which is striking since they were followed for only one year.

Overall, at any

point in time, treatment households were between 30 to 50 percentage points more likely than
control households to have had a good condition GV stove.
The presence of a good condition, low-polluting stove does not guarantee that it will be
used extensively. Households may prefer traditional cooking methods and the improved stoves’
double-pot technology may, for example, make it more time-consuming to cook just one pot of
water. Indeed, even though about a quarter of households owned a low-polluting stove in the
baseline, more than 90 percent of meals reported in the baseline were still cooked on a traditional
stove.

20

The reasons for not taking up a stove varied, as shown by Appendix Table 4. In the first year, about 28 percent
who chose not to take a stove did so because the stoves were inconvenient: either they did not believe that they had
sufficient kitchen space or the fact that the stove was not the right fit for their family size. Only 6 percent claimed
that they were not building it because they had a better stove. About another quarter claimed that they were
planning on building a stove soon.
17

Consequently, we also explored how the offer of the GV improved stove changed the
number of meals cooked with any type of low-polluting stove in good condition over the
previous week. This outcome captures the intensity of use and is the most direct measure of the
improved stoves’ potential impact on health. The Figure 2, Panel D graph shows that treatment
households cook about three more meals a week than the control households on a good
condition, low-polluting stove during the first year.21 Like stove ownership, the effect falls over
time, and picks up in the fourth year when there was a big push by Gram Vikas to construct and
retrain households during the Lottery 2 construction.
Table 4 more formally tests the effect of the stove offer on each of these four variables.
Panel A provides estimates of the overall treatment effect (equation (1)) and Panel B provides
estimates of the overall treatment effect by years since stove construction in the village (equation
(2)). Note that because the stove use behavior of Lottery 1 and Lottery 2 winners was not
significantly different, we group them together for the remainder of the analysis.
The estimates illustrate that take-up was far from universal and proper usage was
substantially smaller than take-up. About 6 percent of the control group took up the GV
improved stoves and the treatment group was 62 percentage points more likely to have a GV
stove than the control group (Column 1, Panel A).22 Considering all low-polluting stoves, the
overall treatment effect falls to about 47 percentage points, as about a quarter of the control
group had a low polluting stove of any type (Column 2, Panel A). However, as Column 3
reports, many households did not undertake the investments necessary to keep the stoves in good
condition: the treatment effect on the proportion of GV improved stoves in good condition is 36
percentage points over the entire period. The effect again is high in the first two years, falls in
Year 3, and increases again during the big push in Year 4 (Column 3, Panel B). Ultimately,
households did not use the stoves regularly. On average, treatment households cooked about
three more meals per week (or about 20 percent more) on any good condition, improved stoves
out of a total of 14 cooked meals per week.

21

Looking at improved stoves in Ghana, Burwen and Levine (2011) also find that individuals do not completely
reduce their use of the traditional stoves when given an improved stove, with the treatment group using an average
of 1.4 traditional stoves as compared to 1.9 in the control group. In fact, they returned to three of eight villages
about eight months after the stove installation and found that only about half of the improved stoves remained in
regular use (i.e., warm to touch or contained reasonable amounts of ash).
22
The overall take-up rate is not inconsistent with other preventive health products that have demonstrated health
effects (see Dupas 2011 for a discussion).
18

If households do not use the stoves correctly, each additional meal cooked will not reduce
smoke inhalation to the fullest possible extent. For example, a failure to cover the second pot
opening when it is not in use will allow smoke to enter the kitchen through this opening.
Similarly if households fail to clean the chimney regularly, it will become blocked and smoke
will enter the kitchen when the improved stove is used.23 It is difficult to measure proper use.
Often, use is gauged through controlled kitchen tests, but households may use the stove correctly
when they are being observed by researchers even if they do not typically use it properly.
Similarly, self-reported measures of use may be biased upwards if households feel judged by the
enumerators.24
Nonetheless, we collected self-reported measures of proper use. As Figure 3 shows, for
the sample of those who own a stove in good condition, only about 60 percent report that they
use the stoves properly, where proper use is defined as cleaning the stove in the last week, using
the stove in the last week, not elevating the cook pot during use, and using the two pots correctly.
In summary, we find that stove behavior and use in real-world settings differs
considerably from controlled laboratory tests.

Take-up of GV stoves was only about 60

percentage points higher in treatment households than control ones, despite the fact that the
stoves were highly subsidized. The share of households that maintained an improved stove in
good condition was substantially smaller at 36 percentage points, and out of these, 40 percent
self-reported that they did not properly clean and use the stoves to minimize indoor air pollution.
In practice, treatment households continued to also use their traditional stoves, cooking only
about three extra meals per week on any type of low-polluting stove in good condition.

B. Effects on Smoke Inhalation
We now test whether being offered a stove caused changes in smoke inhalation. Following Diaz,
Bruce, Pope, Lie, Diaz, Arana, Smith, and Smith-Sivertson (2007), we measured Carbon
Monoxide (CO) in exhaled breath to measure smoke inhalation. As discussed in the data section,
23

Note that self-reported good use does not necessarily mean that the stove will be in good condition: Dutta,
Shields, Edwards, and Smith (2007) find that even when households self-reported regular cleaning by dropping sand
bags from the top of the chimney, the chimneys could often became clogged four to five months after installation if
the cleaning was not done properly.
24
Another reason that smoke inhalation may not be reduced to the fullest extent possible is if the stoves induce
individuals to cook inside and the smoke exposure from a clean stove inside is worse than the smoke exposure from
a traditional stove outside. However, we find no evidence that treatment households increased the number of meals
cooked indoors.
19

CO is a biomarker of recent exposure to air pollution from biomass combustion, and therefore it
can be used to proxy an individual’s personal exposure to smoke from cooking stoves.
Table 5 and Figure 4 provide a reduced form analysis of the effect of stoves on smoke
exposure for women, for those who identified themselves as primary cooks in the baseline, and
for children who were old enough to be tested.

Note that all specifications include the baseline

values of the outcome variable and village

survey month-year fixed effects, and that the

standard errors are clustered at the household level.25
On average, we observe limited effects on the CO concentrations in respondents’ breath.
For women, CO levels fall slightly, but the effect is not significant (Table 5, Panel A, Column 1).
The magnitude of this effect is 1.5 percent of the mean and 1.6 percent of a standard deviation.
As Pitt, Rosenzweig, and Hassan (2010) discuss, indoor air pollution is unlikely to be evenly
distributed within the household, with the highest incidence likely borne by those who do most
of the cooking. Therefore, we estimate the effect for the primary cook in the household at the
time of the baseline. The point estimate for the average effect for primary cooks is about double
that for females, but still not statistically significant over the entire period (Table 5, Panel B,
Column 2). In terms of magnitude, it is small, as it is 3.1 percent of the mean and 3.6 percent of
a standard deviation.26
These estimates mask considerable heterogeneity over time. We observe a meaningful
reduction in primary cook’s CO breath concentrations during the first year.

Specifically, we

find a 0.52 ppm reduction (7.5 percent of the control group’s mean) in the CO concentration
during Year 1 for primary cooks relative to the control group, when stove usage is at its highest.
Thus, to the extent that they were used in the first year, they were effective in reducing CO,
which supports ARTI’s laboratory results that these stoves can be effective at reducing exposure
to indoor air pollution. However, as usage declined so did the effect on CO: the treatment effect
25

If the baseline value is missing, we assign the average of the baseline variable. We additionally include an
indicator variable that equals one when the baseline value for an individual was imputed.
26
In principle, the effect on CO concentrations of exhaled breath could be mitigated by two forms of spillovers from
the treatment to the control group. First, treatment households could conduct all the cooking for the control group
since they own the improved stove. The data are inconsistent with this possibility as the total number of meals
cooked by treatment and control households was not significantly different during the experiment (the magnitude of
the coefficient estimate is near zero, and in fact, negative). Moreover, the number of people whom the treatment
household cooked for was not significantly different than that of the control households during these meals. Second,
the experiment may cause control households to learn about the dangers of indoor air pollution, which leads them to
change their cooking habits to protect themselves from smoke. Using data from our midline survey, we find no
difference in the minutes spent cooking at arm’s length from one’s cooking stove, suggesting that control
households were not differentially trying to protect themselves from the smoke.
20

for primary cooks falls to -0.17 ppm by the second year of stove ownership and is no longer
significant. While smoke exposure generally decreased for women (Column 1) and children
(Column 3) in the first two years, this effect is not statistically significant at conventional
levels.27
To interpret these results, the odd columns in Table 6 report the results from estimating
the effect of owning any type of low-polluting stove on CO exposure with the instrumental
variables approach outlined in equation (3). Additionally, the even-numbered columns estimate
the effect of an additional meal cooked on a good condition, low-polluting stove on CO exposure
with the same instrumental variables approach. Columns 1 and 2 estimate the effect for all
women, Columns 3 and 4 estimate the effect for the primary cooks, and Columns 5 and 6
estimate the effect for children. Note that all specifications include baseline values of the
outcome variable and village

survey month-year fixed effects and are clustered at the

household level.
Before turning to the results, it is worth noting that the instrumental variable estimates are
not equal to the ratios of the relevant reduced form relationships in Tables 4 and 5. This is
because the household-level data on the presence of a stove and meals cooked with a lowpolluting stove in good condition were collected in a different survey than the individual-level
data on the CO breath concentrations. Consequently, the samples differ between Table 5 and 6.
On average, owning at least one of any low-polluting stoves reduces CO levels by -0.286
ppm for women, -0.564 ppm for primary cooks, and -0.478 ppm for children. These scaled
estimates suggest declines of 4.1 percent, 7.9 percent, and 8.8 percent, respectively, in smoke
exposure from owning an improved stove, but none of them are statistically different from zero
(Table 6, Panel A). Owning an improved cooking stove in the first year reduces CO exposure
for primary cooks by -0.898 ppm, or 12.5 percent, relative to the control group (Table 6, Panel B,
Column 3).

However, by Year 2, this falls to -0.468 ppm and is no longer statistically

significant.

By Years 3 and 4, the effect becomes positive and remains statistically

indistinguishable from zero.

27

We also explored whether the stoves were more effective during monsoon season when individuals are more
likely to cook inside. There is evidence that CO concentrations for children and primary cooks are lower in
treatment households (compared to controls) during the monsoon, however these effects would not be statistically
significant at conventional levels.
21

A comparison of these IV results with the RESPIRE studies’ estimates helps to
underscore the fundamental differences in approach and meaning of the studies’ results. With
weekly maintenance and instruction on proper use, as well as the use of stoves for most meals,
the RESPIRE intervention produced a reduction in CO exposure of about 60 percent for women
and 50 percent for children. This effect is much larger than the statistically insignificant 8.8
percent reduction in CO concentrations for children (the group with the largest reduction in our
study) that arise from stove ownership within our study. The fact that the stoves were not used
for all meals in our setting may be responsible for the differences in CO. If households had
cooked all meals with an improved stove, there would have been an estimated 19.1 percent (14
meals × -0.074) reduction in CO concentrations for children. As we emphasized above, while
we cannot be certain that the laboratory effect of our study’s stoves are exactly equal to the effect
of the RESPIRE study’s stoves, it seems safe to conclude that the deterioration of the stoves over
time, coupled with improper use (e.g., not covering the second pot), may be responsible for the
differences in observed levels of smoke exposure reduction.
An alternative explanation for the small estimates in Table 6 is that the GV stoves cause
individuals to feel healthier, which leads them to choose activities (like increased cigarette
smoking) that would expose them to smoke from other sources. In this case, the impacts on
smoke inhalation would be partially or even completely undone by individuals’ compensatory
responses. However, very few women (0.2 percent) and primary cooks (0.7 percent) report
smoking during the course of the study, and therefore, changes to such rates appear unlikely to
affect the overall CO results. It is also possible that men may smoke more in the household,
inducing higher rates of secondhand smoke to women. Appendix Table 5 shows the reduced
form effect of the treatment on the male propensity to smoke and finds no overall difference
(Panel A) and no change over time (Panel B). Thus, the stoves do not appear to induce
compensatory behavior that undoes the stoves’ beneficial impacts.

C. Health Outcomes
This subsection reports the impact of the treatment on a wide range of health outcomes. The
results in the previous subsection suggest that sustainable health effects are unlikely to operate
through the channel of reduced smoke inhalation, as there are no sustainable effects on measured
smoke inhalation over time. Nevertheless, it is possible that there are unobserved household
22

compensatory responses to the stoves that loosen budget constraints in a way that directly
improves health.
For the sample of primary cooks, Figure 5A plots the effect of treatment status over time
for several key health outcomes. Specifically, we examine the effect on respiratory health, as
measured by the spirometer (FEV1 and FEV1/FVC

100), as well as self-reported measures

(“cough or cold” and “any illness”). The estimates are taken from the fitting of a specification
that includes baseline values of the outcome variable and village

survey month-year fixed

effects. The standard errors are clustered at the household level.
Larger spirometry readings indicate greater lung functioning. Even in the early period
when there is a reduction in CO breath concentrations for primary cooks, no impact on lung
functioning is observed. All four of these figures are remarkable in that the response function
hovers around the zero line throughout the four years of follow-up: it is evident that there is little
basis to reject the null hypothesis of no effect.
Table 7A reports on the formal regression analysis of the effect on health for a wider
range of health outcomes for primary cooks (Panel A), children (Panel B), children aged five and
under (Panel C), and infants (Panel D). As shown in the graphs, overall, we find no effect of
randomly being offered a stove on health outcomes. Out of 44 health estimates, five (11 percent)
are significant at the 10 percent level, which is what would be expected by chance. All five of
the statistically significant effects have a counterintuitive signs, suggesting that the stove offer
causes worse health, further underscoring that treatment status appears unrelated to health.28
In the presence of so many outcome variables, it can be informative to summarize the
results by estimating an average treatment effect across the multiple outcomes. To do this, we
standardized all of the outcome variables to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of 1,
took the average across all outcomes for each observation, and then estimated the effect of
treatment status.29 The results are presented in Table 7B for primary cooks (Column 1), children
(Column 2), and children aged five and under (Column 3). Not only are none of the estimated
effects significant, they are practically very small (Table 7B, Panel A). For example, the
28

We also estimate the health effects over time for each of the variables in Table 7A (omitted for brevity). This may
be of especial interest for the primary cooks because of their decline in CO concentrations in the first year. However,
overall, there is little evidence of health effects either in the first year or subsequent years.
29
An observation may comprise a different number of variables due to missing data or due to the fact that surveys
may have been conducted at different times. Therefore, we weight each observation by the number of variables that
contribute to the average. The results from unweighted regressions are qualitatively the same.
23

treatment results are a -0.01 standard deviation change in health across all variables for primary
cooks. Furthermore, none of the effects significantly change over time (Table 7B, Panel B).

D. Monetary and Time Costs of Improved Stoves and Self-Reported Satisfaction
Table 8 examines whether the treatment status causes changes in the monetary and time costs of
using and maintaining a household’s stoves. Improved stoves can affect expenditures on a
number of dimensions. First, when properly used in controlled conditions, the ARTI stoves
require less wood and households received training from Gram Vikas on how to achieve these
fuel reductions. As such, the stoves may reduce energy use and hence fuel costs. Second, if the
stoves are more efficient both in terms of heating up quickly (e.g., time required to boil water)
and the two-pot functionality, cooking times may be reduced. Finally, the new stoves may alter
the time spent making repairs. As recognized by the Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves,
these factors are important for adoption (particularly if households are asked to pay for the
stoves). Moreover, if the stoves reduce energy use then carbon credits could be used to finance
them, which is one of the avenues that is currently being explored to make them more widely
available.
On average, households seem to have been convinced that they should use less wood in
the new stoves: more than 60 percent of households report that they believe that GV stoves use
less wood (Appendix Figure 6). However, looking at actual use in Table 8, wood use appears
unchanged (Table 8, Column 1), while total fuel expenditures increases, although the increase is
only statistically significant in Year 4 (Table 8, Column 2). The discrepancy between the
laboratory test and the actual expenditures by the households may be due to improper use, or the
fact that households now use both the traditional and the improved stove, perhaps
simultaneously. Burwen and Levine (2011) observe a similar effect for the type of stove that
they evaluate in Ghana. After eight weeks, households took less time and fuel to cook a meal in
a carefully controlled test, but there was no significant decline in the actual fuel used by the
family. 30 These results underscore that using laboratory or engineering tests to justify fuel
efficiency gains for carbon credit calculations has the potential to be extremely misleading.
30

The discrepancy between self-reports and actual outcomes has been observed in other contexts as well, and
probably reflect social desirability bias, as households do not want to be impolite to people they perceive to be
associated with the program (for a discussion, see Kremer, Leino, Miguel, and Zwane, 2011). In the stove context,
Boy, Bruce, Smith and Hernandez (2000) report that local women in Guatemala stated that the improved cooking
24

Similarly, most households believe that the stoves reduce cooking time (Appendix Figure
6). However, we find that, if anything, the stoves increased the time spent cooking evening
meals by about four minutes (Table 8, Column 3), although this is not statistically significant at
conventional levels.
Finally, we examine the total repairs to both the improved and traditional stoves.
Control households state that they repair their stoves about once a month. Treatment households
made, on average, about 2.5 more repairs to their stove in the last year (Table 8, Column 4),
translating to about 4.5 hours of time over the last year (Table 8, Column 5). These two effects
are economically large, implying increases of 20.2 percent and 68.7 percent, respectively, and
are statistically significant.31
Despite the fact that GV stoves increase household costs and fail to improve health,
households generally report that they are satisfied with the stoves (Table 9). On a scale from one
to ten with one being the best, those who obtained an improved stove rate their satisfaction with
it at 2.87, with 89 percent of households happy to recommend the stoves to others. The top
reasons for recommending the stoves include that they emit less smoke in the household, the
household belief that they require less fuel, the two-pot functionality, and the households belief
that they require less time to cook. The gap between the satisfaction results, where responses do
not affect respondents’ well-being (except indirectly by trying to please the surveyors), and the
consequential health and CO results underscores the limitations of self-reports generally and
especially in trying to learning about how individuals value new technologies.

VI. DISCUSSION
The paper's basic findings differ from the naïve OLS estimates of the impact of improved stoves
on health, as well as the conventional wisdom about their benefits in the policy world.
Following households for up to four years after they received a subsidized improved stove, we
find that the stoves reduce the CO concentration in breath for primary cooks in the first year, but

stove (plancha) uses less wood than open fire stoves and that this was one of the features that they liked most about
the stoves, even though standard measures of the stoves fuel efficiency tests suggested that cooking on a plancha
was no more efficient than cooking with an open flame, and may have even required more time to cook.
31
We examine which baseline characteristics correlate with increased probability of repairs in the treatment group.
Interestingly, while female health status had no effect on repair propensity, families where children had lower
respiratory health were more likely to make repairs to their stoves.
25

this disappears by the following year. We do not observe any effect on health, neither selfreported nor measured, or on proxies for greenhouse gas emissions.
It is noteworthy that despite the fact that we studied a relatively inexpensive stove model,
this study's measured health effects are qualitatively similar to the findings from the RESPIRE
study in Guatemala, which is considered the flagship randomized experiment of a stove
program.32 Table 10 assembles the results from six different RESPIRE papers that summarize
the results for outcomes that are similar to those in this paper. The RESPIRE stove resulted in
reduced smoke exposure: as Panel A demonstrates, for the subsample of women who were
tested for emissions exposure, personal PM2.5 was about 60 percent lower for the treatment group
relative to the control group (McCracken, Smith, Díaz, Mittleman, Schwartz, 2007) and CO also
declined by roughly 60 percent for mothers in the treatment group (Smith-Sivertsen, Diaz, Pope,
Lie, Diaz, McCracken, Bakke, Arana, Smith, and Bruce, 2009).
Despite these reductions in IAP, the evidence on female health is surprisingly weak.
Panel B demonstrates that like our findings, the estimates of the treatment effect on lung
functioning are close to zero in magnitude and are not statistically significant (Smith-Sivertsen,
Diaz, Pope, Lie, Diaz, McCracken, Bakke, Arana, Smith, and Bruce, 2009). There appears to be
a modest and statistically significant reduction of blood pressure (Panel C), but this was found in
the presence of substantial selective attrition (54 percent response rate in the treatment group and
71 percent in the control) and only after adjusting for control variables that increase the
magnitude of the point estimate (McCracken, Smith, Díaz, Mittleman, Schwartz, 2007). The
birth weight results are similar in this respect (Panel D). Finally, the evidence on self-reported
symptoms is also mixed (Panel F). While women in the treatment group experienced a reduction
in respiratory symptoms (cough, chronic chough, phlegm cough, phlegm, wheeze, and tightness
of chest) the decline was statistically significant only for wheezing. The probability of selfreported sore eyes and headaches was reduced, but there was no effect on backaches (Diaz,
Smith-Sivertsen, Pope, Lie, Diaz, McCracken, Arana, Smith, Bruce, 2007).33
32

The stove that we evaluated has some very appealing features in terms of choice of stoves to evaluate in that it is
relatively inexpensive to construct, had promising laboratory results, and this family of stoves is currently used by
more than 166 million households (World Bank 2011). The RESPIRE stove also has some appealing aspects,
although it costs about US$100-150 (Diaz, Smith-Sivertsen, Pope, Lie, Diaz, Arana, Smith, Bruce, 2007) and the
full cost of the very modest health improvements would also have to include weekly inspections and free
maintenance.
33
The effect on headaches was not present in either the six-month or the 12-month follow-up; it was only present in
the 18-month follow-up (Diaz, Smith-Sivertsen, Pope, Lie, Diaz, McCracken, Arana, Smith, Bruce, 2007).
26

The effects of the stoves on the incidence of pneumonia and respiratory syncytia virus
(RSV) among children are equally as disappointing as our findings (Panel E). There was no
statistically significant difference in MD-diagnosed pneumonia, which is cited as “the primary
outcome” in the study. Moreover, out of 10 outcomes tracked, only one (severe pneumonia as
identified by a field worker) is significant at the 5 percent level in the unadjusted data. It is only
after imputing the outcome variable for missing observations that the MD-diagnosed estimates
becomes marginally significant (at the 9 percent level). Even in this adjusted data, the 95 percent
confidence interval for the odds ratio (0.59–1.06) excludes the figure of 50 percent reduction in
pneumonia that is cited by the GACC.
Overall, the similarity of our health results with those of the RESPIRE study is striking
because the RESPIRE experiment was conducted under conditions that approach laboratory
tests. For example, the treatment households were visited weekly to ensure that they were using
the stove and to provide free repairs. Given the high cost of conducting these kinds of visits,
they do not reflect the way that improved stoves are typically used and thus the health results are
likely an upper bound on health benefits of the RESPIRE stove. This is very puzzling because
the levels of IAP during cooking periods are extremely high and there is an extensive literature
linking ambient air pollution to poor human health. There are several potential explanations for
these results. For example, the response function between health and IAP may be highly
nonlinear, potentially including thresholds, such that reducing indoor pollution, even by more
than 60 percent, at such stunningly high levels may have limited effects. If this is the case, then
it is possible that there is a new stove technology that that would reduce indoor pollution
exposure sufficiently to lead to health gains, but we would need to test for what this inflection
point should be. Alternatively, the overall health status of individuals in very poor countries may
be so low that a reduction in indoor pollution would have to be accompanied by other changes to
achieve health improvements. In this case, it is possible that stove interventions could be
coupled with other health interventions, but again this would need to be tested.
In addition to RESPIRE, we have emerging evidence from several other randomized
evaluations of stoves. Some of the evidence is positive: Bensch and Peters (2012) evaluate an
improved cooking stove for about 227 households in Senegal, and find that one year after the
stoves are distributed, the stoves are used for about 71 percent of meals in the treatment group,

27

and there are improvements in self-reported fuel and health outcomes.34 Some of the evidence is
less so. Evaluating a mud stove in Ghana, Burwen and Levine (2011) show positive effects on
self-reported health eight weeks after the distribution, although there is no effect on smoke
exposure. However, a year later, only about half of the stoves appeared to still be in use.
Similarly, Levine and Beltramo (2010) examine solar stoves in Senegal, and find that six months
after the distribution there were no differences in the amount of time spent cooking near a fire
(and only a one percent decline in fuel use) since households continued to use the traditional
stoves.
The implication of the literature as whole is that the evidence on improved cooking
stoves is more mixed than the conventional wisdom would suggest and that, to date, there is no
clear evidence that a large-scale distribution of stoves is likely to be a cost-effective solution to
the problem of indoor air pollution. Additional research needs to be done. Our findings provide
clear guidance for choosing which types of stoves to test and how to design the interventions and
research.

First, target households appear to have a relatively low willingness to pay for

improved stoves and therefore the relevance of studies of expensive stoves may be limited. In
our study, despite the fact that stoves were so highly subsidized, that they were essentially free,
many households refused to install one (e.g., their homes may not have been big enough to
accommodate the stove or they simply did not want one). In a different setting, Miller and
Mobarak (2011) directly study willingness to pay and also find that even a small cost
discourages take-up. In fact, one reason why inexpensive, mud stoves are often chosen by
organizations is the belief that households are unwilling to purchase the more expensive stoves.
Carbon credits could in principle help with the low willingness to pay, but only if stoves actually
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in practice. As noted, our study failed to find any evidence of a
fuel efficiency gain given typical field conditions.
Second, it is important to study stoves under the conditions that households actually use
them. In the RESPIRE study, which is primarily concerned with the clinical impacts of stoves,
trained fieldworkers inspected the stoves weekly for proper use and maintenance, and then
arranged for repairs if needed (Smith, McCracken, Thompson, Edwards, Shields, Canuz and

34

In this study, there are follow-ups visits with households on the stove at the one, two, and seven month marks.
Interestingly, in this study, the improved stove moved households from cooking inside to cooking outside.
28

Bruce, 2010).35 For most organizations, these weekly visits and repairs are infeasible. In our
study, Gram Vikas (which is an award winning NGO) did the standard types of training and
repair activities that a typical NGO would conduct in a large-scale stove program. Given these
real-world conditions, use declined over time and, despite the fact that households did expend
some time repairing the stoves, the number of broken stoves increased over time. If we had
forced optimal use and repairs, we would have wrongly concluded a much bigger impact of the
stoves than what would happen during a large-scale distribution of them.
Third, and relatedly, it is vital to follow households long enough to understand these
behavioral issues surrounding use and repairs. Treatment effects may change considerably over
time, as households learn about the value of the stoves and subsequently change their
investments in use and maintenance.

Further, households may also experience a general

depreciation of the technology, as cracks developed, chimneys become clogged, and so forth;
stopgap repairs to the stoves may not be sufficient to return the technology to its original
efficiency. Additionally, health effects may be cumulative and not emerge for several years, so
short-duration studies may miss key benefits. Finally, in our case, we found meaningful effects
on CO for primary cooks in the first year. Had we ended the study after learning this, we may
have projected this effect for several years when conducting benefit-cost calculations. However,
in reality, this effect was short-lived.

VII. CONCLUSION
This study shows that relatively inexpensive stoves, used under real world conditions, had
limited long-run impacts. The stoves reduced smoke exposure for the primary cook in the
household in the first year of the study, but after normal use they subsequently had no discernible
effect on exposure. The declining effect appears to be the result of stove breakages combined
with insufficient investments in maintenance, reductions in the number of meals cooked with
good stoves, and inappropriate use. We found no observable effects on health, even in the early
years. While households overwhelmingly claimed that the stoves used less wood, fuel use
remained unchanged, and if anything, somewhat increased. The lack of obvious benefits may
explain why households were not interested in using the stoves optimally.

35

Even despite the carefully controlled environment, Thompson, Bruce, Eskenazi, Diaz, Pope and Smith (2011)
note that the effect on child health in the RESPIRE study may have been limited by improper or incomplete use.
29

More broadly, this study illustrates that it is critical to allow for household behavior when
evaluating health and environmental technologies. Laboratory and laboratory-style field studies
are important for understanding the best case scenario for a technology.

However, all

technologies must ultimately be used by humans who reveal their valuations through their usage
and maintenance decisions.

30

REFERENCES
Alonso, P.L., et al. 1991. “The Effect of Insecticide-Treated Bednets on Mortality of Gambian
Children.” Lancet. 1: 1499-502.
Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva. 2012. “Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality Differ
Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City,” Mimeo.
Bailis, Robert, Majid Ezzati, and Daniel Kammen. 2005. “Mortality and Greenhouse Gas
Impacts of Biomass and Petroleum Energy Futures in Africa.” Science 308(5718): 98-103.
Beers, Mark H and Robert Berkow, eds. 1999. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy
(17th edition). West Point, PA: Merck & Co, Inc.
Bensch, Gunther, and Jörg Peters. 2012. “A Recipe for Success? Randomized Free Distribution
of Improved Cooking Stoves in Senegal.” Mimeo.
Binka, F. N., F. Indome, and T. Smith, “Impact of Spatial Distribution of PermethrinImpregnated Bed Nets on Child Mortality in Rural Northern Ghana,” American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 59 (1998), 80–85.
Burwen, Jason and David I. Levine. 2011. “A Rapid Assessment Randomized-controlled Trial of
Improved Cookstoves in Rural Ghana.” Energy and Resources Group, University of California,
Berkeley Working Paper.
Boy, Erick, Nigel Bruce, Kirk R. Smith, and Ruben Hernandez. 2000. “Fuel Efficiency of an
Improved Wood Burning Stove in Rural Guatemala: Implications for Health, Environment, and
Development.” Energy for Sustainable Development 4(2): 23-31.
Chassang, Sylvain, Gerard Padro i Miquel, and Erik Snowberg. 2011. “Selective Trials: A
Principal-Agent Approach to Randomized Controlled Experiments”. Forthcoming, American
Economic Review.
Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. 2003. "The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1121-1167.
Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. 2003. "Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air
Act of 1970." NBER Working Paper No. 100053.
Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2012. “The Long-Run
Impacts of Air Pollution on Life Expectancy: Evidence from China’s Huai River Policy.”
Mimeo.
Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
from California's Recent Experience?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 1003-1030.
31

Diaz, Esperanza, Tone Smith-Sivertsen, Dan Pope, Rolv T. Lie, Anaite Diaz, John McCracken,
Byron Arana, Kirk R. Smith, and Nigel Bruce. 2007. “Eye discomfort, headache and back pain
among Mayan Guatemalan women taking part in a randomised stove intervention trial.” Journal
of Epidemiology and Community Health 61:74–79.
Duggan, Mark. 2005. "Do New Prescription Drugs Pay for Themselves? The Case of SecondGeneration Antipsychotics.” Journal of Health Economics 24(1): 1-31.
Dupas, Pascaline. 2011.
Economics 3: 425-449.

“Health Behavior in Developing Countries.”

Annual Review of

Dupas, Pascaline. 2012. “Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health
Products: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Mimeo.
Dutta, Karabi, Kyra Naumamoff Shields, Rufus Edwards, Kirk R. Smith. 2007. “Impact of
improved biomass cookstoves on indoor air quality near Pune, India.” Energy for Sustainable
Development 11(2): 19-32.
Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves. 2010. “Goals.” http://cleancookstoves.org/thealliance/goals/
Jayachandran, Seema. 2009. “Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from Indonesia’s
Wildfires.” Journal of Human Resources 44(4): 916-954.
Kremer, Michael, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel, and Alix Zwane. 2011. “Spring Cleaning:
Rural Water Impacts, Valuation, and Property Rights Institutions.”Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126(1): 145-205.
Levine, David I. and Theresa Beltramo. 2010. “The Effect of Solar Ovens on Fuel Use,
Emissions, and Health: Results from a Randomized Controlled Trial.” Hass School of Business,
University of California, Berkeley Working Paper.
Kandlikar, Milind, Conor C.O. Reynolds, and Andy P. Grieshop. 2009. “A Perspective Paper on
Black Carbon Mitigation as a Response to Climate Change”. Released by the Copenhagen
Consensus
Center
on
August
14,
2009.
Retrieved
December
4,
2011.
http://ftc_dev.planck.mocsystems.com/uploads/tx_templavoila/PP_Black_Carbon_Kandlikar_Re
ynolds_Grieshop_v.1.0.pdf
Martin II, William J., Roger I. Glass, John M. Balbus, and Francis S. Collins. 2011. “A Major
Environmental Cause of Death.” Science 344: 180-181.
McCracken, John P., Kirk R. Smith, Anaite Diaz, Murray A. Mittleman, and Joel Schwartz.
2007. “Chimney Stove Intervention to Reduce Long-term Wood Smoke Exposure Lowers Blood
Pressure among Guatemalan Women.” Environmental Health Perspectives 115(7): 996-1001.

32

Miller, Grant and Mushfiq Mobarak. 2011. “Understanding Low Demand: An Experimental
Study of Cook-stove Adoption in Bangladesh.” Yale School of Management Working Paper.
Mueller, Valerie, Alexander Pfaff, John Peabody, Yaping Liu, and Kirk R. Smith. 2011.
Demonstrating bias and improved inference for stoves’ health benefits. International Journal of
Epidemiology 40: 1643-1651.
Nevill, C. G., Some, E. S., Mung'ala, V. O., Muterni, W., New, L., Marsh, K., Lengeler, C. and
Snow, R. W. (1996), Insecticide-treated bednets reduce mortality and severe morbidity from
malaria among children on the Kenyan coast. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 1: 139–
146
Phillips-Howard, Penelope A., et al. 2003. “Efficacy of Permethrin-Treated Bed Nets in the
Prevention of Mortality in Young Children in an Area of High Perennial Malaria Transmission in
Western Kenya.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 68(Suppl. 4): 23-29.
Registrar General & Census
http://www.censusindia.net/

Commisioner,

India.

2001.

“Census

of

India.”

Smith, Kirk R. 1987. Biofuels, Air pollution, and Health: A Global Review. New York: Plenum
Press.
Smith. Kirk R. 2000. “National Burden of Disease in India from Indoor Air Pollution.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97(24): 13286–13293.
Smith, Kirk R., John P. McCracken, Lisa Thompson, Rufus Edwards, Kyra N. Shields, Eduardo
Canuz, and Nigel Bruce. 2010. “Personal Child and Mother Carbon Monoxide Exposures and
Kitchen Levels: Methods and Results from a Randomized Trial of Woodfired Chimney
Cookstoves in Guatemala (RESPIRE).” Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental
Epidemiology 20: 406–416
Smith, Kirk R., John P McCracken, Martin W Weber, Alan Hubbard, Alisa Jenny, Lisa M
Thompson, John Balmes, Anaité Diaz, Byron Arana, and Nigel Bruce. 2011. "Effect of
reduction in household air pollution on childhood pneumonia in Guatemala (RESPIRE): a
randomised controlled trial." The Lancet 378: 1717-26.
Smith-Sivertsen, Tone, Esperanza Diaz, Dan Pope, Rolv T. Lie, Anaite Diaz, John P.
McCracken, Per Bakke, Byron Arana, Kirk R. Smith, and Nigel Bruce. 2009. “Effect of
Reducing Indoor Air Pollution on Women’s Respiratory Symptoms and Lung Function:
RESPIRE Guatemala Randomized Trial.” American Journal of Epidemiology 170(2): 211-220.
Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jed Friedman, Jean-Pierre Habicht, Nicholas
Ingwersen, Christopher McKelvey, Mohammed Hakimi, Jaswadi, Gretel Pelto, Bondan Sikoki,
Teresa Seeman, James P. Smith, Cecep Sumantri, Wayan Suriastini, Siswanto Wilopo “Causal
Effect of Health on Labor Market Outcomes: Experimental Evidence” January 2010, MIMEO.

33

Thompson, Lisa M., Nigel Bruce, Brenda Eskenazi, Anaite Diaz, Daniel Pope, and Kirk R.
Smith. 2011. "Impact of Reduced Maternal Exposures to Wood Smoke from an Introduced
Chimney Stove on Newborn Birth Weight in Rural Guatemala." Environmental Health
Perspectives 119(10).
The World Bank. 2011. “Household Cookstoves, Environment, Health, and Climate Change:
A New Look at an Old Problem.” The Environment Department (Climate Change):
http://climatechange.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/documents/Household%20Cookstovesweb.pdf

34

Table 1: Baseline Household Demographic Characteristics and Stove Usage
Mean
St Dev
N
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Socio-demographic Characteristics
Household Size
6.57
3.49
2530
Monthly Per Capita Household Expenditures
475.28
299.00
2494
Minority Household (Scheduled Caste or Tribe)
0.43
0.50
2516
Has Electricity in Household
0.47
0.50
2529
Male Head Ever Attended School
Male Head Literate

0.69
0.58

0.46
0.49

2085
2100

Female Head Ever Attended School
Female Head Literate
Female Has a Savings Account

0.32
0.20
0.68

0.47
0.40
0.47

2369
2374
2408

Traditional Stove
Any Type of "Clean Stove"
Improved Stove
Kerosene
Biogas
LPG
Electric
Coal

0.99
0.23
0.01
0.10
0.03
0.04
0.11
0.00

0.09
0.42
0.10
0.30
0.17
0.20
0.31
0.06

2480
2480
2480
2480
2480
2480
2480
2480

Cooked Most Meals with Traditional Stove in Last Week
Meals Cooked Last Week
Meals Cooked Last Week with Traditional Stove

0.93
13.75
12.60

0.26
4.08
4.66

2453
2482
2470

Primary Cooks (% female)

0.96

0.20

2476

Panel C: Number of Meals Cooked Each Week, By Stove Location
Open Area
7.46
7.19
Semi-open Area
5.09
6.86
Enclosed Area
0.86
3.18

2515
2515
2515

Panel B: Stove Ownership and Use

Panel D: Fuel
Ever Used Wood as Fuel
Minutes Spent Gathering Wood Yesterday (if gathered wood)
Wood Used for Last Meal (in kg)
Meals Per Bundle of Wood
Household Gathers Wood
Ever Bought Wood
Ever Sold Wood

0.99
313.62
4.96
5.04

0.12
274.99
6.28
7.24

2523
282
1069
2074

0.83
0.35
0.20

0.37
0.48
0.40

2515
2468
2101

Notes: This table provides sample statistics on the baseline demographics characteristics and stove usage for
households. The top 1 percent of values is dropped from continuous variables.

Table 2: Baseline CO Exposure and Health
Mean
St Dev
N
Mean
St Dev
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Women
Primary Cooks
Panel A: Adults
CO
7.55
6.13
3372
7.75
6.19
FEV1
1.93
0.37
2755
1.97
0.37
FVC
2.26
0.42
2751
2.30
0.44
FEV1/FVC * 100
89.70
6.30
2685
89.62
6.11
BMI
18.82
2.58
3738
18.91
2.51
Cold or Cough
0.52
0.50
4253
0.52
0.50
Phlegm
0.13
0.34
4243
0.13
0.34
Headache
0.49
0.50
4252
0.49
0.50
Sore eyes
0.30
0.46
4254
0.28
0.45
Wheezing
0.02
0.13
4243
0.01
0.11
Tightness in Chest
0.05
0.21
4242
0.04
0.21
Any Illness
0.87
0.33
4255
0.86
0.34
Health Expenditures in the Last Month 65.17
177.53
4199
61.60
169.95

2017
1689
1687
1650
2132
2468
2467
2468
2468
2467
2466
2468
2440

All Children
Panel B: Children
CO
6.48
5.29
BMI
-1.85
1.29
Cough
0.40
0.49
Consulted Health Provider About Fever 0.27
0.44
Earache
0.09
0.28
Skin Irritation
0.13
0.34
Vision Problems
0.01
0.11
Hearing Problems
0.01
0.11
Vomiting
0.08
0.27
Diarrhea
0.08
0.27
Abdominal Pain
0.14
0.35
Worms
0.09
0.29
Weakness
0.22
0.41
Any Illness
0.73
0.44
Health Expenditures in the last month
46.15
102.11

929
1399
1373
1399
1398
1399
1399
1399
1399
1398
1396
1398
1399
687

N
(6)

Children Aged 5 and Under
517
2700
3343
3282
3343
3342
3343
3343
3343
3343
3342
3339
3342
3343
3249

-1.94
0.45
0.30
0.09
0.14
0.01
0.01
0.09
0.11
0.15
0.12
0.22
0.77
51.62

1.37
0.50
0.46
0.29
0.35
0.10
0.10
0.28
0.31
0.35
0.32
0.42
0.42
108.99

Notes: This table provides sample statistics on baseline IAP and health for women, primary cooks, and children. For
continuous variables, the top 1 percent of values are dropped. BMI for children is standardized using values from the 2000
US CDC Population of Children.

Meals

N

Table 3: Correlations Between the Number of Meals Cooked in the Last Week with a Clean Stove and Baseline Smoke Exposure and Health
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Panel A: Females
FEV1/FVC *
Cough or
Health
Sore Eyes
Headache
Phlegm
Wheeze
Tight Chest
Any Illness Expenditures
100
Cold
BMI
0.076**
0.038***
-0.005**
-0.004**
0.001
-0.002
-0.001***
-0.000
0.001
1.223
(0.036)
(0.013)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(1.026)

(1)

(2)

CO
-0.036
(0.034)

FEV1
0.002
(0.002)

3,283

2,681

2,614

CO
-0.013
(0.039)
1,967

3,645

4,159

4,160

4,158

4,149

FEV1
0.001
(0.003)

FEV1/FVC *
100
0.086*
(0.046)

BMI
0.043**
(0.017)

Cough or
Cold
-0.004
(0.003)

Sore Eyes
-0.006***
(0.002)

Headache
0.004
(0.003)

Phlegm
-0.001
(0.002)

1,654

1,617

2,092

2,421

2,421

2,421

2,420

Earache
0.001
(0.002)
3,293

4,149

(13)

(14)

(15)

4,149

4,161

4,105

Wheeze
-0.001*
(0.000)

Tight Chest
-0.000
(0.001)

Any Illness
0.000
(0.002)

Health
Expenditures
1.749
(1.320)

2,420

2,420

2,421

2,393

Hearing
Problems
-0.000
(0.001)

Vision
Problems
0.001
(0.001)

Worms
0.002
(0.002)

Diarrhea
-0.001
(0.001)

Any Illness
-0.004
(0.003)

Health
Expenditures
-0.322
(0.586)

3,293

3,293

3,289

3,293

3,293

3,199

Hearing
Problems
-0.000
(0.000)

Vision
Problems
0.002
(0.002)

Worms
-0.001
(0.003)

Diarrhea
-0.000
(0.002)

Any Illness
-0.002
(0.004)

Panel B: Primary Cooks in Baseline

Meals

N

Meals

N

Meals

CO
-0.124**
(0.056)

BMI
0.005
(0.009)

Cough
-0.002
(0.003)

Consult for
Fever
-0.001
(0.003)

507

2,659

3,293

3,232

Cough
-0.005
(0.005)

Consult for
Fever
-0.003
(0.004)

BMI
-0.019
(0.015)

Earache
0.001
(0.003)

Panel C: Children Aged 13 and Under in Baseline
Abdominal
Skin Infection
Vomit
Weakness
Pain
-0.000
-0.000
-0.002
-0.001
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.002)
3,292

3,293

3,292

3,292

Panel D: Children Aged 5 and Under in Baseline
Abdominal
Skin Infection
Vomit
Weakness
Pain
-0.000
0.001
-0.002
-0.001
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)

N
915
1,379
1,353
1,379
1,378
1,379
1,378
1,378
1,379
1,379
1,376
1,379
1,379
Notes: This table provides the correlation between the number of meals cooked with a clean stove at time of baseline and each variable listed in the table. All regressions are estimated using OLS, include village x month of survey x
year of survey fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the household level. In addition, all regressions include indicators for whether the household belongs to a disadvantaged minority, the household has electricity, the male
household head has attended school, the male household head is literate, the female household head (or wife of male head) has attended any school and is literate, any female member has a savings account, as well as monthly household
per capita consumption. For continuous variables, the top 1 percent of values are dropped. BMI for children is standardized using values from the 2000 US CDC Population of Children. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 4: Reduced Form Effect of Stove Offer on Take-Up and Usage

Treat

Treat * I(0 to 12 mo)
Treat * I(13 to 24 mo)
Treat * I(25 to 36 mo)
Treat * I(37 to 48 mo)

Gram Vikas
Improved Stove
Any Lowat Time of
Survey
Polluting Stove
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Overall Treatment Effect
0.618***
0.469***
(0.011)
(0.012)

Number of
Gram Vikas
Meals Cooked
Improved Stove with any Good
in Good
Condition, LowCondition
Polluting Stove
(3)
(4)
0.364***
(0.011)

3.086***
(0.178)

Panel B: By Months Since Stove Construction
0.654***
0.478***
0.364***
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.012)
0.670***
0.500***
0.430***
(0.014)
(0.018)
(0.017)
0.441***
0.396***
0.286***
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.015)
0.722***
0.516***
0.429***
(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.020)

3.493***
(0.230)
3.424***
(0.337)
1.759***
(0.286)
4.032***
(0.325)

N

18,966

17,459

15,370

6,593

Control Group Mean

0.064

0.245

0.044

2.381

Notes: This table provides information on stove ownership and usage over time. All regressions are estimated using OLS,
include village x month of survey x year of survey fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the household level.
Regressions are weighed to account for household splits and mergers. Good condition is defined as those stoves reported to
be in good condition as observed by the enumerator. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Treat

Table 5: Reduced Form Effect of Stove Offer on CO Exposure
Females
Primary Cooks
Children
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Overall Treatment Effect
-0.105
-0.223
-0.131
(0.161)
(0.196)
(0.180)

Panel B: By Months Since Stove Construction
Treat * I(0 to 12 mo)
-0.234
-0.524*
(0.235)
(0.280)
Treat * I(13 to 24 mo)
-0.367
-0.171
(0.392)
(0.490)
Treat * I(25 to 36 mo)
0.184
0.078
(0.254)
(0.317)
Treat * I(37 to 48 mo)
0.027
0.101
(0.326)
(0.436)

-0.318
(0.288)
-0.107
(0.445)
-0.161
(0.212)
0.279
(0.414)

N

7,293

4,232

4,400

Control Group Mean

6.901

7.129

5.456

Notes: This table provides the reduced form effect of being offered a GV stove on CO levels. All regressions
are estimated using OLS, include village x month of survey x year of survey fixed effects, include baseline CO,
and standard errors are clustered at the household level. The top 1 percent of values are dropped. Primary
cook is defined as the individual who reported, in the baseline survey, cooking the majority of meals in the
household during the last week. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Stove Variable

Stove Variable x I(0 to 12 mo)
Stove Variable x I(13 to 24 mo)
Stove Variable x I(25 to 36 mo)
Stove Variable x I(37 to 48 mo)

N

Table 6: IV Effect of Stove Usage on CO
Females
Primary Cooks
Any Type of
Meals on Good
Any Type of
Meals on Good
Low-Polluting Condition, LowLow-Polluting Condition, LowStove
Polluting Stove
Stove
Polluting Stove
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Overall Treatment Effect
-0.286
-0.029
-0.564
-0.064
(0.367)
(0.054)
(0.421)
(0.064)

-0.422
(0.458)
-0.593
(0.855)
0.438
(0.698)
0.193
(0.684)
7,105

Panel B: By Months Since Stove Construction
-0.064
-0.898*
(0.061)
(0.522)
0.006
-0.468
(0.140)
(0.986)
0.098
0.299
(0.149)
(0.848)
-0.017
0.044
(0.076)
(0.807)
6,784

4,043

Children
Any Type of
Meals on Good
Low-Polluting Condition, LowStove
Polluting Stove
(5)
(6)
-0.478
(0.483)

-0.074
(0.075)

-0.107
(0.071)
-0.001
(0.173)
0.048
(0.190)
-0.016
(0.092)

-0.658
(0.697)
-0.205
(0.956)
-0.213
(0.639)
0.261
(0.979)

-0.132
(0.094)
0.029
(0.189)
-0.008
(0.118)
0.015
(0.118)

3,863

4,098

3,901

Notes: This table provides the coefficient estimate of the effect of stove usage on CO levels, where stove usage is instrumented by treatment status. All regressions include village x
month of survey x year of survey fixed effects, include baseline CO, and standard errors are clustered at the household level. The top 1 percent of values are dropped. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Treat

N
Control Group Mean

Table 7A: Reduced Form Effect of Program on the Health
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Panel A: Primary Cooks

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

FEV1
0.003
(0.018)

FEV1/FVC *
100
-0.005
(0.003)

Cough or
Cold
0.005
(0.015)

Sore Eyes
-0.005
(0.010)

Headache
-0.005
(0.015)

Phlegm
0.006
(0.008)

Wheeze
-0.001
(0.002)

Tight Chest
-0.005
(0.004)

3,103
1.922

3,068
0.859

5,337
0.410

5,336
0.111

5,336
0.358

3,580
0.054

3,578
0.005

3,578
0.018

(10)

Any Illness BP - Systolic
-0.017
0.472
(0.014)
(0.579)
5,336
0.753

3,051
110.988

(11)

(12)

BP Diastolic
0.015
(0.388)

Health
Expenditures
1.803
(4.205)

3,051
72.986

5,141
45.888

(13)

(14)

(15)

Panel B: Children Aged 13 and Under in the Baseline

Treat

BMI
-0.081*
(0.043)

Cough
0.011
(0.011)

Consult for
Fever
0.006
(0.010)

Earache
-0.001
(0.004)

Skin
Infection
-0.002
(0.004)

Vomit
0.007
(0.005)

N
Control Group Mean

7,138
-1.611

9,498
0.262

10,308
0.178

9,499
0.034

9,497
0.037

6,973
0.035

Treat

BMI
-0.117*
(0.065)

Cough
0.018
(0.013)

Consult for
Fever
0.003
(0.011)

Earache
-0.004
(0.005)

Skin
Infection
0.001
(0.005)

N
Control Group Mean

2,724
-1.874

6,034
0.229

6,395
0.165

6,036
0.033

6,037
0.029

Birthweight
53.375
(119.120)

Infant
Mortality
0.021**
(0.010)

Infant
Mortality,
Stillbirths
and
Miscarriages
0.018
(0.017)

520
2920.942

1,109
0.068

1,176
0.119

Weakness
-0.001
(0.008)

Abdominal
Pain
0.008
(0.008)

Hearing
Problems
-0.000
(0.001)

Vision
Problems
0.005***
(0.002)

Worms
0.003
(0.005)

Diarrhea
0.002
(0.008)

6,972
0.072

6,971
0.077

6,969
0.002

6,968
0.002

6,536
0.026

6,971
0.072

Vision
Problems
0.006***
(0.002)

Worms
0.006
(0.007)

Diarrhea
0.006
(0.009)

4,369
0.001

3,941
0.021

4,370
0.061

Panel C: Children Aged 5 and Under in the Baseline
Abdominal
Hearing
Vomit
Weakness
Pain
Problems
0.008
0.008
0.013
-0.001
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.001)
4,370
0.031

4,369
0.065

4,370
0.082

4,369
0.003

Health
Any Illness Expenditures
0.005
0.838
(0.013)
(1.795)
9,863
0.561

9,628
25.549

Days of School
Missed Last
Week
-0.006
(0.006)
3,555
0.122

Health
Any Illness Expenditures
0.005
0.512
(0.015)
(2.033)
6,277
0.533

6,207
24.679

Panel D: Pregnancy Infant Outcomes

Treat

N
Control Group Mean

Notes: This table provides the reduced form effect of being offered a GV stove on health. All regressions in Panel A - C are estimated using OLS, include village x month of survey x year of survey fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the household level. In Panel D, the mortality
regressions in columns 2 and 3 include village x survey quarter x survey year fixed effects, and the birthweight regression includes village x birth quarter x birth year fixed effects. For all variables except blood pressure and days of school missed last week, we additionally include the baseline value.
For continuous variables, the top 1 percent of values are dropped. BMI for children is standardized using values from the 2000 US CDC Population of Children. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Treat

Table 7B: The Reduced Form Effect of Stoves on Health
Children Aged
Primary Cooks
Children
Five and Under
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Overall Treatment Effect
-0.010
0.006
0.014
(0.014)
(0.011)
(0.012)

Panel B: By Months Since Stove Construction
Stove Variable x I(0 to 12 mo)
-0.010
0.005
(0.019)
(0.014)
Stove Variable x I(13 to 24 mo)
0.012
0.041
(0.029)
(0.026)
Stove Variable x I(25 to 36 mo)
-0.020
-0.014
(0.023)
(0.019)
Stove Variable x I(37 to 48 mo)
-0.011
0.014
(0.024)
(0.019)

0.011
(0.016)
0.042
(0.029)
0.002
(0.022)
0.017
(0.022)

Notes: This table provides the reduced form effect of the stove offer on the standardized indices of
health.

Table 8: Time and Cost of Operating Stoves

Treat

Treat x I(0 to 12 mo)
Treat x I(13 to 24 mo)
Treat x I(25 to 36 mo)
Treat x I(37 to 48 mo)

Time Spent
Total Fuel Costs
Cooking Last
Total Wood Used Last 30 days
Evening Meal
at Last Meal (Kg)
(Rupees)
(Minutes)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Overall Treatment Effect
0.048
10.041
3.952
(0.125)
(7.065)
(3.304)
Panel B: By Months Since Stove Construction
-0.024
14.633
1.495
(0.182)
(11.446)
(5.666)
0.069
-22.429
12.511*
(0.184)
(16.260)
(6.613)
0.245
13.332
1.226
(0.248)
(11.756)
(4.514)
-0.157
22.314*
5.666
(0.281)
(12.072)
(6.066)

Number of
Repairs Made in
the Last Year
(4)

Time Spent On
Repairs in the
Last Year
(Minutes)
(5)

2.431***
(0.506)

277.981***
(14.665)

6.438***
(1.258)
2.140***
(0.632)
-0.240
(0.362)
2.576**
(1.122)

60.977**
(26.503)
24.699
(28.468)
-23.200
(18.782)
79.193**
(32.205)

N

5,619

4,599

4,651

3,786

3,794

Control Group Mean

3.371

327.579

163.923

12.053

404.624

Notes: This table provides the reduced form effect of being offered a GV stove on stove expenditures. All regressions are estimated using OLS, include village x
month of survey x year of survey fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the household level. The specifications in Columns 1 -3 also include baseline
values. The top 1 percent of values are dropped for continuous variables. Wood use is in kilograms, time variables are in minutes, and fuel costs are in rupees.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 9: Self-Reported Satisfaction with GV Stoves
Mean
St Dev
N
(1)
(2)
(3)
Satisfaction with improved stove
2.87
2.25
1200
Would recommend improved stove
0.89
0.31
1192
Panel A: Reasons Why Would Recommend
Any Reasons
Requires less time
0.34
0.47
Requires less fuel
0.58
0.49
Food tastes better
0.06
0.24
Less smoke
0.63
0.48
Like the two-pot functionality
0.49
0.50
Easier to clean
0.09
0.28
Better for health of self
0.05
0.22
Better for health of children
0.01
0.12
Pot does not turn black
0.01
0.10

1085
1085
1085
1085
1085
1085
1085
1085
1085

Panel B: Reasons Why Would Not Recommend
Any Reasons
Requires more time
0.46
0.50
Requires more fuel
0.45
0.50
Food tastes worse
0.03
0.16
More difficult to clean
0.08
0.28
Have to repair it
0.05
0.22
More smoke than traditional
0.01
0.09

140
140
140
140
140
140

Notes: This table provides sample statistics on self-reported satisfaction with the
GV improved cooking stoves for those who own one. The satisfaction variable is
out of 10, with 1 being the highest level of satisfaction.

Outcome
(1)

Study
(2)

Table 10: Summary of RESPIRE Findings
Estimate
Adjusted Estimate
95%
Point
Point
95% Confidence
Confidence
Estimate P-Value
Interval
Estimate P-Value
Interval
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A. Smoke Exposure
-52%
[- 56, -47]
-61%
[ -65, -57]
-90%
[-92, -87]
-61%

CO Passive Diffusion Tubes: Child
CO Passive Diffusion Tubes: Mother
Continuous CO Monitors
PM 2.5

(1)
(1)
(1)
(2)

FEV (6, 12 and 18 months) (5)
FVC (6, 12 and 18 months) (5)
(FEV1:FVC) *100 (6, 12, and 18 months) (5)

(5)
(5)
(5)

-0.02
-0.04
0.41

SBP Estimate (2)
DBP Estimate (2)

(2)
(2)

-2.3
-2.2

C. Blood Pressure
0.30
[–6.6, 2.0]
0.09
[–4.7, 0.3]

Mean Birth Weight (3)
Low Birth Weight Odds Ratio (3)

(3)
(3)

68

D. Infant Outcomes
0.28
[–56, 191]

Field Worker Assessed Pneumonia Rate Ratio
Field Worker Assessed Severe Pneumonia Rate Ratio
Clinical Pneumonia Rate Ratio All
Clinical Pneumonia Rate Ratio hypoxemic
Clinical Pneumonia Rate Ratio CXR confirmed
Clinical Pneumonia Rate Ratio CXR hypoxemic
RSV(-)
RSV(-) hypoxemic
RSV(+)
RSV(+) hypoxemic

(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)

E. Pneumonia and RSV Incidence for Children
0.91
0.39
[0.74, 1.13]
0.56
0.04
[0.32, 0.97]
0·84
0.257
[0.63, 1.13]
0.74
0.128
[0.50, 1.09]
0.87
0.586
[0.52, 1.45]
0.8
0.505
[0.41, 1.56]
0.91
0.598
[0.63, 1.30]
0.61
0.066 [0.35 ,1.03]
0.94
0.801
[0.59, 1.49]
1.05
0.867 [0.60, 1.83]

Cough (4) (7)
Chronic Cough (4) (7)
Phlegm (4) (7)
Chronic Phlegm (4) (7)
Wheeze (Relative Risk) (4)
Tightness in Chest (4) (7)
Number of Symptoms (Odds Ratio)
% Sore Eyes in Past Month (6 Month) (6) (7)
% Sore Eyes in Past Month (12 Month) (6) (7)
% Sore Eyes in Past Month (18 Month) (6) (7)
% Headache in Past Month (6 Month) (6) (7)
% Headache in Past Month (12 Month) (6) (7)
% Headache in Past Month (18 Month) (6) (7)
% Back pain in Past Month (6 Month) (6) (7)
% Back pain in Past Month (12 Month) (6) (7)
% Back pain in Past Month (18 Month) (6) (7)

(5)
(5)
(5)
(5)
(5)
(5)
(5)
(6)
(6)
(6)
(6)
(6)
(6)
(6)
(6)
(6)

F. Self Reported Symptoms
NS
NS
NS
NS
[.25, .70]
NS
0.03
[.50, .97]
S
S
S
NS
NS
S
NS
NS
NS

0.42
0.7
-19.00
-26.10
-26.20
0.00
-7.10
-20.30
-0.20
-2.00
-7.30

Imputed Data
Point
Estimate
(9)

P-Value
(10)

95% Confidence
Interval
(11)

0.78
0.67
0.74
0.68
0.79
0.54
0.76
0.87

0.095
0.042
0.231
0.234
0.192
0.026
0.275
0.633

[0.59, 1.06]
[0.45, 0.98]
[0.42, 1.15]
[0.36, 1.33]
[0.53, 1.07]
[0.31, 0.91]
[0.42, 1.16]
[0.46, 1.51]

B. Lung Functioning
[ -0.09, 0.04]
[ -0.01, 0.03]
[-0.44, 1.27]

–3.7
–3.0

0.10
0.02

[–8.1, 0.6]
[–5.7, –0.4]

89
0.74

0.13

[–27, 204]
[0.33, 1.66]

Notes:
(1) Adjusted implied controls for the number of minutes the tubes were worn.
(2) Adjusted for age, BMI, daily average apparent temperature, rainy season, day of week, time of day, use of a temascal, having household electricity, an asset index, ever smoking, SHS
exposure, and a random effect
(3) Adjusted for maternal height, gravidity, maternal diastolic blood pressure, and season of birth.
(4) Information on point estimate and p-values are unavailable.
(5) Paper also reports results for just 12 and 18 months of follow-up and finds similar results. These are omitted from the table for brevity.
(6) The Mann-Whitney U test was used for testing the significance of differences.
(7) "NS" means not significant; "S" means significant.

Figure 1: Causal Chain

Reduce IAP
Install a Stove

Stove in Good
Condition

Proper and
Continued Use
Reduce Fuel

Note: This figure traces out the behavioral chain necessary to observe health and fuel impacts after a stove offer is made.

Health Impact

.7

.7

Figure 2: Stove Ownership and Usage, by Time
Panel A: Improved Stove Existing at Time of Survey
Panel C: Improved Stove in Good Condition

-.1

-.1

.1

.1

Post GV Repairs

.3

.3

.5

.5

Post GV Repairs

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

1 to 6

37 to 48

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Months Owned Improved Stove

Panel D: Meals Cooked on a Good Condition, Low-Polluting Stove Last Week

Post GV Repairs

-1

-.1

0

1

.1

2

3

4

.3

5

6

.5

7

Post GV Repairs

8

9

.7

10

Panel B: Owns Any Low-Polluting Stove

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

Months Owned Improved Stove

31 to 36

37 to 48

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Notes: These figures show the difference in stove usage between the treatment and control groups, by months since stove construction in the village and lottery status, conditional on village x month of survey x year fixed effects.
Regressions are weighed to account for splits and mergers. The black line signifies Lottery 1, while the red line signifies Lottery 2. The bars represent the 95th percent confidence interval.

.3
-.1

.1

Percent

.5

.7

Figure 3: Proper Use for Those Who Owned a Good Condition GV Stove

0 to 12

13 to 24

25 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Notes: Good condition is defined as observed by the enumerator. Proper use is defined as cleaning the stove in the
last week, using the stove in the last week, not elevating the cookpot during use, and using the two pots correctly.

Figure 4: Reduced Form Effect on CO, by Time
Panel C: Children Aged 13 and Under in Baseline

-3

-3

-2.5

-2.5

-2

-2

-1.5

-1.5

-1

-1

-.5

-.5

0

0

.5

.5

1

1

1.5

1.5

2

2

Panel A: Women

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

-3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

2

Panel B: Primary Cooks

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Notes: These figures show the difference in CO between the treatment and control groups, by months since stove construction in the village, conditional on village x month of survey x year fixed effects. The bars represent the
95th percent confidence interval. Lottery 1 and Lottery 2 are grouped together as treatment. The top 1 percent of values for CO are dropped. Primary cook is defined as the individual who reported, in the baseline survey,
cooking the majority of meals in the household during the last week.

-.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06

-.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06

Figure 5A: Reduced Form Effect of the Stove Offer on the Health of the Primary Cooks, by Time
Panel A: FEV1
Panel C: Cough or Cold in Last 30 days

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

1 to 6

7 to 12

Months Owned Improved Stove

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Panel D: Any Illness in Last 30 Days

-.06

-.04

-.02

-.06-.04-.02 0 .02 .04 .06

0

.02

.04

.06

Panel B: FEV1/FVC

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

Months Owned Improved Stove

31 to 36

37 to 48

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Notes: These figures show the difference in health outcomes between the treatment and control groups, by months since stove construction in the village, conditional on village x month of survey x year fixed effects. Lottery 1
and Lottery 2 are grouped together as treatment. The bars represent the 95th percent confidence interval. For continuous variables, the top 1 percent of values are dropped.

-.2

-.7

-.4

-.1

-.16 -.12 -.08 -.04

0

.2

.04

.08

.5

.12

.16

.8

.2

Figure 5B: Reduced Form Effect of Stove Offer on the Health Outcomes of Children Aged 13 and Under in the Baseline, by Time
Panel A: BMI
Panel C: Consulted Health Care Professional for Fever

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Months Owned Improved Stove

Panel D: Any Illness in Last 30 Days

.12
.08
.04
-.2

-.2

-.16 -.12 -.08 -.04

-.16 -.12 -.08 -.04

0

0

.04

.08

.12

.16

.16

.2

.2

Panel B: Cough in the Last 30 Days

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

Months Owned Improved Stove

31 to 36

37 to 48

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Notes: These figures show the difference in health outcomes between the treatment and control groups, by months since stove construction in the village, conditional on village x month of survey x year fixed effects. The bars
represent the 95th percent confidence interval. Lottery 1 and Lottery 2 are grouped together as treatment. For continuous variables, the top 1 percent of values are dropped. BMI is standardized using values from the 2000 US
CDC Population of Children.

-.2

-.7

-.4

-.1

-.16 -.12 -.08 -.04

0

.2

.04

.08

.5

.12

.16

.8

.2

Figure 5C: Reduced Form Effect of Stove Offer of the Health Outcomes for Children Aged 5 and Under in the Baseline, by Time
Panel A: BMI
Panel C: Consulted Health Care Professional for Fever

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

1 to 6

7 to 12

Months Owned Improved Stove

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Panel D: Any Illness in Last 30 Days

.12
0
-.16 -.12 -.08 -.04
-.2

-.2

-.16 -.12 -.08 -.04

0

.04

.04

.08

.08

.12

.16

.16

.2

.2

Panel B: Cough in the Last 30 Days

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

Months Owned Improved Stove

31 to 36

37 to 48

1 to 6

7 to 12

13 to 18

19 to 24

25 to 30

31 to 36

37 to 48

Months Owned Improved Stove

Notes: These figures show the difference in health outcomes between the treatment and control groups, by months since stove construction in the village, conditional on village x month of survey x year fixed effects. The bars
represent the 95th percent confidence interval. Lottery 1 and Lottery 2 are grouped together as treatment. For continuous variables, the top 1 percent of values are dropped. BMI is standardized using values from the 2000 US
CDC Population of Children.

WEB APPENDIX
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
A. Data Collection
In this section, we provide a comprehensive description of our data collection processes. As
shown in Appendix Figure 3, we collected baseline data from January to July 2006, prior to the
rollout of the intervention.1

The baseline survey consisted of several modules.

First, we

conducted a comprehensive household module to collect data on household composition (size, as
well as each member’s age, sex, and relationship to the household head), demographics
(education levels, caste, religion), economic indicators (asset ownership, indebtedness), and
consumption patterns. As part of this module, we also collected information on the households’
stove types, stove usage, housing construction, and fuel use. After the household module was
administered, each member of the family was individually interviewed. For each child under the
age of 14, his or her primary care-giver answered a child module on his or her behalf. In this
module, we collected detailed data on stove use, such as how many meals an individual cooked
that week, as well as a series of recall questions that were designed to gauge both respiratory and
general health. For example, we collected data on whether one had a cough in the last 30 days,
whether one had a fever in the last 30 days, and health expenditures. In addition, to understand
the relationship between indoor air pollution and productivity, we collected detailed data on
employment status and time-use patterns for adults over the last 24-hours, and school enrollment
and attendance for children.
In the third, and last, component of the baseline survey, a specially trained enumeration
team conducted a physical health check for each household member (both adults and children).2
The examination included detailed biometric measurements, such as height, weight, and arm
circumference.

Most importantly, the examination included two tests designed to gauge

exposure to smoke and respiratory functioning. First, to gauge smoke exposure, the team
measured carbon monoxide (CO) in exhaled breath with a Micro Medical CO monitor.3 CO is a
1

From June to November 2007, we conducted the baseline for the five villages that we added to the study.
The baseline survey was conducted by an outside survey company, while the baseline health checks were
conducted by an internally hired and trained team. Therefore, the health checks were conducted on a different
schedule as the main survey.
3
Note that we did not measure ambient pollutants (either CO or PM). Ambient measures are less interesting to
measure than exposure measures, as individuals may undertake fewer behaviors to protect themselves from smoke if
ambient measures fall and could, in fact, end up with a higher level of exposure. If we conducted only ambient
2

biomarker of recent exposure to air pollution from biomass combustion, and therefore it can be
used to proxy an individual’s personal exposure to smoke from cooking stoves.
Second, we administered spirometry tests, which are designed to gauge respiratory health
by measuring how much air the lungs can hold and how well the respiratory system can move air
in and out of the lungs.4 The tests were conducted using guidelines from both the equipment
directions and American Association for Respiratory Care.5
After the initial lotteries were conducted and the stoves were built, we conducted the
Continuous Health Survey (CHS) from January 2007 to June 2008. Each household was visited
once. The survey consisted of two key modules. The first module was a household survey, in
which we collected data on whether individuals used the new stoves, whether the stoves were
used properly, whether individuals cleaned the stoves, and questions to gauge user satisfaction
with the stoves. This module also included recall questions on health for each household
member. Finally, we collected information on employment and school attendance in the last 30
days to gauge the impact of the respiratory health on productivity. The second module consisted
of the same physical health exam used in the baseline survey. However, for this survey, we only
conducted the health exam for women and children.6
From May 2008 to December 2009, we conducted the midline survey. This survey
replicated the baseline survey, collecting data on stove use, recall health, and productivity. As
part of this survey, we also conducted the health examination for all household members (men,
women, and children). Finally, the endline survey was conducted from February to December
measures we would see a decline, even though their actual exposure may not have decreased due to behavioral
changes. We focused on CO, which has been argued to be a good proxy for PM. Collecting data on PM exposure is
difficult in this setting: tubes must be attached to the subjects for 24 hours and the equipment requires controlled
temperature, careful transferring of samples, and proper laboratories for testing. Given the conditions of rural
Orissa, controlling the samples would be near impossible at such a large scale. However, McCracken and Smith
(1998) report a strong correlation between the average concentrations of CO and PM2.5 in the kitchen during water
boiling tests. They conclude that this implies “the usefulness of CO measurements as an inexpensive way of
estimating PM2.5 concentrations,” even if it is not an exact proxy (see Ezzati [2002] for a discussion of this).
4
In contrast to peak flow tests, which are easier to administer, spirometry readings can be used to diagnose
obstructive lung disorders (such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] and asthma), and also restrictive
lung disorders. Further, they are the only way to obtain measurements of lung function that are comparable across
individuals (Beers et al., 1999).
5
A manual spirometer was used in the baseline, continuous health survey (CHS), and a portion of the midline. The
enumerators would take up to seven readings for each individual, until there were at least three satisfactory readings
and at least two FEV1 readings within 100mL or 5 percent of each other. Electronic spirometers were adopted
halfway through the midline. The new machines indicated when satisfactory readings had been completed and
saved the best reading for each individual.
6
Given that we were only able to visit each household once and that men are more difficult to find at home,
including men would have been a challenge due to attrition.

2010. The endline survey was very similar to the baseline and midline, covering most of the
questions that were in these surveys, with some modifications based on our experiences in the
last two surveys. Specifically, we shortened the time use and household sections, and we added
more comprehensive questions on infant mortality and pregnancy outcomes. Most importantly,
we added a section on cooking and maintenance practices with the improved stoves (e.g., do
households clean the stove, do households cover both pots when cooking, do households clean
the chimney) and beliefs about the stove (e.g., whether they used more fuel, why they would
recommend it).
In addition to the main surveys, we conducted village sweeps from May 2007 to January
2010 to collect data on recent births. Specifically, we tracked pregnancies that occurred during
the scope of the study and then followed up on birth outcomes. However, we were often
prevented from gathering data soon after each birth because many women relocate to their
parents’ home in the late stages of pregnancy and road conditions were poor during periods of
monsoons. Therefore, we suspended the pregnancy sweeps before the endline survey (that
started in February 2010) and instead collected the rest of these data during the endline survey.
Besides the large-scale surveys, we conducted a number of shorter surveys to assess stove
ownership, repairs, and costs more frequently. In March and July of 2007, we conducted our
first sweeps to assess which households built a stove after Lottery 1 and whether that stove was
in good condition. We conducted these surveys and the two other similar stove surveys at the
same time as the CHS. The first Chulha Monitoring Survey (CMS) was administered from
August 2007 to January 2008 and the first Stove Survey (SS) was conducted in April 2008. Both
surveys asked households if they had built an improved stove, why they did not build one if they
had not, and the current condition of the stove if they had. The CMS additionally obtained
information on whether stove owners used their stove properly and their perception of fuel and
time efficiency of the stove compared to the traditional stove. The second round of the CMS
overlapped with the midline survey administration and was conducted between March and
December 2009. Finally, the second round of the SS was completed between January and May
2010, during the beginning of the endline survey administration.

Note that we also meticulously collected data on stove breakages, repairs and costs for
both traditional and improved stoves in a stove cost survey that was administered concurrently
with both the midline and endline surveys.7
Lastly, throughout the project we also collected administrative data on the functioning of
this Gram Vikas program. Specifically, we collected data on lottery participation and the lottery
outcomes in each village.

B. Experimental Validity: Details
In this section, we provide a more detailed description of experimental validity tests. Appendix
Table 2A and 2B provide a test of the randomization for the baseline demographics, stove and
fuel use, and health for those identified as primary cooks and children in the baseline. In
Columns 1, 2, and 3 of both tables, we present the mean of each variable for the households that
were assigned to the pure control group (those who never won a lottery), Lottery 1 winners, and
Lottery 2 winners, respectively. Standard deviations are listed below the means in parentheses.
The difference in means between the Lottery 1 winners and the control group are presented in
Column 4, differences between Lottery 2 winners and the control group are listed in Column 5,
and differences between Lottery 1 and Lottery 2 winners are presented in Column 6, conditional
on village fixed effects. Standard errors that are clustered at the household level are shown in
parentheses in Columns 4–6. In the final row of each panel we provide the p-value for a test of
joint significance of the difference across each outcome variable.
The treatment groups appear to be generally well-balanced across the 59 baseline
characteristics that we consider. Out of the 177 differences in Columns 4–6 of both tables, only
19 (or 10 percent) are significant at the 10 percent level or more, as would be predicted by
chance. There are some notable differences in health characteristics: difference in any illness
for primary cooks between Lottery 2 and the control (Column 5) and Lottery 1 and Lottery 2
(Column 6), as well as differences in whether a child had a cough in the last 30 days between
Lottery 1 and both the control (Column 1) and Lottery 2 (Column 6). However, in testing the
joint significance of health differences for primary cooks and children, only one of the set of six
7

We additionally administered a cost survey to shopkeepers to collect information on the market price, product life,
and repair costs for other clean stoves (i.e., LPG, mini-LPG, kerosene, and electric heaters). The addition of the
Gram Vikas cost survey in the endline provides additional data on the price of different pipes used for constructing
the improved stoves, and how much each household pays construction workers for their services.

differences is significant at the 10 percent level or more (the difference between Lottery 1 and
Lottery 2 for primary cooks). Despite the fact that the data appear well-balanced, to increase
precision in the ensuing analysis on the effect of the stoves on CO exposure and health, we will
condition the regressions on the baseline values (although note that, in practice, controlling for
the baseline values does not alter the magnitude nor significance of our estimates).8
In Appendix Table 3, we test for differential attrition in each of the four main surveys
(baseline, CHS, midline, and endline). In each of the odd columns, we present the coefficient
estimates when we regress a dummy variable for survey attrition on the treatment dummy. In the
even columns, we present coefficient estimates from regressing an interaction of the treatment
dummy with a set of indicator variables for survey round. In Columns 1 and 2, we study
household attrition, while in the remaining columns we test for attrition within the sample of
individuals. All regressions are clustered at the household level and include village by survey
fixed effects. On average, we do not observe a significant difference in survey attrition for
households (Column 1) and note that the magnitude of this coefficient estimate is also near zero.
Further, we do not observe significant differences across any of the four main survey waves
(Column 2). For individuals (females, primary cooks and children), we only observe a small,
significant difference in attrition for primary cooks in the CHS and children in the baseline
(significant at the 10 percent level). In total, out of the twenty differences that we explore in this
table only two are significant at the 10 percent level, which is what one would expect by chance.
These findings suggest that differential attrition is not a source of bias in the analysis.

8

The results for women are similar to those of primary cooks. Out of the 39 differences (13 variables times three
differences) we explore for women, only four are significant (or 10 percent, which is what would be predicted by
chance). We omit them for brevity, as our subsequent health analysis will be primarily centered on primary cooks.
However, they are available upon request.

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

(1)

Meals

N

CO
-0.049
(0.030)
3,283

Appendix Table 1: Correlations between the Number of Meals Cooked during Last Week with a Clean Stove and Baseline Smoke Exposure and Health (NO CONTROLS)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
Panel A: Females
FEV1/FVC *
Cough or
Health
FEV1
100
Cold
Sore Eyes
Headache
Phlegm
Wheeze
Tight Chest
Any Illness Expenditures
BMI
0.003*
0.058*
0.080***
-0.006***
-0.006***
0.002
-0.002
-0.001***
-0.001*
0.001
2.202**
(0.002)
(0.031)
(0.013)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.891)
2,681

2,614

3,645

4,159

CO
-0.044
(0.036)
1,967

4,160

4,158

FEV1
0.002
(0.003)

FEV1/FVC *
100
0.051
(0.039)

BMI
0.099***
(0.016)

Cough or
Cold
-0.006**
(0.003)

Sore Eyes
-0.008***
(0.002)

Headache
0.005*
(0.003)

1,654

1,617

2,092

2,421

2,421

2,421

Earache
0.001
(0.002)
3,293

4,149

(14)

(15)

4,149

4,149

4,161

4,105

Phlegm
-0.001
(0.002)

Wheeze
-0.001***
(0.000)

Tight Chest
-0.001*
(0.001)

Any Illness
0.000
(0.002)

Health
Expenditures
2.650**
(1.164)

2,420

2,420

2,420

2,421

2,393

Hearing
Problems
-0.000
(0.000)

Vision
Problems
0.001
(0.001)

Worms
0.003
(0.002)

Diarrhea
-0.001
(0.001)

Any Illness
-0.002
(0.003)

Health
Expenditures
-0.053
(0.529)

3,293

3,293

3,289

3,293

3,293

3,199

Hearing
Problems
-0.001***
(0.000)

Vision
Problems
0.002
(0.002)

Worms
0.001
(0.003)

Diarrhea
-0.001
(0.002)

Any Illness
-0.001
(0.004)

Health
Expenditures
0.651
(0.927)

1,379

1,379

1,376

1,379

1,379

1,336

Panel B: Primary Cooks

Meals

N

Meals

N

Meals

N

CO
-0.116***
(0.043)

BMI
0.011
(0.009)

Cough
-0.002
(0.003)

Consult for
Fever
-0.003
(0.002)

507

2,659

3,293

3,232

BMI
-0.001
(0.015)

Cough
-0.004
(0.004)

Consult for
Fever
-0.005
(0.003)

Earache
0.001
(0.002)

915

1,379

1,353

1,379

Panel C: Children Aged 13 and Under in the Baseline
Abdominal
Skin Infection
Vomit
Weakness
Pain
-0.000
-0.001
0.000
-0.001
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
3,292

3,293

3,292

3,292

Panel D: Children Aged 5 and Under in the Baseline
Abdominal
Skin Infection
Vomit
Weakness
Pain
-0.001
0.000
-0.002
-0.002
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
1,378

1,379

1,378

1,378

Notes: This table provides the correlation between the number of meals cooked with a clean stove at time of baseline and each variable listed in the table. All regressions are estimated using OLS, include village x month of survey x year of survey fixed effects, and standard errors are
clustered at the household level. For continuous variables, the top 1 percent of values are dropped. BMI for children is standardized using values from the 2000 US CDC Population of Children. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Table 2A: Randomization Check for Baseline Demographic Characteristics and Stove Use
Means
Differences, Conditional on Village FE
Control Lottery1 Lottery2
Lottery1 - Control
Lottery2 - Control
Lottery1 - Lottery2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Demographics
Household Size
6.41
6.73
6.58
0.3548**
0.2979*
0.1802
(3.18)
(3.78)
(3.52)
(0.1583)
(0.1629)
(0.1798)
Monthly Per Capita Household Expenditures
470.10
475.05
483.36
9.5308
16.3650
-10.3258
(295.12) (306.29) (296.15)
(13.8931)
(14.5893)
(14.8053)
Minority Household (Scheduled Caste or Tribe)
0.40
0.42
0.48
-0.0225**
0.0006
-0.0241**
(0.49)
(0.49)
(0.50)
(0.0113)
(0.0120)
(0.0122)
Has Electricity in Household
0.47
0.48
0.46
0.0262
0.0180
0.0102
(0.50)
(0.50)
(0.50)
(0.0204)
(0.0215)
(0.0213)
Male Head Ever Attended School
0.71
0.71
0.66
0.0097
-0.0244
0.0272
(0.45)
(0.45)
(0.47)
(0.0218)
(0.0243)
(0.0241)
Male Head Literate
0.62
0.59
0.54
-0.0171
-0.0433
0.0190
(0.49)
(0.49)
(0.50)
(0.0250)
(0.0267)
(0.0269)
Female Head Ever Attended School
0.31
0.34
0.30
0.0406*
-0.0022
0.0311
(0.46)
(0.47)
(0.46)
(0.0225)
(0.0234)
(0.0234)
Female Head Literate
0.21
0.21
0.18
0.0079
-0.0201
0.0157
(0.41)
(0.41)
(0.39)
(0.0201)
(0.0207)
(0.0206)
Female Has a Savings Account
0.64
0.69
0.69
0.0356
0.0304
0.0033
(0.48)
(0.46)
(0.46)
(0.0224)
(0.0233)
(0.0230)
P-value from Joint Test

0.09

Panel B: Baseline Stove Characteristics and Fuel Use
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.0047
0.10
0.07
0.10
(0.0042)
Any Type of "Clean Stove"
0.23
0.24
0.23
0.0176
0.42
0.43
0.42
(0.0192)
Improved Stove
0.01
0.01
0.01
-0.0012
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.0051)
Kerosene
0.11
0.10
0.10
-0.0034
(0.31)
(0.31)
(0.29)
(0.0148)
Biogas
0.03
0.03
0.03
-0.0045
(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.0070)
LPG
0.03
0.05
0.05
0.0124
(0.18)
(0.21)
(0.22)
(0.0094)
Electric
0.10
0.12
0.11
0.0270**
(0.29)
(0.32)
(0.31)
(0.0137)
Coal
0.00
0.00
0.01
-0.0022
(0.07)
(0.05)
(0.07)
(0.0029)
Cooked Most Meals with Traditional Stove in Last Week
0.94
0.93
0.92
-0.0160
(0.23)
(0.26)
(0.28)
(0.0115)
Meals Cooked Last Week
13.65
13.82
13.80
0.1659
(4.34)
(4.02)
(3.77)
(0.2018)
Meals Cooked Last Week with Traditional Stove
12.63
12.59
12.59
-0.0142
(4.83)
(4.54)
(4.57)
(0.2217)
% Primary Cook Female
0.32
0.31
0.32
-0.0115
(0.47)
(0.46)
(0.47)
(0.0133)
Meals Cooked in Open Area Last Week
7.40
7.28
7.72
0.0744
(7.06)
(7.17)
(7.31)
(0.3140)
Meals Cooked in Semi-open Area Last Week
5.06
5.18
5.03
0.0956
(7.03)
(6.84)
(6.68)
(0.1551)
Meals Cooked in Enclosed Area Last Week
0.83
0.94
0.79
0.0091
(3.19)
(3.27)
(3.05)
(0.0057)
Ever Use Wood
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.4617
(0.14)
(0.09)
(0.12)
(0.4799)
Minutes Spent Gathering Wood Yesterday (if gathered wood)
4.96
5.10
4.80
-0.0204
(6.13)
(7.04)
(5.57)
(0.3554)
Wood Used for Last Meal (in kg)
5.19
5.04
4.88
0.0369**
(7.23)
(6.06)
(8.38)
(0.0162)
Meals Per Bundle of Wood
0.82
0.87
0.81
-0.0195
(0.39)
(0.34)
(0.39)
(0.0195)
Household Gathers Wood
0.37
0.33
0.36
-0.0117
(0.48)
(0.47)
(0.48)
(0.0139)
Ever Bought Wood
0.20
0.19
0.21
-3.9369
(0.41)
(5.8293)
(0.40)
(0.39)
Ever Sold Wood
37.24
34.32
30.63
-0.0115
(145.87) (122.90) (123.91)
(0.0133)
Traditional Stove

P-values from Joint Test

0.21

0.80

0.30

-0.0014
(0.0052)
0.0041
(0.0199)
-0.0026
(0.0049)
-0.0156
(0.0153)
-0.0037
(0.0074)
0.0116
(0.0101)
0.0144
(0.0141)
0.0002
(0.0036)
-0.0239*
(0.0125)
0.2457
(0.2069)
0.0955
(0.2336)
-0.0062
(0.0142)
-0.0465
(0.3254)
-0.0781
(0.1578)
0.0023
(0.0066)
0.3894
(0.4716)
-0.0561
(0.4300)
-0.0170
(0.0178)
0.0117
(0.0202)
-0.0100
(0.0146)
-6.7556
(6.0798)
-0.0062
(0.0142)

0.0051
(0.0044)
0.0028
(0.0199)
0.0038
(0.0044)
0.0080
(0.0150)
-0.0049
(0.0072)
0.0030
(0.0109)
0.0079
(0.0147)
-0.0025
(0.0032)
0.0085
(0.0133)
-0.0444
(0.1977)
-0.1087
(0.2265)
-0.0065
(0.0139)
0.1195
(0.3255)
0.1429
(0.1605)
0.0090*
(0.0053)
-0.3731
(0.5133)
-0.0551
(0.4002)
0.0541***
(0.0170)
-0.0199
(0.0203)
-0.0015
(0.0142)
2.6789
(5.0492)
-0.0065
(0.0139)

0.96

0.28

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

CO
FEV1
FVC
FEV1/FVC
BMI
Cold or Cough
Any Illness
Phlegm
Headache
Sore eyes
Wheezing
Tightness in Chest
Total Health Expenditures

Appendix Table 2B: Randomization Check for Baseline CO and Health
Means
Differences, Conditional on Village FE
Control
Lottery1
Lottery2
Lottery1 - Control
Lottery2 - Control
Lottery1 - Lottery2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Primary Cooks
7.93
7.52
7.82
-0.4378
0.0508
-0.5374
(6.62)
(5.60)
(6.36)
(0.3296)
(0.3742)
(0.3305)
1.97
1.97
1.96
0.0093
0.0022
0.0013
(0.37)
(0.37)
(0.37)
(0.0220)
(0.0232)
(0.0228)
2.30
2.32
2.29
0.0218
0.0079
0.0090
(0.45)
(0.43)
(0.42)
(0.0262)
(0.0272)
(0.0263)
89.54
89.63
89.72
-0.0514
-0.2857
0.1048
(5.93)
(6.49)
(5.88)
(0.3587)
(0.3650)
(0.3832)
19.06
18.76
18.89
-0.2063*
0.0219
-0.2658**
(2.49)
(2.54)
(2.51)
(0.1250)
(0.1343)
(0.1308)
0.53
0.48
0.54
-0.0420*
0.0197
-0.0546**
(0.50)
(0.50)
(0.50)
(0.0242)
(0.0253)
(0.0250)
0.85
0.85
0.91
-0.0021
0.0549***
-0.0574***
(0.36)
(0.36)
(0.29)
(0.0176)
(0.0168)
(0.0166)
0.14
0.12
0.14
-0.0200
-0.0006
-0.0116
(0.35)
(0.33)
(0.34)
(0.0163)
(0.0177)
(0.0170)
0.50
0.48
0.49
-0.0286
-0.0198
-0.0048
(0.50)
(0.50)
(0.50)
(0.0238)
(0.0251)
(0.0252)
0.0124
-0.0098
0.29
0.28
0.28
-0.0058
(0.45)
(0.45)
(0.45)
(0.0216)
(0.0227)
(0.0227)
0.01
0.01
0.01
-0.0029
-0.0013
-0.0029
(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.0052)
(0.0054)
(0.0049)
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.0029
0.0032
-0.0056
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.21)
(0.0100)
(0.0106)
(0.0103)
56.62
64.69
64.00
5.9421
2.0802
5.1422
(164.67)
(166.53)
(179.46)
(8.0816)
(9.2103)
(9.1846)

P-value from Joint Test

CO
BMI
Cough
Consulted for Fever
Earache
Skin
Any Illness
Vision Problems
Hearing Problems
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Abdominal Pain
Worms
Weakness
Total Health Expenditures

0.221

6.63
(5.48)
-1.82
(1.30)
0.39
(0.49)
0.28
(0.45)
0.09
(0.28)
0.13
(0.34)
0.73
(0.44)
0.01
(0.12)
0.01
(0.11)
0.07
(0.25)
0.07
(0.26)
0.14
(0.35)
0.09
(0.28)
0.21
(0.41)
44.61
(101.22)

Panel B: Children Under Aged 13
5.90
6.89
-0.4398
(4.74)
(5.55)
(0.5464)
-1.89
-1.85
-0.0479
(1.30)
(1.27)
(0.0704)
0.42
0.38
0.0517**
(0.49)
(0.49)
(0.0239)
0.25
0.28
-0.0256
(0.43)
(0.45)
(0.0202)
0.09
0.09
0.0102
(0.29)
(0.28)
(0.0130)
0.14
0.13
0.0120
(0.34)
(0.34)
(0.0164)
0.73
0.74
-0.0007
(0.44)
(0.44)
(0.0222)
0.01
0.01
-0.0038
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.0046)
0.02
0.01
0.0031
(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.0049)
0.08
0.09
0.0094
(0.27)
(0.28)
(0.0115)
0.08
0.08
-0.0022
(0.27)
(0.27)
(0.0118)
0.15
0.14
0.0039
(0.35)
(0.35)
(0.0162)
0.11
0.09
0.0165
(0.31)
(0.28)
(0.0144)
0.21
0.22
-0.0100
(0.41)
(0.42)
(0.0192)
48.89
45.26
4.9607
(99.72)
(106.05)
(4.6885)
0.777

0.390

0.037

0.2126
(0.7118)
0.0342
(0.0732)
-0.0026
(0.0255)
-0.0204
(0.0221)
0.0024
(0.0139)
0.0009
(0.0168)
-0.0102
(0.0227)
-0.0004
(0.0046)
-0.0034
(0.0047)
0.0116
(0.0124)
-0.0082
(0.0129)
0.0008
(0.0172)
-0.0108
(0.0158)
-0.0062
(0.0215)
0.7712
(5.2102)

-0.7463
(0.6406)
-0.0772
(0.0707)
0.0590**
(0.0243)
-0.0137
(0.0212)
0.0020
(0.0140)
0.0072
(0.0164)
-0.0032
(0.0222)
-0.0011
(0.0046)
0.0094*
(0.0051)
-0.0026
(0.0129)
0.0091
(0.0124)
0.0078
(0.0166)
0.0209
(0.0157)
-0.0066
(0.0203)
3.7218
(5.0337)

0.834

0.775

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Treat
Treat * Baseline
Treat * CHS
Treat * Midline
Treat * Endline

N

Appendix Table 3: Testing for Survey Attrition
Household
Females
Primary Cooks
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.000
-0.006
0.001
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.008)
0.003
-0.004
-0.001
(0.006)
(0.014)
(0.003)
0.008
0.005
0.026*
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.014)
-0.007
-0.014
-0.011
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.016)
-0.003
-0.010
-0.011
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.017)
10,300

10,300

27,776

27,776

10,040

10,040

Children
(7)
0.013
(0.010)

(8)

0.031*
(0.017)
0.004
(0.013)
0.007
(0.017)
0.010
(0.016)
25,800

25,800

Notes: This table provides results on whether there exists differential survey attrition by treatment status. The dependent variable is a dummy variable
that indicates whether the household (or individual) was not included in the survey. CHS is the continuous health survey conducted between the baseline
and midline survey. All regressions include village x survey fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the household level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Table 4: Reasons for Not Having a Stove, by Year of Stove Being Offered in Your Village
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Insufficient Kitchen Space/Family Size and Stove Do Not Match
Does Not Want A Double Pot
Already Owns a Better Stove
Will Build Soon
Not Interested in Building
Destroyed by User
Other

0.28
0.01
0.06
0.27
0.07
0.02
0.24

0.34
0.02
0.08
0.21
0.15
0.06
0.11

0.22
0.02
0.03
0.38
0.06
0.23
0.06

Notes: This table provides information on why households did not have a stove, by years since stove was offered in their village.

0.19
0.01
0.04
0.15
0.26
0.32
0.04

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Table 5: Reduced Form Effect of Stoves on
Male Smoking
Male Smokes
(1)
Panel A: Overall Treatment Effect
Treat
0.009
(0.009)
Panel B: By Months Since Stove Construction
Treat x I(0 to 12 mo)
0.008
(0.014)
Treat x I(13 to 24 mo)
-0.013
(0.021)
Treat x I(25 to 36 mo)
0.015
(0.012)
Treat x I(37 to 48 mo)
0.014
(0.015)
N

5,874

Control Group Mean

0.121

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Figure 1: Traditional and Gram Vikas Improved Stoves
Panel A: Traditional Stove

Panel B: Gram Vikas Improved Stove

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Figure 2: Example of Gram Vikas Training Material

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Figure 3: Timeline of Major Surveys and Construction
2006
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

2007
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

2008
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

2009
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Baseline
Lottery 1 Stove Construction
CHS
Pregnancy Survey
Midline
Lottery 2 Stove Construction
Endline

Baseline
Lottery 1 Stove Construction
CHS
Pregnancy Survey
Midline
Lottery 2 Stove Construction
Endline
2010
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Baseline
Lottery 1 Stove Construction
CHS
Pregnancy Survey
Midline
Lottery 2 Stove Construction
Endline
Notes: This table provides a timeline of each major survey we conducted during the course of the project, as well as a timeline of the lotteries and intervention. CHS is the continuous health survey
that we conducted between the baseline and midline surveys.

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Figure 4: Household Sample Sizes, By Survey
Panel A: Primary Household and Health Surveys
Baseline Survey
2575 HH

CHS
2427 HH

ML: 2400 HH
[ML Stove Cost: 2212]

EL: 2048 HH
[EL Stove Cost: 2030]

Panel B: Primary Surveys on the Condition of the Stove

Stove Building
Survey
2575 HH

Stove Monitoring
Survey I
2281 HH

Stove Status I
2474 HH

Stove Monitoring
Survey II
2377 HH

Stove Status II
2423 HH

Notes: This table documents the majority of surveys that were conducted during the course of the study. HH is the number of participating households. CHS is the
continuous health survey that we conducted between the baseline and midline surveys. ML is the midline survey, while EL is the endline survey. We conducted the
stove costs survey in conjunction with the midline and endline. Stove status surveys provide basic information on the stoves, while stove monitoring is a more indepth survey of use.

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Figure 5: Ever Had a Stove Breakage
1

94%

Traditional Stoves
0.9
81%
0.8

74%
67%

0.7
0.6
0.5

Improved Stoves

41%
0.4
29%

0.3
0.2

12%

0.1

9%

0
Ever
Destroyed
(L1)

Ever
Cracked
(L1)

Ever Had Pipe
Issue (L1)

Ever
Destroyed
(L2)

Ever Cracked Ever Had Pipe
(L2)
Issue (L2)

Ever
Destroyed
(Control)

Ever Cracked
(Control)

WEB APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Appendix Figure 6: Beliefs on Stove Quality
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
Less Same More

Less Same More

Worse Same Better

Less Same More

Time

Fuel

Taste

Ease

Notes: This table provide sample statistics on self-reported beliefs with the GV improved cooking stoves for those
who own one.

