                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MISALLOCATION, PROPERTY RIGHTS, AND ACCESS TO FINANCE:
                 EVIDENCE FROM WITHIN AND ACROSS AFRICA

                                      Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
                                         Bent E. Sorensen

                                       Working Paper 18030
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18030


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2012




This paper is prepared for the NBER-Africa Project. The authors thank the project for support. We
thank Sevcan Yesiltas for superb research assistance. We also thank Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Simon
Johnson, Marianna Sørensen, and participants at NBER-Africa Project conferences in Cambridge
and Zanzibar for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Bent E. Sorensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Misallocation, Property Rights, and Access to Finance: Evidence from Within and Across
Africa
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Bent E. Sorensen
NBER Working Paper No. 18030
May 2012
JEL No. F40,O10

                                              ABSTRACT

We study capital misallocation within and across 10 African countries using the World Bank Enterprise
Surveys. First, we compare the extent of misallocation among firms within countries. We document
high variation in firms' marginal product of capital (MPK), implying that countries could produce
significantly more with the same aggregate capital stock if capital were allocated optimally. Such variation
differs from country to country with some African countries (success stories) closer to developed country
benchmarks. Small firms and non-exporters have less access to finance and have higher returns to
capital in general. Self reported measures of obstacles to firms' operations suggest access to finance
is the most important obstacle: A firm with the worst access to finance has MPK 45 percent higher
than a firm with the worst access to finance as a result of low capital per worker. We compare average
levels of the MPK across countries, finding evidence that the strength of property rights and the quality
of the legal system help explain country-level differences in capital misallocation.


Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street, Mailbox 28
Cambridge, MA 02138
and University of Houston and CEPR
and also NBER
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu

Bent E. Sorensen
Department of Economics
University of Houston
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
and CEPR
bent.sorensen@mail.uh.edu
1        Introduction

A number of recent studies argue that misallocation of resources across firms is a prime cause of
underdevelopment. Standard theory implies that if domestic capital markets are functioning well,
the MPK of each firm equals the market interest rate. If firms instead borrow at different interest
rates, maybe due to differential access to informal finance or due to political connections, capital
is likely to be misallocated and the MPK will differ across firms.

        Alfaro, Charlton, and Kanczuk (2008), Banerjee and Duflo (2004), Bartelsman, Haltiwanger,
and Scarpetta (2009), Hsieh and Klenow (2009), and Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) provide evi-
dence of misallocation in different countries and show that misallocation of resources can explain up
to 60 percent of the aggregate TFP-differences between poor and rich countries. Differential access
to credit may not necessarily lead to severe misallocation if firms with higher MPK invest more as
Banerjee and Moll (2010) point out. However, in the absence of secure property rights owners may
not reinvest profits: Even if the return to investment is high, government officials may grab a large
share of earnings, diluting the incentive of owners to reinvest. Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff
(2002) find exactly such behavior in Russia and Ukraine after the breakdown of communism.

        We ask two questions in this paper: What is the extent of capital misallocation within African
countries, and why does misallocation vary across these countries? We quantify capital misallo-
cation across manufacturing establishments within 10 African countries in 2005 and 2006 using
establishment-level data from the World Bank Productivity and Investment Climate Survey.1 This
is a unique survey undertaken as part of a major World Bank initiative between 1999 and 2007
in 80 developed and developing countries around the world. The main purpose of the survey was
to identify obstacles to firm performance and growth; hence the survey not only asks questions on
firm characteristics and outcomes but also many questions on the perceived severity of obstacles
such as crime, infrastructure, and financing constraints. Having firms’ own perceptions of financing
constraints is a big advantage of the data set because much of the literature infers financing con-
straints from companies’ financial statements using various modeling and econometric techniques.
This data set has been used by, among others, Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, Laeven, and Maksimovic
(2006) and Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2005), who show that these self-perceived con-
straints actually bind and hurt firm growth. Our data set has information on small and large, as
well as listed and private firms, which allows us to control for some important firm characteristics.
    1
     Here, “establishment” refers to a production unit which may be part of a larger firm, but for simpler reading we
will also use the term “firm.”




                                                         2
To the best of our knowledge, there is no systematic study undertaken which calculates the ex-
tent of misallocation and its determinants for Africa using comparable firm-level data from many
countries.

    In the literature, there are various approaches employed for calculating the extent of misallo-
cation of capital across firms within a country. As stated above, one of the advantages of our data
set is that it allows us to compare the interest rates firms are paying with the market interest rate.
This is our starting point because we have data on the interest rates each firm pays on loans. We
show that many firms borrow at rates up to 30-40 percent suggesting that firms have even higher
marginal returns to capital.2

    We calculate the MPK for each firm using firm-level output and capital stocks under the assump-
tion that the production function is Cobb-Douglas (with parameters calibrated from the literature).
Doing so reveals that the distribution of the MPK varies a lot within most African countries. This
indicates that capital is inefficiently allocated—a fact that cannot be derived from country level
aggregate figures. We, next, calculate a measure of misallocation suggested by Hsieh and Klenow
(2009) and this measure also indicates imperfect capital and/or labor allocation.3

    Having calculated the extent of misallocation, we seek to explain firm-level differences in returns
to capital within countries and the variation in misallocation across countries. First, we show,
using multiple regressions, that firms with less access to finance have higher MPK. Small firms
have lower MPK (conditional on access to finance and other regressors), indicating that higher
efficiency could be attained by allocating more capital to large firms. Moving from a firm where
access to finance is no obstacle to a firm where access to finance is a very severe obstacle increases
the MPK by 45 percent, revealing that obstacles to credit have important real effects. Second, we
find a clear positive correlation between country-level misallocation and the strength of property
rights, measured using expropriation risk and investment profile variables from the International
Country Risk Guide (ICRG). These variables help explain the variation in misallocation across
African countries consistent with the patterns found by Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff (2002)
for former communist countries.

    Hence, we contribute to the recent debate on “what works in Africa?” in the following sense.
Once we calculate the extent of misallocation using different methodologies, we can explain the
   2
     Banerjee (2002) displays similar evidence for other developing countries. He emphasizes that these rates must be
the rates that firms actually pay because default is rare.
   3
     We attempted a final approach by estimating the correlation between productivity and size; see Alfaro, Charlton,
and Kanczuk (2008) and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2009); however, we did not find any clear patterns.




                                                         3
determinants of this misallocation at the firm level and relate country variation in misallocation
to the broader investment climate and business environment. This, in turn, helps us answer why
certain countries have better allocation of capital across firms; i.e., we can identify relatively suc-
cessful countries, such as South Africa and Botswana, relative to unsuccessful ones, such as Ghana
and Nigeria, and suggest reasons behind their success.

    We use very simple measures of misallocation. In the process of writing the paper, a large
amount of measures were considered, using different production function parameters depending on
labor and capital type. These more complicated measures produced very noisy patterns and served
little purpose. We believe that the lesson from this non-reported work is that fairly underdevel-
oped economies face many unmeasured obstacles which obscure patterns in anything but simple
straightforward measures.4 It may be the case that some firms pay higher interest rates due to risk
premiums, and it may be the case that the simple functional forms we use to measure the MPK
are misspecified, making our measures of misallocation noisy. We therefore compare the statistics
calculated for African countries to corresponding statistics calculated for a selection of non-African
countries at different levels of development; namely, Germany, Ireland, Spain, South Korea, and
India. This comparison reveals that standard deviations across firms of all our misallocation mea-
sures are much larger in Africa. For example, the standard deviation of the interest rate is 2–5
times higher in African countries than in European countries and the standard deviation of the
MPK is about 40 percent higher in African countries (and in India) than in European countries.
More than 50 percent of firms in Africa report that access to finance is a severe obstacle while very
few firms in Europe report this as a severe obstacle.

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reports on our field trip to Ghana, a
country with a high level of misallocation. Section 3 describes our data in detail while Section 4
presents results from our empirical analysis. Section 5 concludes.



2    Observations from Investigators’ Trip to Ghana

The authors visited Ghana in May 2011 and interviewed several people familiar with local conditions
such as academics and foreign entrepreneurs. Foreign firms are concentrated in Accra, the capital
of Ghana, in a free trade zone which has reliable electricity (although many companies in Ghana
   4
     We studied alternative measures of labor cost (separating full-time, part-time, temporary, and non-production
workers), other measures suggested by Hsieh and Klenow (2009), and more narrow indicators of financing constraints
such as use of collateral. We also attempted to include both manufacturing and non-manufacturing firms.



                                                        4
rely on generators) and, most importantly, a large modern harbor which allows for easy shipping.
Foreign entrepreneurs finance investments with retained earnings or non-local financing because
contract enforcement in Africa is weak. Most projects are done with a 50 percent down payment
up front. The main attraction by far of investing in Ghana (relative to alternative sub-Saharan
countries) is political stability although a reliable local workforce is another plus. It was mentioned
that workers from some other African countries are considered less reliable. One multinational
corporation located production in Ghana due to local demand for its product from other foreign
companies operating in Ghana and sub-Saharan Africa. This corporation was originally shipping
its product from an affiliate outside of Africa but could not keep up with the orders—the motivation
for shipping from afar was put as: “Nobody wants to buy something made in Africa because quality
is perceived to be poor.”

   Foreign companies have to obey a 70 percent local content requirement which means 70 percent
of the workforce should be Ghanaians. This constitutes a problem because the local workforce lacks
basic skills; for example, plumbers are hard to find. The companies bring in high-tech personnel
from India and the Philippines or from the United States (although Americans sometimes do not
want to stay) to train the local workforce. This, however, is costly being very time intensive.
Foreign entrepreneurs try to circumvent the 70 percent requirement by other means (one example
given was pleading with officials) in order to get things done. Companies import all capital goods
and intermediate goods from the United States and other developed countries.

   There was general agreement that access to capital through formal channels, such as banks, is
severely limited in particular due to lack of clear property rights to land. Being unable to use land
as collateral makes it difficult for small businesses to get loans. Micro, informal, loans are often
available but annual rates are very high, often above 50 percent. One U.S. multinational company
owner said that the main reason, more important than infrastructure, for investing in a factory in
the free trade zone was that the land is owned by the government—the company paid for a 47 year
lease in advance. Local firms are shut out from financial intermediation and borrow from family or
local unofficial lenders. Banks mainly serve the government.

   Small scale corruption is another major problem. (Maybe also large scale corruption although
we did not learn about that.) Mango producers in the north of Ghana were not able to get fruit to
the market in Accra without paying prohibitive bribes at police check points which also slow down
trucking on the already inadequate roads (by U.S. standards; according to the foreign entrepreneur,
the roads are good by Africa standards). As we understood, police bribes are not particularly large,
maybe a few dollars, but with enough checkpoints, it becomes unprofitable to transport low margin

                                                  5
goods over any substantial distance. In the descriptive statistics tables to be discussed later, we
show numbers for Ghana and for African countries pooled.



3        Data

3.1       Productivity and Investment Climate Survey

The firm-level data comes from the Productivity and Investment Climate Survey of the World
Bank,5 administered in roughly parallel fashion to enterprizes in 21 countries in Africa, mostly in
face-to-face interviews. The data set provides a basis for making country comparisons of investment
climate and severity of constraints affecting firms. It captures firms’ perceptions of key constraints
in the business environment thatg shape operational and investment decisions, as well as several
quantitative indices of firm experience.

        The first roll-out of surveys was done in 2006 for 13 countries: Burundi, Congo, Botswana,
Angola, Guinea Bissau, Guinea Conakry, Namibia, Gambia, Mauritania, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Uganda, and Rwanda. In 2007, a second roll-out was conducted in 8 additional countries: South
Africa, Mozambique, Zambia, Mali, Ghana, Senegal, Kenya, and Nigeria. Questionnaires of the two
roll-outs are not systematically different, except that the second questionnaire generally has more
detailed questions. The World Bank also surveys some developed and emerging market countries
but the structure of the questionnaires is somewhat different from that used in the African surveys.
For comparison with Africa, we choose Germany, India, Ireland, South Korea, and Spain.6

        The data set for African countries, merging the two roll-outs, has information on 12,752 es-
tablishments. For the comparison countries, we have data for 1,196 German, 2,286 Indian, 501
Irish, 598 South Korean, and 606 Spanish establishments. Enterprizes with 5-19, 20-99, and 100+
employees are labeled small, medium sized, and large, respectively.

        The Productivity and Investment Climate Survey comprises 4 sets of questionnaires which are
particularly designed for the following sectors: Manufacturing, retail, residual (out of manufacturing
and retail), and micro (also called the informal sector). Each questionnaire has several sections in
which detailed information is given. In related surveys, entrepreneurs provided general information
including legal status (e.g., proprietorship); the percentage owned by the largest share holder;
    5
    The data and related documents are available at http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/
    6
    The World Bank also surveys Brazil, China, and Turkey. However, the structure of those surveys is too different
from that of the African surveys to allow us to make comparisons.



                                                        6
private, foreign, or government ownership; sex and ethnic origin of the majority owner; level of
education and experience of the top manager; when the firm was established; and whether it
was formally registered (Section A). The survey also provides information on sales and exports
(section C), supplies and import (section D), capacity and innovation (section E), investment
climate constraints (section F), infrastructure (G), conflict resolution/legal environment (section
H), business-government relations (section I), labor regulation (section J), finance (section K),
and productivity (section L). The data was collected using similar survey sampling methodologies
because one of the main objectives in establishing this database is to provide a wide set of measures
of firm outcomes and structures which are comparable across countries. The database is mainly a
stratified sampling of firms from a representative sample provided by the national statistical offices.
If this is not available, stratification is done on a randomly drawn sample. Sample stratification is
based on having a third of the data be represented by each size group. Representation of several
sectors was also an objective.7


3.2    Questions on Obstacles

The main question on obstacles is: Do you think the following (X) present any obstacle to the
current operations of your establishment? The answers are No Obstacle, Minor Obstacle, Moder-
ate Obstacle, Major Obstacle, and Very Severe Obstacle which are assigned the numerical values
1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively. We have averaged answers to the question stated above into four
groups: Limited Access to Finance, Weak Infrastructure, Weak Law and Order, and Red Tape.
Weak Infrastructure is the average of answers to this question where X is “Electricity,” “Telecom-
munications,” “Transportation,” and “Access to Land.” Red Tape is the average of answers to
this question where X is “Tax Rates,” “Tax Administration,” “Customs and Trade Regulations,”
“Labor Regulations,” and “Business Licensing and Permits.” Weak Law and Order is the average
of answers to this question where X is “Functioning of the Courts,” “Political Instability,” “Corrup-
tion,” “Macroeconomic Instability,” “Crime, Theft and Disorder,” and “Practices of Competitors
in the Informal Sector.” Weak Law and Order and Red Tape are coded such that higher values
correspond to less law and order and more red tape. For Indian firms, the answers vary between
0 (no obstacle), 1 (minor obstacle), 2 (moderate obstacle), 3 (major obstacle), and 4 (very severe
obstacle).
   7
    The World Bank provides sample selection notes giving detailed information on sampling methodologies for the
Enterprise Surveys. Some notes are available at http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/. Details for the Africa sample
are available from the authors by request but sample selection notes are not available for Germany, India, Ireland,
South Korea, and Spain.


                                                        7
3.3    Construction of Misallocation Measures

The variables we use from the Investment Climate Survey are annual interest rates (self reported),
sales, capital stock at current replacement cost, labor, total cost of materials and intermediate
inputs, total capital income, and total cost of labor. Variables in domestic monetary values are
converted into U.S. dollars using the annual exchange rates from World Development Indicators.8
The definitions are as follows:

    • Annual Nominal Interest Rate (R): For annual nominal interest rates, we directly use the
      information on interest rates paid on loans.9

    • Annual Real Interest Rate: To calculate real interest rates, we subtract inflation of the year
      the surveys are conducted. The inflation rate, obtained from the International Monetary
      Fund, is the annual percent change in consumer prices.

    • Value added (Y): Value added is constructed as total sales minus total cost of raw materials
      and intermediate goods used in production.

    • Replacement cost value of Capital Stock (K): Historical cost of replacing all machinery and
      equipment with new machines.

    • Labor Measure (L): We use information on the total number of full-time permanent employees
      at the end of the survey year to proxy labor used in the production process. Permanent
      employees are defined as all paid employees that work 8 or more hours per day with a contract
      for a term of one or more fiscal years and/or have a guaranteed renewal of their employment
      contract.

    • Total Cost of Labor (wL): Includes wages, salaries, bonuses, and social payments.

    • Total Capital Income (RK): We multiply the replacement cost of capital (K) with R, which is
      taken as 15%. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) use a value of 10% but because the average nominal
      interest rate for our African sample is about 15%, we choose this higher value. For our
      benchmark samples, the average nominal interest rates are given in Table 3.
   8
     We noticed that monetary values reported in the domestic currency of Ghana are equal to the ones supposedly
converted to U.S. dollars. In order to fix that, we multiplied monetary values in the domestic currency of Ghana by
0.00011, the annual dollar exchange rate of Ghana in 2006.
   9
     The question is as follows: Does your establishment currently have a line of credit or loan from a financial
institution? If so, what is the average annual interest rate?




                                                        8
   Using the above variables, we calculate two measures of misallocation previously used in the
literature. We follow Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and outline the pertinent features of their model
here.

   Assume that aggregate output (or, in Hsieh and Klenow, sectoral output) is a CES index of
                                                                        σ−1     σ
differentiated outputs of firms i, i = 1, ..., M ; i.e., Y = (ΣM
                                                               i=1 Yi
                                                                         σ
                                                                              ) (σ−1) , with the production of
each differentiated product given by a Cobb-Douglas production function


                                            Yi = Ai Kiα L1−α
                                                         i   ,


where Ai is firm-level TFP, Ki is capital input, and Li is labor. Profits are


                               π = (1 − τyi )Pi Yi − w Li − (1 + τKi ) RKi ,


where Pi is the price of output and R is the rental price of capital. τyi is an output distortion, such as
a tax on firm i’s output, which does not affect the relative choice of capital and labor. τyi is allowed
to vary by firm and is intended to capture distortions such as corruption or any other impediment
to production of firm i which affects output but isn’t tied to capital or labor. τKi captures access
to credit. A positive value indicates that a firm pays a higher cost of capital than the official
interest rate R, for example, because the firm only has access to informal credit at high rates.
                                                                                  σ     R α w 1−α (1+τKi )α
Profit maximization gives price as a markup over marginal cost: Pi =            (σ−1) ( α ) ( 1−α ) Ai (1−τyi ) .
The capital-labor ratio is then
                                        Ki     α w      1
                                           =                 ,                                               (1)
                                        Li   1 − α R 1 + τKi
which reflects the relative capital/labor distortion. The marginal revenue product of capital (de-
noted MRPK) is
                                              σ − 1 Pi Yi    1 + τKi
                                 MRPKi = α                =R         ,                                       (2)
                                                σ    Ki      1 − τyi
which is larger, the larger the output distortion and the larger the capital/labor distortion.

   Based on these considerations, we use the following measures of misallocation


   1. MPK:
                                                           Pi Yi
                                               MPKi = α          .                                           (3)
                                                            Ki

        This measure corresponds to equation (2) for σ = ∞, the case of perfect competition. The
        scaling of Pi Yi /Ki by any constant will not affect our regressions, where we use the logarithm


                                                    9
      of MPK, and affects only the descriptive statistics where we focus on the dispersion, rather
      than the level, of MPK. Because we don’t know what would be a suitable value of σ in our
      sample, we use the perfect competition benchmark.

  2. Hsieh and Klenow Measure (HK): For α = 1/3, we calculate the index introduced by Hsieh
      and Klenow as


                                                       α (wL)i
                                             HKi =             .                                  (4)
                                                     1 − α RKi

      This measure directly reflects the relative capital distortion because it, under the assumptions
      of Hsieh and Klenow’s model, directly measures 1 + τKi as can be seen from equation (1).


3.4   Sample Selection Criteria

In our analysis, we use manufacturing firms and limit ourselves to countries with at least 35 firms
having observations on nominal interest rates. Thus, the baseline sample comprises 10 African
countries with 4,039 firms, Germany with 221 firms, India with 2,286 firms, Ireland with 175 firms,
South Korea with 215 firms, and Spain with 134 firms.

   We apply the following sample selection criteria to all firms in the baseline sample:

   • We drop firms with missing information on key variables such as value added, capital stock,
      and labor.

   • We drop government-owned firms.

   • We drop firms with negative age, which is calculated as the difference of the corresponding
      year that the firm is surveyed and its date of establishment. Thus, if age is negative, we treat
      the date of establishment as faulty.

   • We drop firms with negative values of sales, capital stock, labor, total cost of raw materials
      and intermediate goods.

   • We drop firms whose replacement cost of capital stock is zero and whose replacement cost is
      bigger than the net book value of capital.

   • We drop firms below the 1 percent and above the 99 percent tails of replacement cost value
      of capital stock.


                                                   10
   In the final sample, the total number of firms in African countries (Botswana, Burundi, Ghana,
Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia) is 3,908. The final sample has
168 German firms, 2,129 Indian firms, 140 Irish firms, 178 South Korean firms, and 114 Spanish
firms.


3.5      Country-Level Data

Our country-level broad institutional measures come from the ICRG Researchers’ Data set and
World Bank Doing Business databases.

   The first mentioned data set collects political information and financial and economic data, con-
verting these into risk points for each individual risk component on the basis of a consistent pattern
of evaluation. The political risk components are “Government Stability,” “Socioeconomic Condi-
tions,” “Investment Profile,” “External Conflict,” “Internal Conflict,” “Corruption,” “Military in
Politics,” “Religious Tensions,” “ Weak Law and Order,” “Ethnic Tensions,” “Democratic Account-
ability,” and “Bureaucracy Quality.” The main variables used from this data set are “Corruption”
and “Investment Profile.”

   The second data set provides quantitative measures of regulations regarding starting a business,
dealing with construction permits, employing workers, registering property, getting credit, protect-
ing investors, paying taxes, trading across borders, enforcing contracts, and closing a business. The
main variable we use from this data set is “Registering Property (days)”

   • Registering Property: The number of days it takes to register property that an entrepreneur
         wants to purchase.

   • Corruption: This is a measure that assesses actual or potential corruption in the form of
         excessive patronage, nepotism, job reservations, “favors-for-favors,” and secret party funding.
         Larger values of the index indicate higher risk of conducting business ineffectively.

   • Investment Profile: This is an assessment of factors affecting the risk to investment that
         are not covered by other political, economic, and financial risk components. The risk rating
         assigned is the sum of three subcomponents, each with a maximum score of four points
         and a minimum score of 0 points. A score of 4 points indicates very low risk and a score
         of 0 indicates very high risk. The subcomponents are “Contract Viability/Expropriation,”
         “Profits,” “Repatriation,” and “Payment Delays.” Larger values of the index indicate higher
         risk of expropriation, payment delays, etc.

                                                    11
4     Empirical Analysis

4.1   The Extent of Capital Misallocation

In Table 1, we display descriptive statistics for our main sample of countries (Burundi, Kenya, South
Africa, Senegal, Botswana, Nigeria, Uganda, Ghana, Tanzania, and Zambia). These statistics are
calculated for each country and then averaged. We display statistics for Ghana separately and—
for comparison to emerging and developing countries—Germany, India, Ireland, South Korea, and
Spain. The table displays nominal and real interest rates, the logarithm of the capital-labor ratio,
the logarithm of the MPK, and the logarithm of the Hsieh-Klenow HK-index. We choose to show
the variables in logarithmic form, where the variables are close to normally distributed, because
this is how they are used in the regression analysis.

    For the African countries, nominal interest rates have a mean of 15.3 with a standard deviation
of 6.1, have minimum and maximum values of 0 and 50, respectively, and exhibit high kurtosis
(compared with the value of 3 for the normal distribution). Real interest rates have a mean of 8.7
percent, a standard deviation of 6.2, a minimum of –11.6, and a maximum of 44.4. Inflation rates
may differ widely between rural and urban areas and in either event such negative, numerically
large, real rates are suspicious, so we will focus on nominal interest rates—see Deaton and Heston
(2010) for some issues in measuring price levels in developing countries. It is hard to know what
is the optimal level of the interest rate in these countries, but large variation in interest rates
indicates suboptimal allocation of capital. Ghana seems fairly similar to other African countries
with a large standard deviation of nominal interest rates at 7.3. Szabo (2011) points out that
family loans in Ghana are quite common and often carry very small nominal interest rates and
combined with the very high interest rates in the informal market pointed out earlier, this helps
explain the enormous spread in interest rates. Interest rates display similar large spreads within
India (standard deviation of 6.3) while they are much less dispersed, with standard deviations at 2.9
and below, in the developed countries, Germany, Ireland, South Korea, and Spain. This indicates
that the large spreads observed in Africa do not reflect actuarially fair risk premiums.

    Capital-labor ratios are approximately log-normally distributed with the log-ratio having a
kurtosis of about 3 in Africa. If capital is efficiently allocated, all firms have the same MPK
but, obviously, our MPK measures are estimated under highly simplifying conditions and therefore
estimated MPKs will vary, maybe due to the simplifying conditions. In order to evaluate if the
variation in the MPKs indicates bad allocation of capital we compare to the spread in estimated



                                                 12
MPKs in developed countries. We find low standard deviations of log-MPK of about 1 in developed
countries versus 1.4 for the African sample (1.5 for Ghana) and 1.6 for India indicating misallocation
in Africa (and India). The HK-measure takes a theoretical value of unity under efficient allocation
and this measure also displays significantly higher variation in Africa and India (due to lack of
data, this index is not available for Germany and South Korea).

   Table 2 gives a breakdown of the number of firms into exporters, listed, and small firms while
Table 3 shows the statistics of Table 1 broken down by type of firm. Large firms have more
capital per worker and pay lower interest rates and this holds even more for listed firms. Similarly,
exporting and foreign owned firms have more capital relative to labor while foreign owned firms
pay slightly lower interest rates. There is also less dispersion of interest rates within the group of
listed firms, indicating less misallocation of capital within this group of firms.

   We next study these indicators in graphical form where more information can be shown com-
pactly by country. Figure 1(a) displays inflation and the mean and standard deviation of nominal
interest rates for South Korea, Spain, Ireland, Germany, Burundi, Kenya, South Africa, Senegal,
Botswana, India, Nigeria, Uganda, Ghana, Tanzania, and Zambia in this order where we have
ordered the countries by the standard deviation of interest rates from low to high. Among the
African countries, Burundi displays the lowest variation in interest rates followed by Kenya and
South Africa while Zambia has the highest spread followed by Tanzania, Ghana, and Uganda.
Develop countries have much lower variation in interest rates. Figure 1(b) shows box-plots for
the distribution of interest rates (albeit with extreme outliers removed). The main “box” of data
for each country shows the range of the 25-75 percentiles. Such plots will reveal if the standard
deviations are mainly caused by outliers. Visually, if a low interest rate combined with a low
25-75 spread is considered healthy, as we think it should be, Kenya and South Africa (as well as
the developed countries) have the best distribution while the distributions of interest rates within
Zambia, Nigeria, and Ghana are less good.

   Figures 2(a) and (b) display the spread of our two misallocation measures, the MPK and HK
indices, respectively. “Spread” is defined as the absolute distance to the country median. Burundi,
Botswana, and Nigeria have large spreads in the MPK and, less strongly, in the HK index. The
HK-index has very large spreads for Spain and Ireland which indicates that a high spread of this
measure may be driven by outliers and, therefore, may not be a good indicator of misallocation.

   Figure 3 displays self-reported obstacles to growth for the African countries. Typically, access
to finance plays the leading role with over 60 percent of all firms mentioning access to finance as



                                                  13
a major obstacle in Burundi, Ghana, Nigeria, and Uganda. In South Africa, less than 15 percent
of firms mention finance while the number is about 40 percent in Botswana, Kenya, and Tanzania
while it is 50 percent in Senegal, and 30 percent in Zambia. Weak infrastructure is typically
mentioned by about 30-35 percent of the firms although the number is much lower for Botswana,
South Africa, and Zambia. Law and order is a problem for 10-20 percent of firms, although the
number is higher in Burundi and Kenya. Finally, red tape is mentioned by about 15-20 percent of
firms in most countries with a very low number in South Africa. In Kenya, 35 percent of firms point
to red tape—Kenya stands out in these figures as having a significant amount of firms mentioning
each of the main obstacles while most other countries have finance dominating other obstacles.


4.2   Misallocation, Country-Level Institutions, and Investment Climate

We next turn to the broader policy question of whether good institutions are relevant for perfor-
mance at the firm level. Our broad institutional variables capture protection of investor rights
measured as corruption, the general investment climate, measured as the risk factors affecting the
investment and ease of doing business, measured as the days it takes to register a property. These
variables are quite correlated among themselves and we show their correlations with the MPK index
in Figures 4 and with the HK index in Figure 5.

   In Figure 4(a), we see a positive relation between misallocation, measured by average log(MPK),
and registering property. This implies that the longer it takes to register a property, the higher is
misallocation. The implication is that informal lending or retained earnings do not make up for
the impediments to formal credit. We see a negative slope for the relation between the (country-
mean) level of misallocation and the index for investment profile in Figure 4(b). Figure 4(c),
which uses an index for corruption on the X-axis, is very similar. This means that countries
with a better investment climate (lower expropriation risk/corruption) have lower levels of capital
misallocation on average which is consistent with the patterns found by Johnson, McMillan, and
Woodruff (2002): Firms are not likely to reinvest profits when property rights (broadly defined)
are weak. For example, according to our field study, we would not expect mango producers in
Northern Ghana to reinvest profits to increase production for shipping to Accra, because profits
would be exhausted by bribes at road check-points. The picture is the same for the HK index, as
shown in Figure 5. We proceed with firm-level determinants of the misallocation.




                                                 14
4.3       Misallocation and Access to Finance: Firm-Level Evidence

In this section, we investigate the role of various constraints faced by firms in explaining misallo-
cation. Table 4 gives descriptive statistics for obstacles averaged into four groups: Limited Access
to Finance, Weak Infrastructure, Weak Law and Order, and Red Tape as described earlier. Ta-
ble 4 shows that for African countries and Ghana the most serious obstacle is Limited Access to
Finance, which has the highest mean, followed by Weak Infrastructure. Developed countries have
lower means in general for all the obstacles. In developed countries, Limited Access to Finance
seems to be equivalent to Weak Infrastructure for developing countries in terms of importance of
obstacles (India is left out of this table because the answers to the questions are scored on a different
scale).

   In Table 5, we use OLS-regressions to examine determinants of misallocation using log-MPK as
the dependent variable. The MPK is equalized across firms under ideal conditions so in the absence
of distortions all regressors should be insignificant and no firm-level obstacle should significantly
predict MPK. We interpret positive significant values as determinants of capital market distortions
relative to labor market distortions. This is because higher MPK of a firm as a result of a certain
obstacle indicates that relatively little capital was allocated to that firm. We find in column (1) that
Limited Access to Finance and Weak Infrastructure are insignificantly correlated with distortions,
while the MPK is negative and significantly correlated with Weak Law and Order and Red Tape.
The coefficient of –9.3 to Weak Law and Order implies that an increase of one unit in Weak Law
and Order index (moving from, say, “no obstacle” to “minor obstacle”) is associated with a 9.3
percent increase in distortion in the direction of having too much capital relative to labor. I.e., the
negative coefficient implies that the MPK is lower when law and order is lacking, indicating that
it correlates more with labor market than with capital market distortions—see equation (2).

   Column (2) adds industry dummies and column (3) adds age, size, and export status of the firm.
Small firms have lower MPKs meaning higher distortions. This implies that aggregate efficiency
could be improved by moving capital to larger more efficient firms. Limited Access to Finance now
matters for exporting firms; such firms have lower returns and more distortions if their access to
finance is limited. Column (4) drops country dummies. The coefficient of Limited Access to Finance
becomes significant in column (4), which implies that Limited Access to Finance in particular
explains differences in MPK between countries. Limited Access to Finance is not significant for
developed countries nor for India, even without the country effects.

   Weak Infrastructure is significant when we omit the country dummies in column (4), suggesting


                                                   15
that this variable in particular explains cross-country differences in MPK. This variable has strong
explanatory power for MPK differences within India but is insignificant for Korea and Europe. The
coefficient to Weak Infrastructure is positive indicating that firms invest less in physical capital when
infrastructure is lacking. The coefficient to Red Tape also is negative in column (4), indicating that
cumbersome bureaucracy is important in explaining differences in MPK across African countries
as well as within countries (recall that a negative coefficient means lower MPK and so higher
distortions). The coefficient to this variable is significantly positive for India and Europe, possibly
due to high tax rates and a high degree of bureaucracy discouraging investment although we do not
further explore what underlies this. For Africa, the coefficient to Red Tape is negative indicating
labor market distortion and it is possible that labor distortions stem from rules such as those
imposing minimum numbers of local employees that we described for the case study of Ghana—
such rules would likely be referred to as red tape in the surveys.

   As in column (3), when we include interaction terms, we see that the sign for exporting firms
interacted with Limited Access to Finance is negative in all columns (not significant for India and
positive for Europe). The interpretation of this is that non-exporting firms are relatively highly
affected by imperfections in financial markets, leading to high MPKs consistent with such firms
having too low a capital/labor ration relative to exporting firms—possibly, exporting firms are able
to raise funds through long-term relations with foreign customers. The other interactions are not
significant for the African sample on which we focus.

   Table 6 repeats the same exercise using the Hsieh-Klenow index. The HK-index takes a high
value in the case of capital distortions (too low capital) and a negative value in the case of labor
distortions (too little labor compensation). In contrast to the MPK-measure of Table 5, it relies
on labor costs being correctly measured. A natural first hypothesis is that imperfect financial
markets lead to capital distortions and the estimated coefficient to “Limited Access to Finance”
in column (1) confirms this with a very high level of significance. The coefficient indicates that a
firm that moves from, say, “no obstacle” to “minor” obstacle, will have 11 percent higher capital
distortion (while moving from ”no obstacle” to “very severe obstacle” increases capital distortions
by 44.4 percent). Red Tape has a negative coefficient, implying that bureaucracy leads to higher
labor distortion relative to capital distortions (the opposite holds for India, where capital distortions
seems to be more important). In column (4), we see that for exporters, a high value of Limited
Access to Finance implies less relative capital distortion compared to non-exporters. Red Tape in
particular explains differences between countries as can be seen from the larger coefficient when
country dummies are dropped. The interaction effects for exporters reveal negative coefficients,


                                                   16
meaning for exporters Limited Access to Finance leads to more labor distortions though column (4)
suggests this pattern might be driven by country differences.

    Overall, the patterns of Table 6 are quite similar to those of Table 5, which indicates that
the obstacles we consider distorts capital/labor ratios, rather than output—if output distortions
dominated, the regressors would be significant in Table 5 and insignificant in Table 6 and not
similar as in our results.



5    Conclusion

Using establishment-level survey data from the World Bank, we quantify the extent of misallocation
within the manufacturing sector for 10 African countries. To benchmark our results, we use similar
data for India, another developing country, and developed countries such as Germany. Our main
measures of misallocation are the MPK and an index suggested by Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Both
measures reveal a great deal of capital misallocation in Africa and India and little misallocation
in developed countries. Within Africa, capital markets appear to function relatively well in South
Africa and, a little less so, in Kenya and Burundi, while Nigeria and Ghana display high levels of
misallocation.

    The firm-level regressions demonstrate that an important determinant of within-country mis-
allocation is Limited Access to Finance. The MPK is 45 percent higher in firms where access to
finance is a serious problem compared to firms where access to finance is not a problem. Com-
paring mean levels of misallocation across countries, we find that countries with higher risk of
expropriation; i.e., lower degrees of property right protection, display more misallocation. The
within-country firm-level results and across-country results both point to the importance of strong
property rights and a well functioning financial system for the efficient allocation of capital.




                                                  17
                                       References



Alfaro, L., Charlton A., and Kanczuk F. (2008) “Firm-Size Distribution and Cross-Country Income
    Differences,” NBER Working paper No. 14060.

Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., and Scarpetta, S. (2009) “Cross Country Differences in Produc-
    tivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection,” NBER Working paper No. 15490.

Banerjee, A. V. (2002) “Contracting Constraints, Credit Markets and Economic Development,”
    MIT Dept. of Economics Working Paper No. 02-17 (Section 4).

Banerjee, A. V. and Duflo, E. (2005) “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development Eco-
    nomics,” in: Aghion, P. and Durlauf, S. (Eds.) Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1,
    473552. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Bannerjee, A. V. and Moll, B. (2010) “Why Does Misallocation Persist?” American Economic
    Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 189-206.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Laeven, L., and Maksimovic, V. (2006) “The Determinants of
    Financing Obstacles,” Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 932-952.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and Maksimovic, V. (2005) “Financial and Legal Constraints to
    Growth: Does Size Matter,” Journal of Finance 60, 137177.

Deaton, A. and Heston, A. (2010) “Understanding PPPs and PPP based National Accounts,”
    American Economic Journal 2, 1-35.

Hallward-Driemeier, M., Khun-Jush, G., and Pritchett, L. (2010) “Deals versus Rules: Policy
    Implementation Uncertainty and Why Firms Hate It,” NBER Working paper No. 16001.

Hsieh, C. and Klenow, P. (2009) “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1403-1448.

Johnson, S., McMillan, J. and Woodruff, C. (2002) “Property Rights and Finance,” American
    Economic Review 92, 1335-1356.

Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2008) “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Het-
    erogeneous Plants, Review of Economic Dynamics 11, 707-720.

                                             18
Szabo, Andrea (2011) “Family Financing and Productivity among Small Manufacturing Firms in
    Ghana,” University of Houston, Working Paper.




                                           19
                                  Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Panel A: African Countries, 2005-2006
                                        Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis

Nominal Interest Rate                    811    15.3         6.1        0     50       14         6.6
Real Interest Rate                       811     8.7         6.2    -11.6   44.4      7.7         6.3
log (K/L)                               3538     1.5         1.8     -3.7    9.1       1.5        2.8
log MPK                                 3533    -0.9         1.4     -7.3    5.6      -0.9        3.9
log HK-index                            3539     0.2         1.5     -6.3    6.1       0.3        3.4

Panel B: Ghana, 2006
                                        Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis

Nominal Interest Rate                     52    20.5         7.3      1.5   33.3     21.1          3
Real Interest Rate                        52     9.8         7.3     -9.2   22.6     10.4          3
log (K/L)                                284     0.1         1.6     -3.7    5.9      -0.1        3.5
log MPK                                  284    -0.6         1.5     -7.3    5.6      -0.6        7.1
log HK-index                             284     0.7         1.4     -6.3    5.4       0.7          6

Panel C: Germany, 2005
                                        Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis

Nominal Interest Rate                    114     8.5         2.9     4.1      17      7.8         4.2
Real Interest Rate                       114     6.6         2.9     2.2    15.1      5.9         4.2
log (K/L)                                158       4         1.1        0    6.7       4.1        4.3
log MPK                                  155    -0.7         1.1     -3.6    2.7      -0.7          4


Panel D: India, 2004
                                        Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis

Nominal Interest Rate                    694      12         6.3        0     95     11.5        94.3
Real Interest Rate                       694     8.2         6.3     -3.8   91.2      7.7        94.3
log (K/L)                               1495     1.3         1.5     -6.4    9.3       1.4        7.1
log MPK                                 1462    -1.2         1.6     -8.9   12.6      -1.4        9.9
log HK-index                            1481    -0.2         1.9     -9.2   13.7      -0.2        8.6

Table to be continued.




                                                 20
                                Table 1 (continued): Descriptive Statistics

       Panel E: Ireland, 2005
                                        Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median     Kurtosis

       Nominal Interest Rate              96       4.7          1.6    2.7     9.5        4.2         3.5
       Real Interest Rate                 96       2.3          1.6    0.3     7.1        1.8         3.5
       log (K/L)                         132       4.4          1.1     0.2      7        4.4         4.9
       log MPK                           119      -2.4          1.2      -5    2.4       -2.5         6.4
       log HK-index                      131       1.4          1.2    -1.6    5.3        1.5         4.4


       Panel F: South Korea, 2005
                                        Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median     Kurtosis

       Nominal Interest Rate             106       6.4          1.5       2     12          6         5.6
       Real Interest Rate                106       3.6          1.5    -0.8    9.2        3.2         5.6
       log (K/L)                         152       4.3            1     1.6    6.5        4.3         2.7
       log MPK                           144        -1            1    -3.8    1.9       -1.1         3.7


       Panel G : Spain, 2005
                                        Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median     Kurtosis

       Nominal Interest Rate              63       4.1          1.5     2.5     12        3.7        12.5
       Real Interest Rate                 63       0.7          1.5    -0.9    8.6        0.3        12.5
       log (K/L)                          90       4.2            1     2.1    6.8        4.2         2.5
       log MPK                            88        -1          0.8    -2.5    0.9       -1.2         2.3
       log HK-index                       88       1.5          0.9    -0.4    3.7        1.4         2.5



Notes: The nominal interest rate is the response to the question “What is the annual cost of loans (i.e., rate of
interest)?” To calculate the real interest rate, we subtract the annual inflation rate (percent change in consumer
                                                                                                  Y
prices) in the year of the survey. The Marginal Product of Capital (MPK) is calculated as α K        where Y and K
are value added and replacement cost of capital stock, respectively. The Hsieh-Klenow (HK) index is calculated
     α (wL)
as 1−α   RK
              where wL and RK stand for total cost of labor and capital, respectively. The standard deviation is
calculated for each country and then averaged. The Africa sample comprises Botswana, Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda,
Kenya, South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria, Zambia, and Senegal. The firms being surveyed in Germany and South Korea
are not asked about the total cost of labor (wL), thus values of the HK-index are not available for those firms. K/L
is calculated using the total number of full-time workers at the end of the year of the survey. See the data section
for detailed explanations of the variables.




                                                         21
                                    Table 2: Distribution of Firm Types


                                   Panel A: African Countries
                                                                     N       %
                                   All firms                      3908      100
                                   Exporters                        77     1.97
                                   Listed                           22     0.56
                                   Small                          1998    51.13

                                   Panel B: Germany
                                                                     N       %
                                   All firms                       168      100
                                   Exporters                         4     2.38
                                   Listed                            0        0
                                   Small                            53    31.55

                                   Panel C: India
                                                                     N       %
                                   All firms                      2129      100
                                   Exporters                       374    17.57
                                   Listed                          127     5.97
                                   Small                           959    45.04

                                   Panel D: Ireland
                                                                     N       %
                                   All firms                       140      100
                                   Exporters                        16    11.43
                                   Listed                            1     0.71
                                   Small                            51    36.43

                                   Panel E: South Korea
                                                                     N       %
                                   All firms                       178      100
                                   Exporters                        25    14.04
                                   Listed                           18    10.11
                                   Small                            53    29.78

                                   Panel F: Spain
                                                                     N       %
                                   All firms                       114      100
                                   Exporters                         7     6.14
                                   Listed                            0        0
                                   Small                            30    26.32



Notes: The first column reports the number of firms. The second column reports the percent of firm types. “Ex-
porters” have ratio of exports to total sales above 50 percent. “Listed” firms are listed on a stock exchange. “Small”
firms have 5 to 19 employees. The Africa sample comprises Botswana, Burundi, Tanzania, and Uganda, Kenya, South
Africa, Ghana, Nigeria, Zambia, and Senegal.




                                                         22
                  Table 3: Descriptive Statistics by Firm Types

          Small Firms    Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis
Nominal Interest Rate     217    16.3          6.9       0     50       15         7.4
   Real Interest Rate     217     9.9          7.1   -11.6   44.4      9.6         7.5
            log (K/L)    1985       1          1.7    -3.7    9.1       0.9          3
             log MPK     1984    -0.8          1.3    -6.1    3.5      -0.8        3.3
        log HK-index     1985     0.4          1.4    -6.2    4.7       0.5        3.4
          Large Firms    Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis

Nominal Interest Rate     594    14.9          5.8     1.5     38       13         5.5
   Real Interest Rate     594     8.3          5.9    -9.2   30.7      7.7           5
            log (K/L)    1553     2.1          1.8    -3.6    7.9      2.3         3.2
             log MPK     1549    -0.9          1.5    -7.3    5.6       -1         4.5
        log HK-index     1554     0.1          1.5    -6.3    6.1        0         3.7
         Listed Firms    Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis

Nominal Interest Rate      10    14.3          4.2    7.5    21.2     14.3         2.3
   Real Interest Rate      10     5.2          3.4    0.9    10.5      4.6         1.8
            log (K/L)      22     2.8          1.2     0.1    4.8       3.1        2.5
             log MPK       22    -0.9            1    -2.5    1.4      -1.1        2.9
        log HK-index       22     0.1          0.9    -1.6    2.5         0        3.9
    Non-Listed Firms     Obs.   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max    Median    Kurtosis
Nominal Interest Rate     801    15.3          6.1       0     50       14         6.6
   Real Interest Rate     801     8.8          6.3   -11.6   44.4      7.7         6.3
            log (K/L)    3516     1.5          1.8    -3.7    9.1       1.5        2.8
             log MPK     3511    -0.9          1.4    -7.3    5.6      -0.9        3.9
        log HK-index     3517     0.3          1.5    -6.3    6.1       0.3        3.4

Table to be continued.




                                          23
                       Table 3 (continued): Descriptive Statistics by Firm Types

               Exporting Firms      Obs.   Mean     Std. Dev.     Min     Max    Median     Kurtosis
         Nominal Interest Rate        34     12.4           4.1       5     30        12        11.8
            Real Interest Rate        34      5.9           4.2    -5.7   19.3       6.4         5.7
                       log (K/L)      73      2.1           1.6    -1.6    7.2          2        3.5
                        log MPK       71       -1           1.5    -4.4      4         -1        4.3
                   log HK-index       73        0           1.6    -3.4    5.3       -0.2          4
          Non-Exporting Firms       Obs.   Mean     Std. Dev.     Min     Max    Median     Kurtosis
         Nominal Interest Rate       777     15.4           6.2       0     50        14         6.5
            Real Interest Rate       777      8.8           6.3   -11.6   44.4       7.9         6.3
                       log (K/L)    3465      1.5           1.8    -3.7    9.1        1.5        2.7
                        log MPK     3462     -0.9           1.4    -7.3    5.6       -0.9        3.9
                   log HK-index     3466      0.3           1.5    -6.3    6.1        0.3        3.4



Notes: The sample is for Africa only and comprises Botswana, Burundi, Tanzania, and Uganda, Kenya, South Africa,
Ghana, Nigeria, Zambia, and Senegal. See notes to the previous tables for detailed explanations of the variables.




                                                       24
           Table 4: Descriptive Statistics of Obstacles to Firm Operations
Panel A: African Countries
                             Obs.   Mean   Std. Dev.   Min   Max    Median   Kurtosis

Limited Access to Finance    3908      3         1.5     1     5         3        1.5
      Weak Infrastructure    3908    2.4         0.9     1     5       2.5        2.4
    Weak Law and Order       3908    2.1         0.8     1     5         2        2.6
                Red Tape     3908      2         0.8     1     5       1.8        2.9

          Panel B: Ghana
                             Obs.   Mean   Std. Dev.   Min   Max    Median   Kurtosis

Limited Access to Finance     305    3.6         1.4     1      5        4        2.4
      Weak Infrastructure     305    2.5         0.7     1    4.5      2.5        2.6
    Weak Law and Order        305    1.6         0.5     1    3.5      1.5        3.6
                Red Tape      305    1.8         0.7     1      4      1.6        3.1

        Panel C: Germany
                             Obs.   Mean   Std. Dev.   Min   Max    Median   Kurtosis

Limited Access to Finance     168    2.2           1     1      4        2        1.9
      Weak Infrastructure     168    1.4         0.5     1      4      1.3        9.9
    Weak Law and Order        168    1.7         0.6     1    3.7      1.5        3.9
                Red Tape      168    2.1         0.7     1      4        2        2.7

    Table to be continued.




                                           25
             Table 4 (continued): Descriptive Statistics of Obstacles to Firm Operations
                  Panel D: Ireland
                                       Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Min    Max     Median     Kurtosis

        Limited Access to Finance       140       1.9            1      1       4        1.5         2.3
              Weak Infrastructure       140       1.7          0.8      1       4        1.5         2.9
            Weak Law and Order          140       1.6          0.6      1       4        1.5         5.8
                        Red Tape        140       1.8          0.8      1       4        1.7         3.3

             Panel E: South Korea
                                       Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Min    Max     Median     Kurtosis

        Limited Access to Finance       177         2          1.1      1       4        1.5         2.1
              Weak Infrastructure       176       1.5          0.8      1       4          1         4.5
            Weak Law and Order          176       1.9          0.7      1       4          2         2.9
                        Red Tape        177       1.7          0.8      1       4        1.5         3.3

                    Panel F: Spain
                                       Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Min    Max     Median     Kurtosis

        Limited Access to Finance       114       2.3            1      1       4          2         1.8
              Weak Infrastructure       114       1.8          0.9      1     3.8        1.5         2.9
            Weak Law and Order          114       1.9          0.9      1       4        1.6           3
                        Red Tape        114         2          0.9      1       4        1.7         2.5



Notes: We use 2005 data for Botswana, Burundi, Tanzania, and Uganda, 2006 data for Kenya, South Africa, Ghana,
Nigeria, Zambia, and Senegal, and 2005 data for Germany, Ireland, South Korea, and Spain. We average answers to
questions about obstacles into four groups: Limited Access to Finance, Weak Infrastructure, Weak Law and Order,
and Red Tape. The basic obstacle measure is the response to the question “Do you think that X presents any
obstacle to the current operations of your establishment?” where X represents various questions whose answers are
averaged into these four groups. Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), 4
(major obstacle), and 5 (very severe obstacle). Weak Infrastructure is composed of the following Xs: “Electricity,”
“Telecommunications,” “Transportation,” and “Access to Land.” Red Tape is composed of the following Xs: “Tax
Rates,” “Tax Administration,” “Customs and Trade Regulations,” “Labor Regulations,” and “Business Licensing and
Permits.” Weak Law and Order is composed of the following Xs: “Functioning of the Courts,” “Political Instability,”
“Corruption,” “Macroeconomic Instability,” “Crime, Theft and Disorder,” and “Practices of Competitors in the
Informal Sector.” Limited Access to Finance is a stand alone question which represents a single X. Weak Law and
Order and Red Tape are coded such that higher values correspond to less law and order and more red tape.




                                                        26
                             Table 5: Firm-Level Determinants of Misallocation
Dependent Variable: Log MPK
                                     (Africa)    (Africa)    (Africa)     (Africa)     (India)    (S. Korea)     (Europe)
Limited Access to Finance                 4.5         3.2          2.6      4.9**           2.3         13.4          –5.3
                                        (1.8)       (1.5)        (1.6)       (2.4)        (0.5)        (1.2)       (–0.8)
Weak Infrastructure                       6.1         5.4          6.1     12.0**       16.9**           8.5        –22.1
                                        (1.3)       (1.1)        (1.2)       (2.4)        (2.3)        (0.9)       (–1.6)
Weak Law and Order                     –9.3**       –8.6*       –8.2*         –4.8       –11.8          –2.8          –0.5
                                       (–2.5)      (–2.2)      (–2.2)      (–0.8)       (–1.3)        (–0.2)       (–0.0)
Red Tape                                –7.4*        –4.9       –6.4*    –15.1***      11.8***         –13.6        18.2*
                                       (–1.9)      (–1.4)      (–1.9)      (–4.1)         (3.2)       (–0.4)         (1.9)
Age                                                               –0.2     –0.4**          –0.2         –0.9          –0.2
                                                               (–0.7)      (–2.7)       (–0.5)        (–1.6)       (–1.2)
Export                                                            14.5        13.5     89.1***          –9.5          21.3
                                                                 (0.5)       (0.5)        (5.8)       (–0.3)         (0.8)
Small                                                        –16.0***         –9.0    –61.9***         –12.4       –26.0*
                                                               (–3.4)      (–1.3)       (–6.9)        (–1.0)       (–1.9)
Fin*Export                                                    –24.8**     –23.6**        –15.0       –50.4**      64.4***
                                                               (–2.5)      (–2.8)       (–1.0)        (–2.9)         (5.3)
Inf*Export                                                         3.9        –4.5      45.6**         –32.2          42.9
                                                                 (0.2)     (–0.2)         (2.7)       (–0.8)         (1.2)
Law*Export                                                         4.4      –13.3           3.8        –23.9        –69.8
                                                                 (0.2)     (–0.8)         (0.3)       (–0.6)       (–1.5)
Red*Export                                                        –3.3        11.3       –23.6        84.9**        –53.3
                                                               (–0.2)        (0.5)      (–0.8)         (2.8)       (–1.2)
Country effects                           Yes        Yes           Yes         No           No           No            No
Industry effects                          No         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
Adj. R sq.                               0.1         0.1          0.1         0.0          0.1           –0.1          0.4
N                                       3533        3533         3529        3529         1449            141          362

 Notes: See notes to the previous tables for variable explanations. The interaction variables are constructed by the
 multiplication of (Export − Export) with (X − X) where X refers to an obstacle group and X refers to the mean
 of the corresponding variable over all firms. Export is a dummy which indicates firms whose percentage of direct
 exports to total sales exceed 50. The Africa sample comprises Botswana, Burundi, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal,
 South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. The Europe sample comprises Germany, Ireland and Spain. Standard
 errors are robust and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and
 10% levels, respectively.




                                                            27
                            Table 6: Firm-Level Determinants of Misallocation
 Dependent Variable: Log HK-index
                                            (Africa)   (Africa)    (Africa)     (Africa)     (India)    (Europe)
 Limited Access to Finance                  11.0***      8.6***      7.1***     10.8***           2.9         –2.6
                                               (3.5)       (3.4)       (4.2)       (4.6)        (0.5)       (–0.3)
 Weak Infrastructure                            –2.6        –2.7        –2.4         4.2          3.9         –9.7
                                             (–0.5)      (–0.6)      (–0.5)        (0.9)        (0.4)       (–0.6)
 Weak Law and Order                             –5.8        –5.4        –6.2        –4.1       –15.2          –9.4
                                             (–1.6)      (–1.4)      (–1.8)      (–0.7)       (–1.5)        (–1.2)
 Red Tape                                    –11.5*         –8.5        –8.1   –24.9***      16.0***          11.3
                                             (–2.2)      (–1.8)      (–1.8)      (–6.0)         (3.4)        (1.2)
 Age                                                                    –0.0        –0.3         –0.1          0.0
                                                                     (–0.0)      (–1.4)       (–0.3)         (0.1)
 Export                                                                 11.5        12.8     96.4***           6.4
                                                                       (0.4)       (0.6)        (3.3)        (0.3)
 Small                                                                –10.3         –1.4    –60.0***           3.7
                                                                     (–1.3)      (–0.1)       (–7.2)         (0.4)
 Fin*Export                                                          –35.1*     –29.1**          –6.6        –23.4
                                                                     (–2.2)      (–3.0)       (–0.4)        (–1.2)
 Inf*Export                                                             –3.7      –13.8          25.5         20.2
                                                                     (–0.2)      (–0.7)         (1.0)        (0.3)
 Law*Export                                                           –14.7     –41.0**          32.9          7.3
                                                                     (–0.6)      (–2.7)         (1.2)        (0.1)
 Red*Export                                                             28.0     42.3**        –49.2         –14.7
                                                                       (1.0)       (2.4)      (–1.2)        (–0.3)
 Country effects                                 Yes        Yes          Yes         No           No           Yes
 Industry effects                                No         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Adj. R sq.                                     0.1         0.2         0.2         0.1          0.1          –0.0
 N                                             3539        3539        3535        3535         1467           219

Notes: See notes to the previous tables for variable explanations. The interaction variables are constructed by the
multiplication of (Export − Export) with (X − X) where X refers to an obstacle group and X refers to the mean
of the corresponding variable over all firms. Export is a dummy which indicates firms with percentage of direct
exports to total sales greater than 50. The Africa sample comprises Botswana, Burundi, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria,
Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. The Europe sample comprises Ireland and Spain. Because
German and South Korean firms are not asked to provide information on total cost of labor, the HK-index measure
can not be calculated. Standard errors are robust and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                          28
                                            Figure 1: Distribution of Nominal Interest Rate and Inflation




29
                                          (a)                                                                        (b)

     Notes: Panel (a) displays the mean and standard deviation of nominal interest rates and inflation. 2005 data for Botswana, Burundi, Tanzania, and
     Uganda, 2006 data for Kenya, South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria, Zambia, and Senegal, 2005 data for Germany, Ireland, South Korea and Spain, and 2004
     data for India are used. Panel (b) displays box-plots for the distribution of nominal interest rates where the nominal interest rate is the response to
     the question “What is the annual cost of loans (i.e., rate of interest).” Inflation rate is the annual percent change in consumer prices. In both panels,
     countries are ordered according to the standard deviation of nominal interest rates.
                                                 Figure 2: The Distribution of Misallocation Measures




30
                                  (a) MPK Spread                                                          (b) HK-index Spread


     Notes: Panels (a)-(b) display box-plots for the distribution of the MPK spread and the HK-index spread, respectively. The spread is the absolute value
     of the difference between the firm-level value of the corresponding variable and its country-level median. In Panel (a), the misallocation measure MPK,
                        Y
     is calculated as α K where Y is value added and K is replacement cost of capital. In Panel (b), the misallocation measure, the HK-index, is calculated as
       α  (wL)
     1−α RK
                where wL  and RK stand for total cost of labor and capital, respectively. German and South Korean firms do not provide information on wL,
     thus the HK-index is not calculated for those firms. In both panels, countries are ranked according to the standard deviation of annual nominal interest
     rates and outside values are excluded. An outside value is defined as a value that is smaller than the lower quartile minus 1.5 times the interquartile
     range or larger than the upper quartile plus 1.5 times the interquartile range.
                                                                      Figure 3: Major Obstacle Figures




                                                                                                         100




               100
                                                                                                         90




               90
                                                                                                         80




               80
                                                                                                         70




               70
                                                                                                      50 60




            50 60
                                                                                                   Percentages




         Percentages
                                                                                                         40




               40
                                                                                                         30




               30
                                                                                                         20




               20




31
                                                                                                         10




               10
                                                                                                         0




               0
                Limited Access to Finance   Weak Infrastructure   Law and Order      Red Tape             Limited Access to Finance   Weak Infrastructure    Law and Order   Red Tape


                                                   (a) Botswana                                                                                (b) Burundi

     Notes: Limited Access to Finance, Weak Infrastructure, Weak Law and Order, and Red Tape represent the major obstacle groups that establishments
     face during their operation. The measures are constructed using answers to the question “Do you think that .... presents any obstacle to the current
     operations of your establishment?” For example, in the case of Limited Access to Finance, the question is as follows: “Do you think that limited access to
     finance presents any obstacle to the current operation of your establishment?” Answers to these questions can be no obstacle, minor obstacle, moderate
     obstacle, major obstacle, and very severe obstacle, which are coded as 1,2,3,4, and 5 respectively. The way we construct our measure of limited access
     to finance is as follows. We take the number of establishments which answered the question “Do you think that limited access to finance present any
     obstacle to the current operation of your establishment?” as “major obstacle and very severe obstacle” and divide by the total number of establishments
     which answered the question. Hence, our measures represent the percentage of establishments which consider limited access to finance a very important
     obstacle for their operations. In the case of Weak Infrastructure, the questions are “Do you think that electricity, telecommunication, transportation, or
     access to land presents a major/severe obstacle to the current operations of your establishment?” In the case of Red Tape, the questions we use are “ Do
     you think that tax rates, tax administration, customs and trade regulations, labor regulations, or business licensing and permits present a major/severe
     obstacle to the current operations of your establishment?”. In case of Weak Law and Order, the questions are “ Do you think that the functioning of the
     courts, political instability, corruption, macroeconomic instability, crime, theft and disorder, or practices of competitors in the informal sector present
     major/severe obstacle to the current operations of your establishment?”
                                                                          Figure 3: Major Obstacle Figures




                100
                                                                                                             100




                90
                                                                                                             90




                80
                                                                                                             80




                70
                                                                                                             70




             50 60
                                                                                                          50 60




          Percentages
                                                                                                       Percentages




                40
                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                             30




                30
                                                                                                             20




                20
                                                                                                             10




                10
                                                                                                             0




                0
                 Limited Access to Finance   Weak Infrastructure      Law and Order      Red Tape             Limited Access to Finance   Weak Infrastructure     Law and Order   Red Tape




32
                                                        (c) Ghana                                                                                    (d) Kenya


                                                                                                             100




               100
                                                                                                             90




               90
                                                                                                             80




               80
                                                                                                             70




               70
                                                                                                          50 60




            50 60
                                                                                                       Percentages




         Percentages
                                                                                                             40




               40
                                                                                                             30




               30
                                                                                                             20




               20
                                                                                                             10




               10
                                                                                                             0




               0
                Limited Access to Finance    Weak Infrastructure      Law and Order     Red Tape              Limited Access to Finance   Weak Infrastructure     Law and Order   Red Tape


                                                        (e) Nigeria                                                                                 (f) Senegal

     Notes: See notes to the previous figure.
                                                                        Figure 3: Major Obstacle Figures




                100
                                                                                                           100




                90
                                                                                                           90




                80
                                                                                                           80




                70
                                                                                                           70




             50 60
                                                                                                        50 60




          Percentages
                                                                                                     Percentages




                40
                                                                                                           40




                30
                                                                                                           30




                20
                                                                                                           20




                10
                                                                                                           10




                0
                                                                                                           0
                 Limited Access to Finance   Weak Infrastructure    Law and Order      Red Tape             Limited Access to Finance   Weak Infrastructure     Law and Order   Red Tape




33
                                                  (g) South Africa                                                                               (h) Tanzania




               100
                                                                                                          100




               90
                                                                                                          90




               80
                                                                                                          80




               70
                                                                                                          70




            50 60
                                                                                                       50 60




         Percentages
                                                                                                    Percentages




               40
                                                                                                          40




               30
                                                                                                          30




               20
                                                                                                          20




               10
                                                                                                          10




               0
                                                                                                          0




                Limited Access to Finance    Weak Infrastructure    Law and Order      Red Tape            Limited Access to Finance    Weak Infrastructure     Law and Order   Red Tape


                                                       (i) Uganda                                                                                 (j) Zambia

     Notes: See notes to the previous figure.
                               Figure 4: The Relationship Between Misallocation (MPK) and Institutional Variables




                            (a) Property Registration (days)                                                    (b) Investment Profile




34
                                                                        (c) Corruption

     Notes: Panels (a)-(c) display cross-country correlation plots of the (country) average log(MPK) against the country-level measures Property Registration
                                                                                                                                      Y
     (days), Investment Profile, and Corruption, respectively. Log(MPK) is the logarithm of MPK, which is calculated as α K              where Y is value added
     and K is replacement value of capital. Property Registration is the number of days it takes to register a property that an entrepreneur wants to
     purchase. Investment Profile is an assessment of factors affecting the risk to investment that are not covered by other political, economic, or financial risk
     components. The risk rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents: “Contract Viability/Expropriation,” “Profits Repatriation,” and “Payment
     Delays.” As that index value increases, the risk of expropriation, payment delays, etc. increases. Corruption is a measure that assesses actual or potential
     corruption in the form of excessive patronage, nepotism, job reservations, “favors-for-favors,” and secret party funding. As that index value increases,
     the risk of of conducting business ineffectively increases. See the data section for detailed explanations.
                           Figure 5: The Relationship Between Misallocation (HK-index) and Institutional Variables




                           (a) Property Registration (days)                                                  (b) Investment Profile




35
                                                                      (c) Corruption

     Notes: Panels (a)-(c) display cross-country correlation plots of the (country) average log(HK-index) against the country-level measures Property Reg-
                                                                                                                                                 α (wL)
     istration (days), Investment Profile, and Corruption, respectively. Log(HK-index) is the logarithm of HK-index, which is calculated as 1−α      RK
                                                                                                                                                         where
     wL and RK stand for total cost of labor and capital, respectively. Property Registration is the number of days it takes to register a property that an
     entrepreneur wants to purchase. Investment Profile is an assessment of factors affecting the risk to investment that are not covered by other political,
     economic, or financial risk components. The risk rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents: “Contract Viability/Expropriation,” “Profits
     Repatriation,” and “Payment Delays.” As that index gets bigger, the risk of expropriation, payment delays etc. increases. Corruption is a measure that
     assesses actual or potential corruption in the form of excessive patronage, nepotism, job reservations, “favors-for-favors,” and secret party funding. As
     that index value increases, the risk of of conducting business ineffectively increases. See the data section for detailed explanations.
