                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TAX REFORM, INVESTMENT,
                   AND THE VALUE OF THE FIRM




                        Alan J. Auerbach


                       James R. Hines Jr.




                     Working Paper No. 1803




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1986




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the CEPR/SSRC
Conference on Corporate Finance, Taxation, and Investment, Oxford,
UK, in September 1985. We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation for
research support, and to Andrew Abel and other participants in the
NBER Taxation Program for comments and suggestions. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation
and projects in Government Budgets and in Taxation and Capital
Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Workinq Paper *1803
                                                    January 1986



             Tax Reform, Investrient, and the Value of the Firm



                                  BSTRT½CT




     The taxation of corporate assets is well understood to influence invest-
ment and firm valuation. This paper explores the consequences of postwar U.S.
tax changes in a dynamic model which incorporates costs of adjustment and
investor expectations of future tax reforms and macroeconomic variability.
When viewed in a dynamic context, the tax code can have very different incen-
tives than those implied by the usual static analysis. Simulation results
suggest that investment is sensitive to future tax changes and business—cycle
movements. The paper also illustrates the implications of this analysis for
the design of tax reforms.




Alan J. Auerbach                                 James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                       Harvard University
3718 Locust Walk/CR                              200 Littauer Center
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           Cambridge, MA 02138
(215) 898—1503                                    (617) 495-2144
Introduction


          Since the work of Hall and Jorgenson (1967), there has been

considerable empirical analysis of the effects of taxation on investment

behavior. The literature concentrates on several issues.     Initially, it

emphasized the pattern and strength of the investment response to changes in

the "user cost of capital" induced by changes in taxation (Hall and Jorgenson

1971, Eisner and Nadiri 1968, Bischoff 1971, Clark 1979). In this work,

investment was typically divided into two classes, structures and equipment.

          More recently, several studies have emphasized the effects of

particular tax provisions on the incentives to invest -in different types of

assets, calculating "effective tax rates" based on the user cost of capital

for several classes of assets at a more disaggregated level (Auerbach and

Jorgenson 1980, Jorgenson and Sullivan 1981, Hulten and Robertson 1982,

Gravelle 1981, Auerbach 1983, King and Fullerton 1984).    These studies

focused on the "long run" effects of different tax systems. They did not

explore how short-run investment behavior might be influenced by anticipted

changes in the tax code or costs of adjusting capital stocks to the higher or

lower levels optimal under new tax policy regimes.

          Though such analysis is extremely helpful in understanding the

overall incentive effects of very complicated tax systems, the emphasis on

steady state behavior may be misleading in a world where the tax law changes

as frequently as it does. A review of recent U.S. legislative history

illustrates this point.

          The year 1981 saw the "tax cut to end all tax cuts," the Economic
                                     —2—


Recovery Tax Act, which substantially reduced both corporate and individual

income tax collections and contained provisions scheduled for introduction as

late as 1986. One year later, Congress raised taxes, undoing some of the

provisions already in operation and cancelling others yet to become effective.

This happened again in 1984. Now, in 1985, there is serious discussion of a

number of a number of tax proposals that again would markedly change the

environment faced by taxpayers. A bet against change would appear to face

long odds.1

           In attempting to understand the likely effects of policy changes,

there is little justification for ignoring this record, or for assuming that

investors will. Indeed, the problem of "dynamic inconsistency", in which

government will have the incentive in the future to adopt different tax

policies than those promised today, was first discussed using the investment

tax credit as an example (Kydland and Prescott 1977). Unanticipated changes

in the investment tax credit provide an efficient "bang for the buck" in terms

of increased investment per dollar of lost tax revenue, because old capital is

excluded from benefitting from the tax reduction. This may also be viewed as

a capital levy on existing assets, since their quasirents will be driven down

by increases in new investment (Auerbach and Kotlikoff 1983). Yet anticipated

changes in the investment tax credit would obviously have very different

effects.

           The purpose of this paper is to bring to the literature on the

effects of tax policies on investment incentives an explicit treatment of

short run transition behavior, taking full account of the provisions of the
                                    —3-



tax law and allowing for varying degrees of foresight on the part of investors

and costs of adjustment to increasing the capital stock. Though these

questions have been studied using the q model of investment (beginning with

Summers 1981), the emphasis in such work has been on estimation of adjustment

costs and the prediction of the behavior of investment to one-time shocks to

investment incentives. Closest in spirit to the our analysis is the work of

Abel (1982), who showed how temporary and anticpated changes in tax provisions

would affect current investment and the value of "marginal q" (the net cost of

new capital goods) in the q model. One may view the present paper as an

empirical application of his analysis to the postwar U.S. experience and the

current tax reform debate.

          Among the questions we seek to answer below are:


     • What effects, taken together, have all the postwar

       changes in investment incentives had on investment?


     • What effects should different historical policy

       changes have had on the market value of corporations?


     • Because of the structure of adjustment costs and

       differences in the durability of different types of

       capital, how does the pattern of investment

       incentives across asset types differ between the long

       and short runs?


    • What would be the impact of tax reform proposals of

       the kind currently being discussed on investment and
                                    -4-


       securities values? How would various phase-in plans

       for these proposals alter their impacts?


       How important are expectations about future tax

       changes when there are substantial costs to adjusting

       the capital stock?


The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the

model. Following this is a discussion of how the model's parameters are

chosen, and the simulation technique used to solve for the paths of investment

and market values over time. We then proceed to analyze the questions just

raised, looking first at historical investment behavior and then at the

current situation.


Modelling Investment Behavior


          The model of investment used in this paper assumes that there are

two types of fixed investment (structures and equipment) and costs to

adjusting the capital stock that may be separate or mutual and may differ

between structures and equipment. It is, in other words, a q investment model

with two types of capital. We choose this level of aggregation to allow

comparability with previous work, and because the greatest variation in tax

treatment has historically been between these two broad classes of assets.

         Consistent with the data, ours is a discrete time model with one

year intervals. Each capital good is assumed to decay exponentially, and the

representative, competitive firm produces its output using labor and the two
                                            -5—


types of capital subject to a constant returns to scale, Cobb-Douglas

production function, with a1 and a2 representing the gross shares (including

depreciation) of the equipment and structures, respectively, in production.

The adjustment cost function is assumed to have the following form2:


(1)      A(It) =   [o(It/Kt_,)2Kt   1
                                        +
                                            i(Iit/Kit   i)2Kit   i
                                                                     +


where 'it and K,t are net investment and capital of type I in year t,     and

      are sums over both types of investment and capital, and , and 2 are

adjustment cost terms reflecting joint costs and costs specific to the two

types of capital, respectively.

            Given the homogeneity of the production function and adjustment cost

function with respect to the scale of the firm, the value of the firm will be

proportional to the size of its capital stock and the behavior of all firms

can be represented by a single, aggregate representative firm.

            The quadratic adjustment cost function in (1) is a two-capital-good

version of the one used by Summers (1981) in his empirical analysis. It also

differs in two other respects. First, it is based on net, rather than gross

investment. Second, there is no constant subtracted from the ratio I/K in

each quadratic term. However, one may equivalently view the current model as

being based on gross investment, with a constant equal to the rate, 6, of

economic depreciation being subtracted. Either way, the notion is that

minimum average adjustment costs (in this case, zero) occur when net

investment is zero. This makes sense if one views the costs as general ones

involving changing the scale of operations rather than bolting down
                                    —6—


the new machines. Summers's preferred estimate of the constant term (.088) is

quite consistent with this interpretation.

          We ignore changes in relative prices between capital goods and

output and between different types of capital, and assume that all new

investment goods have a real price of unity in every year. The adjustment

costs are assumed to be "internalt1, in that they relate not to an upward

sloping supply schedule for capital goods but the costs of absorption at the

firm level. This is consistent with the observation that historical

fluctuations in capital goods prices are relatively minor compared to

estimated costs of adjustment.

          The firm's optimization problem consists of choosing equipment,

structures and labor at each time t, taking account of current and (to the

extent of the assumed planning horizon) future economic conditions. There is

no risk from the firm's point of view; whatever it expects about the future

(right or wrong) is expected with certainty.       If we let the production

function in the three factor inputs be F(.), then the firm seeks to maximize

its value at time t, equal to the discounted value of its real, after-tax cash

flows:



(2)      Vt =   (1+_+l_t)          1T51F15,K25,N5) -            w5N5)
                                                                        +



                                          2
                (1+r)(1—T)A(I) +   (1+r)        [—(1—k.)c.5 +
                                          1=1



                T
                                    -7—


where N5 is the labor input in period s, r is the real, after-tax required

return, w is the real wage rate paid at the end of year s, D.(s,x) is     the
depreciation allowance at the beginning of year s for assets of type i

purchased at the beginning of year x, k,t is the investment tax credit

received on investment of type I at the beginning of year t, c is the rate of

inflation, ó is the rate at which capital of type I depreciates, G1t is gross

investment of type I at the beginning of year t, and Tt is the tax rate at the

beginning of year t Depreciation allowances decay at the inflation rate

because they are not indexed.

          We use the convention that year t investment occurs at the beginning

of the period, while quasirents occur at the end, with period t investment

yielding its first return at the end of the same period. We also assume that

adjustment costs are immediately expensed, as would be the case for internal

adjustment costs that require extra factors or reduce productivity. Gross and

net investment of type i are related by the identity:


(3)       G1t =   'it   +



          For labor, the optimal condition derived by differentiating (2) with

respect to N calls for the firm to set the marginal product of labor equal to

the real wage. As usual in models of this sort with constant returns to

scale, the labor demand equation is omitted from explicit analysis. For each

type of capital good I, it is most convenient to derive the first order

condition with respect to gross investment at each date t, Gft. Assuming, for

the moment, an infinite horizon and perfect foresight, this yields:
                                             -8-




(4)
          Pft   = [(1+1(1-Tt+i)1


                    -
                        s=t+1
                             (1_öi)_t)(1+r)s_t+1)(1_Ts+l)pis]

where (using 1 and 3):

                                 —
(5)       pit =     dFt/dKt          dAt+i/dKt
                =
                    dFt/dKt      +
                                     0[It+1/K2 2o(It+i/K)]
                                                       +


                                 +,0[(I.1/K.t)2            +25.(I.ti/K.t)}
is the "total" marginal product of capital at the end of period t, taking

account of reduced concurrent costs of adjustment, and q is the marginal

cost of a unit of capital, less tax savings associated with costs of

adjustment:



          qft   =1       +                         +
(6)
                             (1—Tt)[o(I/Kt_1)

          Equation (5) reminds the reader that there are two components to the
firm's marginal value of an additional piece of capital this year: the

marginal product of capital (dFt+i/dKt) and the reduction in next year's

adjustment costs (dAti/dKt). Expression (4) says that firms should invest in

capital of type i at date t until its marginal product, after tax, equals its

after tax cost (multiplied by (1+r) because costs are borne at the beginning

of the period) less the present value of investment credits, depreciation

allowances and future quasirents. Thus, the expression is the result of the

optimal backward solution for firm behavior. When expectations are static, as

is commonly assumed, (4) reduces to the standard user cost of capital formula:
                                             -9--




(7)              =



where z1, equals the present value of depreciation allowances 01(s,t) and


(8)                  =


is a tax-adjusted price of new capital goods that we will interpret below.

          Because of the assumption that production is governed by a

Cobb-Douglas production function, the direct marginal product of óapital of

type i in period t is:


                                        —(i—a.)      a.
                          (1—a1—a2)
(9)       F.t =       aN              a.K.          K.3

where a is the production function constant. Thus, given the optimal choice

of labor input, expressions (4) and (5) for i and j give us two equations in

the capital stocks Kit and K2t. Without adjustment costs, this would permit a

closed form, backward solution for these capital stocks in each period.4

However, since           depends on lagged capital stocks, this solution method is no

longer possible, and we must resort to simulation analysis.


Parameterization


          Three types of parameters appear in the model just described,

relating to production (a, a1, a2, 11 ö,                  and       taxation (T, k1,

k2, D1(') and D2(•)) and financial markets (r and it).          For it, we use the

realized values of the GNP deflator (year on year), while T is set equal to

the statutory corporate tax rate that prevailed for the majority of the
                                        -10-


year.5 In order to calculate the production paramaters a and 6 and the tax

terms k and D(.), it is necessary to aggregate data on thirty-four classes of

assets for which we have data (twenty equipment and fourteen structures) into

corresponding values for aggregate equipment and structures. This turns out

to be a very complex problem.

          What we seek are parameters for aggregate capital goods that, by

some measure, accurately reflect those of their components. One criterion

that seems reasonable is to require that, for a particular tax system, both

net and gross rates of return to capital before tax be the same for the

aggregate assets as for the sums of their components. A particular motivation

for using this approach is that it results 'in the effective tax rate, as

usually measured, being invariant to the aggregation procedure.

          To see what weights this criterion dictates, consider first the

special case in which adjustment costs are zero and expectations are myopic.

Let     be the fraction of capital stock j of the total in its class I

(equipment or structures) at a particular date. (We suppress the time

subscript but emphasize that these capital stock weights are not time

invariant.) The gross before tax return to capital of type I is then:


(10)      p1 =           =       Q..(r+ö.) (1—k.—Tz.)/(1-T)
                 J           3

where o, k and z3 correspond to asset j. The net return is:

(11)      r =        —




Thus, the criterion would be satisfied by weighting the indvidual values of 6

by capital stock weights ci and the tax parameters k and z by ci(r+ô); the tax
                                     —11—


parameters of short-lived assets should be more heavily weighted. This is an

important choice, since the values of k+Tz generally increase monotonically

with

          Since capital stock weights change over time, this formula would

require recomputation every year. However, this presents an index number

problem, and it is unclear that we should prefer a measure with varying

weights. Even after this issue is resolved, one must deal with the problem of

adjustment costs and varying values of asset-specific q's, about which there

is little information. Finally, there is the problem of expectations. When

the marginal product of capital is dictated by expression (4), there are no

simple weights (that we can think of!) that satisfy the criterion. One would

generally have to determine the weights simultaneously with the solution for

the marginal product itself, which would make the problem intractible.

          In light of the situation, we choose to weight 5 by j and tax

parameters by &2(r+S), using fixed values for r and the capital stock weights cz

over time. The capital stock weights used are for the year 1977, as described

in Auerbach (1983). The rates of economic depreciation come from calculations

by Hulten and Wykoff (1981). The fixed value used for r is .04.

          Once values of 8] and 2 are known, it is possible to estimate the

capital share parameters a1 and a2 from production and capital stock data. We

begin by calculating the net-of-depreciation, before-tax return to capital in

the corporate sector in 1977 by dividing the difference between value added

and labor compensation in the corporate sector, taken from the 1977 Census of

Manufactures, by the total corporate capital stock, equal to equipment and
                                                  —12-


structures plus inventories and land. We then assume that all forms of

capital earned this before-tax rate of return, Rg•7 Next, we assume that the

Cobb-Douglas production function specified above refers to gross output net of

returns to inventories and land,8 calculated as follows:


             G = V +           +          —
(12)
                       61K1        2K2        RgK3+K4

where V is value added and K3 and K4 are stocks of inventories and land.

            Once we have obtained this value of G, we note that, since output is

observed net of adjustment costs, the production function F(.) must satisfy:


(13)        F(K1,K2,N) = 6 +       A(I)

Finally, we define the net return to capital of type i (i=1,2) in the current

period as being the derivative of 0 with respect to K, holding constant the

capital stock growth rates (11/K1), (12/K2) and (I/K), less depreciation a1.9

This   yields (using 1 and 9):


(14)        Rg =   aF/K1
                           —
                               30(I/K)2
                                              —
                                                  3(I/K)2   -
                                                                a,   i=1,2


which can immediately be solved for a1.'°


            The resulting parameter values are:


            a1 =    .167

            a2 =    .171
               =    .137

            82 =    .033
                                    -13-


with the estimated value of Rg equal to 1O.4. This estimate of the marginal

product of capital (which is used in the current version of the paper only in

the calculation of a1 and a2)11 is consistent with previous findings. In

interpreting the sizes of the two share coefficients, it should be remembered

that these are shares in gross output, less estimated returns to land and

inventories. Relative to usual calculations of the capital share of net

output, the first of these factors (the use of gross output) would lead to a

larger total share (since depreciation is included in both numerator and

denominator) while the second (excluding part of the capital stock) would lead

to a smaller total share (since returns to excluded capital are subtracted

from both numerator and denominator.)

          Finally, the production function constant a is obtained by dividing

F(.) by the product of its component factors raised to the power of their

respective factor shares. We then assume that the labor input, in efficiency

units, grows at a constant rate of 3 over the entire sample period.12 This

imparts a trend rate of growth to the steady state of the model, and is set

slightly below the historical capital stock growth rate of about 4 because

part of that growth may be attributable to the historical decline in effective

tax rates on investment.

          The only parameters that remain to be chosen are the adjustment

costs terms ,
                1   and 2' which are quite crucial to our analysis. Previous

studies have inferred these parameters from regressions of investment on

"tax—adjusted q". The authors of these studies have derived "tax-adjusted q"

by correcting the ratio of the market value of the firm to its capital stock
                                     —14—


(presumed to be average q) for tax factors such as the investment tax credit,

accelerated depreciation and the deductibility of adjustment costs that would

cause marginal and average q to differ. In one case (Abel and Blanchard

1984), average q is explicity estimated from projected future profits and

interest rates. A regression of I on adjusted q can then be interpreted as

estimating the inverted marginal cost function.

          In a model with one capital stock, the coefficient on adjusted q

would be an estimate of 1/a, the inverted marginal adjustment cost. Although

such regressions cannot be done if there is more than one capital stock, one

can still interpret the coefficient as the inverse of the sum of marginal

adjustment costs associated with investment of type i, or           in the

current model.

          Empirical investigations have found this coefficient to be quite

small. Using annual data, Summers (1981) chose a "preferred" value of .031

from his many regressions, implying a value of the marginal adjustment cost

of 32.2, while Poterba and Summers (1983) found slightly lower values of 1/

using British data. Using quarterly U.S. data, Abel and Blanchard (1984)

found values of 1/ of between 0 and .015.

          However, for many reasons usually pointed out by authors of the

previous studies themselves, these coefficients (which are not always even

statistically significant) may be prone to serious downward bias because of an

inexact measure of q being used.13

          Estimated speeds of adjustment based on such high adjustment costs

appear to be unreasonably slow, given previous work on investment behavior.
                                         —15--



For example, Summers (1981) finds that half of the long run increase in

investment that occurs in response to an unanticipated increase in the

investment tax credit is achieved after approximately eight years. The same

pattern of adjustment occurs in response to an immediate cut in the corporate

tax rate. Previous studies based on the neoclassical model (modified to allow

slower responses to changes in the cost of capital than to changes in output)

found the same percentage of the long run adjustment to be reached in about

eight quarters or less (Bischoff 1971, Clark 1979). Similar response patterns

have been obtained from a comparison of different full model simulations

(Chirinko and Eisner 1983).

            While we are quite uncertain what the "true" value of     is, it seems

appropriate to use one that provides more reasonable speeds of adjustment.

Some experimentation suggests an overall value of       = 12, which we arbitrarily

divide equally between own and common adjustment costs. That is, we assume

that    =      =2   =   6.   In future work, we hope to obtain our own empirical

estimates of these parameters.


Solution of the Model


            In the presence of adjustment costs, the model as specified can only

be solved numerically. There exist different techniques to obtain such

solutions. The one used here is based on the approach first taken in a q

model by Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983). The actual algorithm used depends on

the policy experiment considered.

            All simulations begin with the assumption that, prior to 1954, the
                                    -16-


economy was in a steady state: that economic conditions had been stable for

sufficiently long that the stocks of both kinds of capital had completely

adjusted, and no change in these conditions was anticipated. Though this is

undoubtedly inaccurate, some such assumption is required to fix the inital

values of capital stocks in a way that is consistent with the assumed

production technology.

          This solution for the steady state in 1953 does not depend on any

future variables. Indeed, when expectations are assumed to be completely

myopic throughout, the model can then be solved forward without iteration,

with each year's solution beginning with Kt_i and solving for Kt. At the

other extreme is the assumption of perfect foresight. By this, we mean that

all tax and inflation rates are correctly anticipated until the present.14 It

is hard to implement this assumption for future dates, so we make assumptions

about the values of these variables and suppose that firms' expectations match

them. We then solve the model into the 21st century to guarantee convergence

to a new steady state.

          Our method begins with a path of initial guesses for the capital

stocks of each type in each year. Then, a version of expression (4), with the

guess of Kt_i held constant at time t, is solved backward for a new vector of

capital stocks. These are used to update the previous guesses, and the

procedure is repeated until convergence is reached.

          In cases in which we wish to assume that expectations are forward

looking until some particular date of a change in regime, we solve the model

in the manner just described but stipulate that people assume that the tax
                                    —17—


parameters prevailing in the year before the regime shift will remain

unchanged forever. This simulation generates capital stocks for the year

before the regime shift. Next, we take these capital stocks and use them as

the initial ones for a second simulation that begins in that year and

continues into the future. For example, if one wished to assume that from

1954 through 1961 no investment tax credit was anticipated, but that after its

introduction in 1962 no further mistakes were made, one would follow the

procedure just described using 1962 as the year of the regime shift. This

approach is very useful in analyzing current policy alternatives since,

whatever is anticipated, the current capital stocks are certainly fixed and

cannot change if a policy shift is announced.


Measuring the Effects of Policies


          Once the solution paths are obtained for the two capital stocks, we

calculate three variables of interest. One is the average q of the

representative firm, its value relative to the replacement cost of its capital

stock. This starts with the marginal q obtained directly from the adjustment

cost function, and then takes account of the variety of tax provisions that

make old and new capital differ in value. The second is the effective tax

rate, which summarizes the incentive to invest in a particular asset in a

given year. The third is the net investment flows of equipment and structures

which the simulation generates.


Estimatin9 Average q
                                      -18-


          It is this variable that tells us what the overall impact of a tax

change will be on market value. Generally, there will be two effects. To the

extent that the incentive to invest -increases, marginal q, defined to be the

basic price of a unit of capital capital plus the derivative of the adjustment

cost function with respect to investment, will rise. In the absence of

taxes, the homogeneity of production and adjustment cost functions would imply

that this would also be the firm's value per unit of capital.

          But to the extent that the new incentive magnifies the distinction

between new and old capital, the difference between marginal q and average q

will also rise. The net effect on average q can be either positive or

negative for expansionary or contract-ionary policies. Holding marginal q

constant, an increase in average q may be viewed as a lump sum transfer to the

owners of corporate capital.

          The formula for average q is based on an arbitrage condition between

old and new capital. Since new capital goods must generate after-tax cash

flows equal to marginal q, it follows that:



              =                   + (It1Kt_1)I + PV + k.t + Ts0i (5,t)
(15)
                  Tt[o(It/Kt_i)

where     is marginal q and PV is the present value of the after-tax

quasirents accruing to an new asset purchased for one dollar at date t. Since

capital purchased at t'<t has a present value of quasirents of (l_oi)ttPVit,

it follows that its value at date t, per efficiency unit of capital, is:



(16)               = Pvit   +
                                  T5D(S,t')]/(l-â)tt
                                        -19—


Solution of (15) for         and substitution of this expression into (16) gives

a solution for the value of capital of type i and cohort t' at time t, in

terms of        From (1) and the definition of marginal q, we also have:


(17)           = 1   +
                         ot'Kt)   +
                                      jtK1t)
Combining (16) and (17) to get each cohort's value, we then aggregate these

values of average q over all vintages and both types of capital to obtain an

overall value for the firm at date t.

           Note that this expression for average q is consistent with the

assumption of perfect foresight. When myopic expectations are assumed, we

change (15) and (16) correspondingly.


Calculating Effective Tax Rates


           In models based on myopic expectations, it is common to define the

effective tax rate to be the percentage difference between the net (of

depreciation) marginal products of capital before and after taxes. Given a

fixed after-tax return, this calculation also tells us what the before tax, or

social return to capital must be for the firm to earn zero profits. Unless

the economy actually is in a steady state, however, this will be correct only

in the year the calculation is made. Hence, the effective tax rate as

commonly used measures the required before-tax return to capital in the same

year, assuming myopia.

           When firms are not myopic, the formula for the user cost of capital

is different, but we can still answer the same question, viz., what rate of
                                            -20-


return on capital must the firm earn in the current year, taking account of

future changes in taxes, inflation and the firm's marginal product of capital?

As before, this will tell us what the firm's rate of return on investment must

be, before taxes, in the current year. Dropping subsrcripts, the effective

tax rate is defined to be:


(18)      0 =   ((p/q   -   - r]/(p/q   -
                                            6)


where p is the marginal product of capital defined in (5).

          It is not clear which value of q should be used in (18). The most

obvious candidate is marginal q, as defined in expression (17). However, use

of this value has the effect of incorporating the tax deduction for adjustment

costs in the effective tax rate. This is perfectly acceptable; it reflects

the fact that part of the cost of investment is expensed. However, it makes

more difficult a comparison with previous results, since even when there is

economic depreciation of direct capital costs, the effective tax rate will be

less than T. By using the tax adjusted value, q', defined in (8),15 one

"undoestt the differential tax treatment of adjustment costs, and obtains the

usual results for expensing, economic depreciation, and other special cases.

Hence, for the sake of comparability with other studies in which adjustment

costs were ignored, we take this latter approach.


Simulation Results


         This section presents the results of simulations, chosen to provide

answers to some of the questions raised in the introduction.   We begin by
                                    —21—


comparing the historical measures of average q and investment that would have

prevailed with and without adjustment costs. Because of the erratic behavior

that would occur under perfect foresight in the absence of adjustment costs,

we perform this comparison under the assumption of myopic expectations. By

construction, effective tax rates for the two simulations will be identical,

since all differences will be absorbed in q', the tax-adjusted cost of capital

goods that is used in expression (18).16 The main point is to illustrate the

smoothing of investment and the impact that movements in marginal q have on

average q when adjustment costs are present. Both simulations are performed

for the period 1953-1990, with the assumption made that the Bradley-Gephardt

"Fair Tax" plan -is implemented in 1985. This plan would lower the corporate

tax rate to 3O, repeal the investment tax credit and provide declining

balance depreciation allowances designed to have a present value of near that

of economic depreciation at rates of inflation like those recently experienced

in the U.S.17

          Table la presents effective tax rates for these two simulations.

For each year, there are two numbers: the effective tax rates for equipment

and structures, respectively. These results are quite consistent with those

of the previous literature.17

          Beginning from effective tax rates in 1953 well above the statutory

rate of 52 for equipment, and somewhat lower for structures, rates move lower

with the tax changes introduced in 1954, and again in 1962 with the

introduction of the investment tax credit. Tax rates on equipment go down

again in 1972 with the reintroduction of the investment tax credit and the
                                    —22-


introduction of the Asset Depreciation Range (ADR) System. By 1980, higher

rates of inflation have pushed effective tax rates back up again, particularly

on equipment. The introduction of ACRS in 1981 brought effective tax rates on

equipment essentially to zero, also lowering tax rates on structures to an

postwar low. Reduced inflation in 1982 brought tax rates down still

further.19 Rates went up in 1983 on equipment and 1984 on structures because

of the 1982 and 1984 tax acts, which introduced a fifty percent basis

adjustment for the investment tax credit and an eighteen year (instead of

fifteen year) tax life for structures, respectively.

          A switch to Bradley-Gephardt in 1985 would substantially increase

the effective tax rate on equipment, leaving both effective tax rates near the

statutory rate of .30. The constancy of effective tax rates reflects the

assumption of constant future real interest rates and inflation.

          Table lb displays values for average q, or g, for the simulation

without adjustment costs, for structures, equipment, and in the aggregate,

based on estimated capital stock composition and tax treatment in each year.

Since there are no adjustment costs in this case, marginal q is identically

equal to one, so movements in average q are entirely due to changes in the

relative tax treatment of new and old capital.

          These values of average q have also declined over the years as the

distinction made by the tax system between old and new capital has widened.

Under a system of economic depreciation, average q would equal marginal q net

of the tax deduction of adjustment costs, as defined in (6) (averaged over the

two types of capital). With no adjustment costs this value is, of course,
                                       -23-


one. The estimated time series given in Table lb suggest that average q was

actually above one in 1953. After the acceleration of depreciation allowances

in 1954, and throughout the 1950s and until 1962, average q was approximately

equal to one. However, since then g has been lower, reaching a low of .80 in

1981 and staying near this value since.20 A switch to Bradley-Gephardt in

1985 would return average q back to a value of approximately one, as

depreciation allowances are decelerated and the investment tax credit removed,

thereby removing the tax distinction between old and new capital.

             The net investment rates for equipment, structures and in the

aggregate under the no-adjustment-cost simulation are displayed in Table ic,

expressed as a percentage of the respective capital stocks. These numbers are

quite unrealistic, as one would expect them to be. But if one wants to allow

for a sluggish adjustment of investment, this must be carried through

consistenly to other calculations, such as for average q.

             With adjustment costs present, the nature of the results for

investment and average q change quite dramatically. Because marginal

adjustment costs are high when investment demand is strong, firms seek to

smooth their investment. At the same time, the value of average q diverges

from one not only because of the distinction between new and old capital but

also because of the presence of marginal adjustment costs. Given the value of

the sum of      and I3 for i=1,2 and the statutory tax rate of about .5, this

increases the value of average q by about 6 times the growth rate of capital,

or .18 in the long run. In the short run, average q is determined both by the

distinction between new and old capital (the difference between average q and
                                   -24-


marginal q) and the value of marginal q itself. A change in the incentive to

invest will typically affect both of these terms, sometimes in different

directions.

          These results can be seen immediately from the time series displayed

in Table 2b. The aggregate value of average q starts out at 1.23, indicating

a very small aggregate difference in the tax treatment of new and old capital.

For equipment, depreciation slower than economic depreciation leads to a

premium in the value of old capital goods. The value of average q falls very

little in 1981, from 1.09 to 1.08, as the increase in marginal q associated

with more investment nearly outweighs the effect of the levy on old capital.

A similar effect is present for the period 1971-72, when the reinstitution of

the investment tax credit and the introduction of the Asset Depreciation Range

for equipment incresed the incentive to invest. Without costs of adjustment,

aggregate average q drops from .94 to .88. With costs of adjustment, it does

not drop at all.

          The sharp increase in average q that occurs in 1985 is due to the

decreases distinction between old and new capital introduced by

Bradley-Gephardt. In the short run, this effect dominates the decline in

marginal q associated with a reduced incentive to invest in equipment.

          Table 2c presents the net investment figures produced by the

simulations. The impact of adjustment costs is clear. Though investment

still increases in years of increased investment incentives, such as 1962,

1972 and 1981, these increases are of the order of magnitude of 0.5 percent to

1.1 percent of the aggregate capital stock. Such changes are well within the
                                     —25—


range of historical fluctuations in investment, representing a swing of

perhaps 2 percent of output. The proposed switch to Bradley-Gephardt in 1985

would reduce investment by about .4 percent of the capital stock, although a

decline of about .1 percent would occur even without any such change, as net

investment slowly approaches its assumed steady state value of 3.0 percent of

the capital stock.

          Tables 3a, b and c present the results of a simulation of behavior

over the same period under the assumption that there is perfect foresight as

well as adjustment costs to investment. We assume that, prior to 1984,

expectations about what would happen in years 1954-1984 were correct. It is

obviously impossible to simulate perfect foresight about the years 1985 and

beyond, so we assume that firms expected 1984 to be characteristic of all

subsequent years.    We also provide information in the table for the years

1985-1990 under the assumption that the Bradley-Gephardt plan is introduced

unexpectedly in 1985 and that there is perfect foresight about the future

impact of this policy, once introduced.

          A major effect, seen in Table 3a, is the increase in effective tax

rates that occurs in years before increases in investment incentives that do

not benefit old capital but reduce its marginal product. This is evident in

1961, 1971 and 1980, when the effective tax rates on both structures and

equipment rise from the previous year's values, in contrast to declines for

each year that were seen for the myopic case.

          One can also see differences in the pattern of investment over time,

compared to the case of myopia (with adjustment costs), although there does
                                    -26-


not appear to be any noticeable increase in the volatility of the series, as

one might have expected. Under perfect foresight, aggregate net investment

varies between 3.1 percent of the capital stock in 1971 and 4.8 percent in

1962, 1981 and 1982. Under myopic expectations, the range is from 2.8 percent

in 1970 to 4.6 percent in 1982 and 1983.

          In general, it is difficult to compare the investment series in

Tables 2c and 3c for any particular year, since the entire time path of

investment and expectations is different under the two assumptions. For

example, investment in equipment increases from 3.5 percent to 3.9 percent

during 1980-81 under myopic expectations and from 4.1 percent to 4.4 percent

under perfect foresight. One cannot say that the effect of expectations is to

reduce the effect of the 1981 incentives, however, since there is a natural

tendancy for investment to decline over time toward the steady state value of

3.0 percent, at a faster rate for higher levels of investment.

          The different assumption about expectations has a relatively

insignificant impact on average q. This is because, with statutory tax rates

changing little over time, the only real differences in the formula come from

the use of different nominal interest rates to discount depreciation

allowances and the use of different future marginal products of capital to

calculate the present value of after-tax quasirents, PV.

          One of the criticisms of schemes like the Bradley-Gephardt plan and

other proposals to lower statutory tax rates is that they provide transfers to

old capital and reduce the incentive to invest. This outcome is evident in

Table 3, as well as in the earlier tables. But supporters argue that such
                                     -27-


plans encompassing low statutory rates and economic depreciation allowances

are desirable for other reasons.21 Hence, it would be useful to know whether

this characteristic of reducing average tax rates while increasing marginal

ones can be influenced by a phasing in of one of the new plans.

          This possibility is examined in our simulation presented in Table 4.

We assume the same path for the years 1953-84 as is presented in Table 3, and

that in 1985 a phase-in plan for Bradley-Gephardt is announced and implemented

with perfect foresight beginning in 1985. The phase-in calls for the

immediate removal of the investment tax credit and ACRS depreciation, but only

a gradual reduction in corporate tax rates, to 42% in 1986, 38% in 1987, 34%

in 1988 and 30% in 1989.   This policy would, obviously, involve a smaller

revenue loss than one with an immediate reduction in the corporate tax rate to

30%, as was simulated in Table 3.

          The results in Table 4 show that the increase in average q is about

the same as without the phase-in. This masks two offsetting effects, however.

First, the incentive to invest is increased by the phase-in. Second, the

windfalls received by owners of existing assets are reduced. As can be seen

from a comparison of the investment figures in Tables 3c and 4, the gradual

reduction in the corporate tax rate leads to an acceleration of investment,

with more investment in both structures and equipment in each of the years

between 1985 and 1988, and less thereafter.

         These higher rates of investment are associated with the desire by

firms to invest while their depreciation allowances (which still have an

accelerated pattern relative to economic depreciation) have greater value in
                                    -28-


generating tax deductions, as discussed by Abel (1982). Thus, this phase-in

leads to a situation where investment actually rises in the aggregate in 1985

with the enactment of Bradley-Gephardt, while at the same time reducing the

extent of its windfall to old capital.

           To compare the effects of these different tax plans, net investment

figures are much more helpful than effective tax rates, as measured for the

perfect foresight case. With the phase-in, effective tax rates are actually

higher in 1985 (compare Tables 3a and 4), but this simply reflects the fact

that investment is higher in 1985 and expected to decline faster under the

phase-in. This means larger anticipated capital losses as marginal q

declines, necessitating a somewhat higher current marginal product to

compensate investors.

           Naturally, this beneficial effect depends on the tax change being

unanticipated. To the extent that firms in earlier years might have expected

such discriminatory treatment of their assets, their investment levels would

have been lower than indicated by the simulations.

     The simulation results presented so far are based, of course, on highly

stylized assumptions about the production technology, the pattern of true eco-

nomic deprectiation, aggregation over firms and assets, methods of financing

marginal investments, and other variables. Since this model was designed to

capture the effects of historical tax changes on firm valuation and investment

incentives, we examined the sensitivity of our results to different specifica-

tions of the historical pattern of required returns and marginal products of

capital.
                                             -29-


       Tables 5 and 6a present simulation results for a perfect foresight

scenario (with adjustment costs) in which firms' required rate of return

corresponds to the risk-adjusted after-tax real rate on 4- to 6-month

commercial paper which prevailed in the year of investment. This series on

adjusted interest rates was calculated by (19):


(19)        ra =   0.06 +   (1—T)PR — INFL


where ra is the adjusted rate, PR is the nominal (annualized) return on 4— to

6-month paper, and INFL is the contemporaneous inflation rate (which firms

know exactly since the simulations assume perfect foresight). The after-tax

risk premium in (19) is 6, which roughly corresponds to the historical dif-

ference between after-tax risk-free interest rates and after-tax profit rates.

       While for reasons mentioned earlier it can be misleading to compare two

investment series year-for-year, a comparison of Tables 3 and 6a reveals some

important trends. The simulation which uses adjusted commercial paper rates

shows investment through 1975 which has a similar pattern but is generally

higher than investment in the constant interest rate simulation. As interest

rates rise in the mid—1970's the capital stock adjusts and investment rates

are lower than in the constant-rate simulation. One example of this adjust-

ment is the slackening of investment in structures in 1976, which contrasts

with the acceleration of structures investment for that year in the constant-

rate simulation.

       A more striking difference comes in the switch-over to Bradley-Gephardt

in 1985. Table 6a reveals equipment investment to fall dramatically in
                                    -30--



response to the removal of some of its tax preferences in 1985, a result which

is more pronounced than the investment drop in the constant-rate simulation.

The difference reflects the post-1970's long-term adjustment of the capital

stock to lower levels and the consequences of unfavorable tax changes on top

of this adjustment. For structures, investment recovers slightly in 1985,

while still reflecting that the stock of structures is too high for a

sustained 3 growth rate. This contrasts with the seemingly small effect of

Bradley-Gephardt on structures investment in the constant-rate case.

     Average q in the first column of Table 5 moves in a fashion similar to

average q in Table 3, with the exception that higher investment keeps average

q above the constant-rate average q through 1975 by its effect on marginal q.

In general, interest rate changes will have three effects on average q

(relative to constant—rate calculations): one, through changes in

contemporaneous investment and marginal q, another through changes in the

nominal discount rate if old capital is locked into depreciation patterns

which are accelerated to a different degree (for the remaining basis) than

that currently in use, and a third through changes in investment patterns

which affect the depreciation pattern composition of old capital.

     Since postwar tax reforms have generally increased the acceleration of

depreciation allowances each time, one expects that higher interest rates will

usually produce lower values of average q through all of these effects. Table

5 reflects the consequences of rising interest rates in the late 1970's and

1980's, as average q falls below one in 1980 and continues to fall steadily

until the introduction of Bradley—Gephardt in 1985. The 1985 tax reform has
                                            —31-


similar effects on the value of old capital in the variable-interest rate case

and in the constant-rate case. For equipment, this result is the product of

the sharp deceleration of depreciation deductions which just balances the

effect of investment disincentives on marginal q. For structures, the 1985

investment incentives raise marginal q slightly, while the depressing effects

of higher interest rates on average q are less important than for equipment

since a smaller fraction of the structures capital stock was put in place with

the accelerated post-1981 depreciation schedules.

       Tables 5 and 6b report the results of simulations in which the required

rate of return was held constant (at 0.04) but the marginal product of capital

varied cyclically around its long—run growth path. These simulations assume

that firms have perfect foresight and that adjustment costs are present.

       In order to obtain a historical series of marginal products consistent

with the production function technology specified earlier, we used data on

after-tax corporate rates of return from Feldstein, et. al. (1983). Assuming

capital market equilibrium and constant returns technology, this rate of

return will be equal to the marginal gross return to capital, Rg in (14).

Note that this methodology implicitly assumes that yearly variation in the

return to capital is attributable to shocks to the production function and not

to changes in the capital/labor ratio. As before, we assume for the purpose

of calculating production function coefficients that net investment is 3 each

year. Then, using (9) and (14), the technical and labor-related component of

the production function can be computed:


              (1—a —a. )
                  1 2          (C +
                                       t     (1—a —G
                                                   1 2
(20)       aN              =          RQ)
                                            Kt
                                 0
                                         —32—


where the left side of (20) is the value to be calculated, and C is a constant

equal to:


(21)        C =                              +           +
                  (0.03)2($0+1s1+2s2)            ö1s1        62s2

where s is the share of capital of type i in the capital stock (s1 +                    1).
                                                                                   s2
       Since (20) is a relationship which holds for all years, it must hold for

1977, the year from which values are calibrated. Marginal products of capital

for all other years were calculated using a1 and                  a2 to solve for atNta12)
relative to its value in 1977:21


                  (1—a 1—a2)                                           —
            a N                C + R                     (t-77)       1 a1 a2)
(22)
                                         •
                                                 [1.03            1

                               C + R77
            aN                      g


       The investment pattern shown in Table 6b is slightly lower but closely

resembles that of Table 3 until the late 1960's. Starting then, investment

falls from its levels in the benchmark run, while maintaining analogous

year-to-year movements. No doubt these results in Table 6b reflect the

declining rate of return to capital, the economic malaise captured here as

marginal products which fall from trend values. Equipment investment declines

sharply -in response to the unexpected tax regime change in 1985, while

investment in structures rises slightly. Both of these results are quite

similar to those found in Table 3.

       Average q in the second column of Table 5 tracks the values of average q

in Table 3, with the exception that it falls more quickly starting in the late
                                    —33—


1960's. Average q makes a recovery in 1985, though not to as high a level as

in the runs reported in Table 3. Naturally, these results are the products of

the investment decline brought about by lower marginal products.   Lower

marginal q's generate lower average q's during the period 1967-1984, and the

lower average q's in 1985 (especially for structures) reflect that a smaller

fraction of the capital stock -in place in that year was depreciated using the

most accelerated methods.

     Tables 5 and 6c presents results for the simulations in which both

interest rates and marginal products were permitted to vary in the manner

described above. Not surprisingly, these results resemble a combination of

those in Tables 6a, 6b, and the first two columns of Table 5.   Investment in

both equipment and structures declines starting in the late 1960's, and is

somewhat more volatile throughout the period than was the case in earlier

runs. High interest rates and declining marginal products deliver a combined

hammer blow to investment (especially in structures) at the end of the 1970's,

an effect much stronger than in any of the other runs. When Bradley—Gephardt

is introduced in 1985, equipment investment again declines dramatically and

structures investment stays quite low while recovering somewhat.

     Average q's in the third column of Table 6 follow patterns similar to

those of the first two columns, with declining q's in the late 1960's

following those of column two and leading those of column one by a few years.

By the mid-1970's, however, the investment disaster produces low marginal q's

which drive average q below the values in other columns and below one in 1977.

Average q continues to fall until 1985, when its recovery is on the same order
                                    —34—


of magnitude as recoveries in other runs.

     In comparing results from different foresight and business cycle specifi—

cations, it is reasonable to contrast simulated investment and average q to

values which prevailed over this period. Table 7 presents net corporate

investment, expressed as a fraction of the capital stock, in equipment and

structures for the period 1953-1984. These investment rates are not derived

from the published BEA net investment series; they are calculated by applying

the BEA gross investment data and Hulten-Wykoff depreciation rates to form a

perpetual inventory of corporate capital assuming the published 1925 net capi-

tal stock to be accurate. The investment series produced by this method are

then measured consistently with net investment calculations from the simula-

tion runs.

     Table 7 illustrates several sharp features of the postwar investment

experience. Equipment investment strongly accelerates in the mid-1960's, pre-

sumably in response to the introduction of the investment tax credit and

repeal of the Long amendment. Both equipment and structures appear to be

affected by business cycle downturns in 1970—1971 and 1975—1976. Structures

never recover from the latter shock, with the tax code and high interest rates

combining to prevent net investment in every year of the post-1975 period from

equalling any of its previous values.

    These features of the historical investment pattern seem to be best cap-

tured by the perfect foresight simulations with varying interest rates.

Investment in the simulation with myopic expectations and no adjustment costs

(Table ic) responds too quickly to tax changes, producing anomalous results
                                    —35—


such as negative equipment investment in 1966, the historical peak. Even when

adjustment costs are added to the myopic run (Table 2c), the model fails to

replicate the equipment investment boom in the 1960's and the decline of

structures investment in the 1970's. The perfect foresight simulation which

ignores business-cycle effects (Table 3c) also fails to capture the magnitude

of these swings; in fact, this run shows structures investment to accelerate

in 1981. The perfect foresight simulation with variable marginal products but

a constant interest rate (Table 6b) produces results similarly at odds with

investment data.

     Tables 6a and 6c, which report simulations in which firms have perfect

foresight and interest rates vary, contain investment series which appear to

track actual investment most closely. Equipment investment rises strongly in

the mid-1960's, though not as much as in the historical data. In both simula-

tions the late 1970's are very hard on structures investment. The results in

Table 6c, which come from a simulation in which both interest rates and margi-

nal products vary, show a very deep drop in structures investment at the end

of the 1970's. The magnitude of investment swings in Table 6c makes Table 6a

(perfect foresight and variable interest rates only) appear to mirror histori-

cal investment most closely. While these comparisons do not constitute a sta-

tistical test, they suggest the importance of interest rate movements to any

tax—based explanation of investment behavior. It is possible that with a dif-

ferent specification of adjustment costs business-cycle influences on marginal

products could provide useful realism as well.
                                    —36—


Conclusions


          This paper represents a first attempt to characterize investment

behavior in a manner that allows one to consider the effects of different tax

policy changes on the investment behavior of firms and the value of their

shares. Our simulated results indicate how important the presence of

adjustment costs are when one wishes to consider how an abrupt change in the

economic environment will affect the firm. This is particularly true if tax

changes are either announced or anticipated.

          There are a number of extensions one would wish to consider before

using simulations such as these for more than illustrative purposes. We hope

to include in the simulations the effects of changes in personal taxes, given

some assumptions about the determination of the firm's financial policy.

Perhaps most important and yet most difficult is the task of obtaining better

estimates of the production parameters. The adjustment cost terms, about

which we have the least empirical evidence, are, unfortunately, possibly the

most crucial to our results. We hope to remedy this situation. At the same

time, sensitivity analysis of the simulation results would be desirable.
                                                    Notes


     1. Nor is the frequency of policy changes unique to the U.S. Britain
has shown an equal variability of tax provisions (as described in Poterba and
Summers 1983 and King and Fullerton 1984), most recently (in 1984) scaling
back provisions for the expensing of investment and lowering the corporate tax
rate, as most reform proposals being discussed currently in the U.S. would.

     2. For ease of notation, we write A(.) as a function of                       alone rather
than all its arguments.

     3. The constancy of it is not assumed in our analysis, and is used here
only for the sake of simplicity. Some of the later simulations examine the
effect of allowing r to vary.

     4. Note that net investment is simply the first difference of the capi-
tal stock.

       5. This and other tax data used is described in Appendix A of Auerbach
(1983).

     6. We note in passing that if the rate of growth of the capital stock,
say g, equals the interest rate, then this latter set of weights corresponds
to using investment flow weights rather than capital stock weights.

     7. This would be true only if, among other things, the effective tax
rates on all forms of capital were equal, which they were not.

     8. This assumption is required if we are to consider the investment
decisions separately for structures and equipment.

     9. This marginal product definition is required for G to be homogeneous
of degree one with respect to its inputs.

     10. The internal consistency of this procedure can be verified by noting
that, given this solution for a1 and a2, Rg(K1 +
                                                 K2) equals
                 —
                     A(I)   —          —
[(a1 +    a2)F                  61K1       62K2] which, by (12) and (13), equals
                        -
[v   - Rg(K3 + K4)          (1-a1-a2)F].       Thus, the net returns to capital equal value

added less the competitive return to labor.

     11. In future work, we intend to examine how well simulations with time—
varying parameters do in predicting observed movements in the marginal product
of capital rg.

     12. Denison (1979, p. 92) finds all factors and productivity changes
other than capital growth to contribute exactly 3.OO annually to the growth
of U.S. nonresidential business output over the period 1948-1973. While this
figure includes noncorporate businesses and would presumably be lower over the
period of the 1970ts, it suggests that 3 is the most reasonable choice for
the exogenous growth rate of noncapital inputs.

     13. These include the presence of returns to other factors in the firm's
market value, heterogeneity of the capital stock and the standard use of a tax
adjustment based on myopia of expectations about future changes in the tax
law. Some evidence in support of this comes from the finding by Abel and
Blanchard that the coefficient of investment on adjusted q rises substantially
(to between .084 and .121 for quarterly data) when the variable is purged of
that part of its variation estimated to have come from fluctuations in the
cost of capital (as opposed to profitability).

     14. This is also trivially true of the real, required after-tax return,
which in the first four simulations is set equal to a constant rate of 4.
This simplification is relaxed in the later simulations.

     15. When expectations are nonmyopic, q' is defined consistently, with
future changes in T taken into account.

     16. To see this, note that, except for q', the cost of capital in (7)
depends on parameters exogenous to the firm.

     17. See Auerbach (1984) for a further discussion of the plan. It is
quite similar in character to the one introduced by the U.S. Treasury in
November, 1984.

     18. The main differences with calculations reported in Auerbach (1983)
are the alternative method of aggregation and the use of the current value,
rather than an ARIMA forecast, of the inflation rate. These variations do not
have an important impact on the results.

     19. The much stronger effect of changes in the inflation rate on the tax
rate for equipment is due to its having a shorter lifetime than structures.
See Auerbach (1979) for further discussion.

      20. These results are quite similar to those presented in Auerbach
 (1983).

      21. For example, the reduced problem of tax losses that would result
 from the removal of front-loading of depreciation allowances that causes a
 temporal mismatch between taxable cash flows and tax deductions.
                                    References


Abel, A. (1982), "Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a
     q Model of Investment", Journal of Monetary Economics, 9, March, 353-373.

Abel, A. and 0. Blanchard (1984), "The Present Value of Profits and Cyclical
     Movements in Investment", mimeo.

Auerbach, A. (1979), "Inflation and the Choice of Asset Life", Journal of
     Political Economy, 87, June, 621-638.

_____ (1983), "Corporate Taxation in the United States", Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 14:2, 451-505.

_____ (1984), "The Fair Tax Act and Corporate Investment: An Evaluation of the
     Bradley-Gephardt Proposal", niimeo.

Auerbach, A. and 0. Jorgenson (1980), "Inflation-Proof Depreciation of
     Assets", Harvard Business Review, 58, September/October, 113-118.

Auerbach, A. and L. Kotlikoff (1983), "Investment Versus Savings Incentives:
     The Size of the 'Bang for the Buck' and the Potential for Self-Financing
     Business Tax Cuts", in L. Meyer, ed., The Economic Consequences of
     Government Deficits, (Boston: Kluwer—Nijhoff), 121—154.

Bischoff, C. (1971), "The Effect of Alternative Lag Distributions", in G.
     Fromm, ed., Tax Incentives and Capital Spending, (Washington: Brookings),
     61—130.

Chirinko, R. and R. Eisner (1983), "Tax Policy and Investment in Major U.S.
     Macroeconometric Models", Journal of Public Economics, 20, March,
     139—166.

Clark, P. (1979), "Investment in the 1970s: Theory, Performance, and
     Prediction", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 10:1, 73-113.

Denison, E. (1979), Accounting for Slower Economic Growth: The United States
     in the 1970's, (Washington: Brookings).

Eisner, R. and N. Nadiri (1968), "Investment Behavior and Neoclassical
     Theory", Review of Economics and Statistics, 50, August, 369-382.

Feldstein, M., J. Poterba, and L. Dicks-Mireaux (1983), "The Effective Tax
     Rate and the Pretax Rate of Return", Journal of Public Economics, 21,
     129—158.

Gravelle, J. (1981), "The Social Cost of Nonneutral Taxation: Estimates for
     Nonresidential Capital", in C. Hulton, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and
     the Taxation of Income from Capital, (Washington: Urban Institute),
     239-250.
Hall, R. and 0. Jorgenson (1967), "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior",
     American Econonijc Review, 57, June, 391-414.

_____ and    —
             — (1971), "Application of the Theory of Optimum Capital
     Accumulation", in G. Fromm, ed., Tax Incentives and Capital Spending,
     9-60.

Hulten, C. and F. Wykoff (1981), "The Measurement of Economic Depreciation",
     in C. Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income
     from Capital, 81—125.

Hulten, C., F. Wykoff, and J. Robertson (1982), "Corporate Tax Policy and
     Economic Growth: An Analysis of the 1981 and 1982 Acts", (Washington:
     Urban Institute).

Jorgenson, 0. and M. Sullivan (1981), "Inflation and Corporate Capital
     Recovery", in C. Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation
     of Income from Captial, 171-237.

King, M. and 0. Fullerton (1984), eds., The Taxation of Income from Capital,
     (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1977), "Rules Versus Discretion: The
     Inconsistency of Optimal Plans", Journal of Political Economy, 85, June,
     473—491.

Poterba, J. and L. Summers (1983), "Dividend Taxes, Corporate Investment, and
     q", Journal of Public Economics, 22, November, 135-167.

Summers, L. (1981), "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q Theory Approach",
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 12:1, 67-127.
                 Table la
        Effective Tax Rates: Myopic


Year    Equipment            Structures

1953      0.61                  0.51
1954      0.54                  0.46
1955      0.57                  0.49
1956      0.60                  0.51
1957      0.60                  0.51
1958      0.56                  0.47
1959      0.58                  0.49
1960      0.56                  0.47
1961      0.53                  0.45
1962      0.37                  0.43
1963      0.36                  0.42
1964      0.26                  0.41
1965      0.27                  0.40
1966      0.29                  0.41
1967     0.47                   0.43
1968     0.36                   0.47
1969     0.44                   0.49
1970     0.56                   0.50
1971     0.53                   0.47
 1972    0.08                   0.43
1973     0.17                   0.45
1974     0.30                   0.48
1975     0.31                   0.48
1976     0.13                   0.41
1977     0.16                   0.42
1978     0.23                   0.44
1979     0.27                   0.44
1980     0.26                   0.43
1981     0.02                   0.35
1982    -0.19                   0.30
1983    —0.14                   0.26
1984    -0.14                   0.29
1985     0.27                   0.28
1986     0.27                   0.28
1987     0.27                   0.28
1988     0.27                   0.28
1989     0.27                   0.28
1990     0.27                   0.28
                         Table lb
         Average q: Myopic (No Adjustment Costs)


Year        Equipment         Structures           Total

1953          1.18               1.00              1.05
1954          1.15               0.95              1.01
1955          1.14               0.96              1.02
1956          1.14               0.97              1.02
1957          1.14               0.97              1.02
1958          1.13               0.96              1.01
1959          1.12               0.97              1.01
1960          1.11               0.96              1.00
1961          1.10               0.96              1.00
1962          1.00               0.92              0.94
1963          0.99               0.92              0.94
1964
I   rr        0.96
              U•
                                 0.92
                                 U•
                                                   0.93
                                                   0.93
1966          0.94               0.92              0.93
1967         0.98                0.92              0.95
 1968        0.91                0.91              0.91
1969         0.91                0.91              0.91
1970         0.96                0.94              0.94
1971         0.95                0.93              0.94
1972         0.84                0.91              0.88
1973         0.86                0.92              0.90
1974         0.85                0.92              0.90
1975         0.83                0.92              0.89
1976         0.81                0.88              0.85
1977         0.82                0.89              0.86
1978         0.81                0.89              0.86
1979         0.81                0.89              0.86
1980         0.81                0.89              0.87
1981         0.76                0.82              0.81
1982         0.77                0.83              0.81
1983         0.77                0.83              0.81
1984         0.76                0.85              0.82
1985         0.91                0.96              0.95
1986         0.87                0.95              0.94
1987         0.86                0.96              0.93
1988         0.85                0.95              0.92
1989         0.86                0.95              0.92
1990         0.87                0.95              0.92
                       Table ic
        Investment: Myopic (No Adjustment Costs)


Year      Equipment           Structures            Total

1953         0.030               0.030              0.030
1954         0.130               0.145              0.141
1955       -0.011              -0.014              -0.013
1956       -0.011              -0.012              —0.011
1957         0.022              0.023               0.023
1958         0.101              0.104               0.103
1959         0.002              0.000               0.001
1960         0.062              0.065               0.064
1961         0.065              0.069               0.067
1962         0.178              0.095               0.122
1963         0.043              0.046               0.045
 1964       0.111               0.082               O-
1965        0.023               0.033               0.030
1966       -0.004              -0.006              -0.006
1967       -0.088              -0.011              -0.037
1968        0.062              —0.050              -0.014
1969        0.007               0.007               0.007
1970       -0.058               0.024              -0.005
1971        0.056               0.063               0.061
1972        0.338               0.160               0.218
1973       -0.011              -0.011              -0.011
1974       —0.035              -0.030              —0.032
1975        0.021               0.022               0.022
1976        0.143               0.173               0.162
1977        0.015               0.014               0.014
1978       -0.006              —0.005              -0.005
1979        0.028               0.043               0.038
1980        0.018               0.019               0.019
1981        0.158               0.181               0.173
1982        0.010               0.110               0.106
1983        0.014               0.049               0.037
1984        0.024              -0.002               0.006
1985       -0.097               0.022              -0.018
1986        0.030               0.030               0.030
1987        0.030               0.030               0.030
1988        0.030               0.030               0.030
1989        0.030               0.030               0.030
1990        0.030               0.030               0.030
                        Table 2b
       Avera9e q: Myopic (With Adjustment Costs)


Year       Equipment          Structures           Total

1953        1.35                 1.17              1.23
1954        1.36                1.17               1.23
1955        1.34                1.16               1.21
1956        1.32                1.14               1.19
1957        1.31                1.14               1.19
1958        1.33                1.16               1.21
1959        1.31                1.15               1.20
1960        1.31                1.16               1.20
1961        1.31                1.17               1.21
1962        1.26                1.14               1.18
1963        1.25                1.15               1.18
1964        1.25                1.17               1.20
            1.24                1.18               1.20
1966        1.21                1.17               1.18
1967        1.20                1.17               1.17
1968        1.13                1.08               1.09
1969        Lii                 1.07               1 .08
1970        1.13                1.12               1.12
1971        1.14                1.14               1.14
1972        1.13                1.14               1.14
1973        1.11                1.13               1.12
1974        1 .08               1.11               1.10
1975        1.06                1.11               1.09
1976        1.07                1.13               1.11
1977        1.06                1.12               1.10
1978        1.04                1.11               1.08
1979        1.05                1.13               1.10
1980        1.04                1.12               1.09
1981        1.03                1.11               1.08
1982        1.04                1.12               1.09
1983        1.03                1.13               1.10
1984        1.02                1.12               1.09
1985        1.18                1.33               1.28
1986        1.17                1.31               1.27
1987        1.16                1.30               1.26
1988        1.15                1.29               1.25
1989        1.15                1.28               1.24
1990        1.16                1.27               1.24
                         Table 2c
        Investment: Myopic (With Adjustment Costs)


Year       Equipment          Structures             Total

 1953         0.030              0.030               0.030
 1954         0.035              0.039               0.038
 1955         0.033              0.034               0.034
 1956         0.030              0.031               0.030
 1957         0.030              0.030               0.030
 1958         0.034              0.036               0.035
 1959         0.032              0.033               0.033
 1960         0.034              0.035               0.035
 1961         0.035              0.038               0.037
 1962         0.048              0.039               0.042
 1963        0.047               0.040               0.042
 1964        0.051               o -                 A AA
 1965        0.048               0.042               0.044
 1966        0.045               0.036               0.040
 1967        0.031               0.038               0.036
 1968        0.042               0.026               0.031
 1969        0.039               0.025               0.030
 1970        0.026               0.029               0.028
1971         0.027               0.032               0.030
 1972        0.051               0.035               0.041
1973         0.047               0.032               0.037
1974         0.042               0.028               0.033
1975         0.040               0.028               0.033
1976         0.041               0.040               0.040
1977         0.040               0.038               0.039
1978         0.038               0.035               0.036
1979         0.036               0.036               0.036
1980         0.035               0.035               0.035
1981         0.039               0.045               0.043
1982         0.041               0.049               0.046
1983         0.039               0.051               0.046
1984         0.040               0.046               0.044
1985         0.026               0.048               0.040
1986         0.028               0.045               0.039
1987         0.029               0.044               0.039
1988         0.030               0.042               0.038
1989         0.031               0.040               0.037
1990         0.032               0.039               0.037
                      Table 3a
       Effective Tax Rates: Perfect Foresight


Year        Equipment            Structures

1953          0.61                  0.54
1954          0.59                  0.52
1955          0.59                  0.52
1956          0.59                  0.52
1957          0.58                  0.51
1958          0.58                  0.51
1959          0.57                  0.50
1960          0.57                  0.50
1961          0.65                  0.53
1962          0.49                  0.48
1963          0.49                  0.48
1964          0.41                  0.47
1965          0.42                  0.47
1966          0.29                  0.46
1967          0.60                  0.50
1968          0.46                  0.48
1969          0.29                  0.45
1970          0.47                  0.47
1971          0.60                  0.49
1972          0.33                  0.47
1973          0.35                  0.47
1974          0.33                  0.47
1975          0.28                  0.48
1976          0.26                  0.45
1977          0.26                  0.45
1978          0.23                  0.45
1979          0.23                  0.44
1980          0.30                  0.49
1981          0.03                  0.39
1982         —0.14                  0.37
1983          0.03                  0.35
1984          0.02                  0.37
1985          0.21                  0.36
1986          0.22                  0.36
1987          0.23                  0.35
1988          0.24                  0.34
1989          0.25                  0.34
1990          0.25                  0.33
                    Table 3b
          Average q: Perfect Foresight


Year    Equipment         Structures     Total

 1953     1.33               1.18         1.23
 1954     1.37               1.20         1.25
 1955     1.37               1.20         1.25
 1956     1.37               1.20         1.25
 1957     1.37               1.20         1.25
 1958     1.36               1.20         1.25
 1959     1.35               1.20         1.24
 1960     1.33               1.19         1.24
 1961     1.32               1.19         1.23
 1962     1.29               1.18         1.22
 1963     1.27               1.18         1.21
 1964     1.24               1.17         1.19
 1965     1.21               1.16        1.18
 1966    1.19                1.16        1.17
 1967    1.18                1.15        1.16
 1968    1.18                1.15        1.16
1969     1.17                1.15        1.15
 1970    1.16                1.15        1.15
1971     1.16                1.14        1.15
1972     1.13                1.14        1.14
1973     1.12               1.13         1.13
1974     1.11               1.13         1.13
1975     1.11               1.14         1.13
1976     1.09               1.13         1.12
1977     1.08               1.13         1.11
1978     1.07               1.12         1.11
1979     1.06               1.12         1.10
1980     1.06               1.12         1.10
1981     1.05               1.12         1.09
1982     1.04               1.12         1.09
1983     1.04               1.11         1.09
1984     1.02               1.11         1.08
1985     1.14               1.29         1.24
1986     1.13               1.28         1.23
1987     1.12               1.27         1.22
1988     1.12               1.26         1.22
1989     1.12               1.26         1.21
1990     1.13               1.25         1.21
                    Table 3c
         Investment: Perfect Foresight


Year   Equipment         Structures      Total

1953    0.030               0.030        0.030
1954    0.039               0.042        0.041
1955    0.038               0.041        0.040
1956    0.039               0.041        0.040
1957    0.039               0.041        0.040
1958    0.039               0.040        0.040
1959    0.039               0.040        0.039
1960    0.039               0.039        0.039
1961    0.038               0.038        0.038
1962    0.055               0.043        0.047
1963    0.051               0.042        0.045
1964    0.050               0.039        0.043
1QRS                        fl rr.7      n na
1966    0.042               0.036        0.038
1967    0.028               0.035        0.033
1968    0.046               0.039        0.041
1969    0.045               0.039        0.041
1970    0.029               0.033        0.032
1971    0.030               0.031        0.031
1972    0.052               0.032        0.039
1973    0.049               0.032        0.038
1974    0.048               0.032        0.038
1975    0.048               0.033        0.038
1976    0.043               0.038        0.040
1977    0.043               0.038        0.040
1978    0.042               0.038        0.039
1979    0.040               0.036        0.038
1980    0.041               0.037        0.038
1981    0.044               0.049        0.047
1982    0.043               0.049        0.047
1983    0.038               0.047        0.044
1984    0.039               0.043        0.041
1985    0.022               0.043        0.036
1986    0.023               0.042        0.035
1987    0.024               0.041        0.035
1988    0.025               0.040        0.035
1989    0.026               0.039        0.035
1990    0.027               0.038        0.034
                        Table 4
                Gradual Tax Reform: 1985
                  (Perfect Foresight)


Year   Equipment             Structures    Total


                   Effective Tax Rates

1984    0.02                       0.37
1985    024                        0.40
1986    0.22                       0.37
1987    0.21                       0.35
1988    0.20                       0.33
1989    0.23                       0.33
1990    0.24                       0.32


                       Average q
1984    1.02                    1.11       1.08
1985    1.15                    1.28       1.24
1986    1.13                    1.27       1.22
1987    1.12                    1.26       1.22
1988    1.11                    1.25       1.2].
1989    1.11                    1.25       1.20
1990    1.12                    1.24       1.20


                       Investment

1984    0.039                   0.043      0.041
1985    0.033                   0.053      0.046
1986    0.030                   0.048      0.042
1987    0.028                   0.044      0.038
1988    0.026                   0.041      0.035
1989    0.024                   0.038      0.033
1990    0.025                   0.037      0.033
                              Table 5
   Total Average q: Interest Rate and Marginal Product Variants
                        (Perfect Foresight)



           Interest Rate      Marginal Product   Interest rate and Marg.
Year           Varies              Varies            Product Vary

1953
1954             1.29                1.24                 1.28
1955             1.29                1.24                 1.28
1956             1.28                1.23                 1.26
1957             1.27                1.23                 1.25
1958             1.25                1.23                 1.24
1959             1.25                1.23                 1.25
1960             1.25                1.23                 1.25
1961             1.25                1.23                 1.25
1Q               I                   1a.——                12
1963             1.25                1.21                 1.25
1964             1.24                1.19                 1.24
1965             1.24                1.16                 1.23
1966             1.24                1.14                 1.21
1967             1.24                1.12                 1.19
1958             1.24                1.11                 1.18
1969             1.23                1.09                 1.16
1970             1.23                1.08                 1.15
1971             1.22                1.08                 1.14
1972             1.19                1.07                 1.12
1973             1.18                1.06                 1.10
1974             1.17                1.06                 1.09
1975             1.14                1.06                  1.07
1976             1.09                1.06                 1.02
1977             1.06                1.05                 1.00
1978             1.04                1.05                 0.97
1979             1.01                1.04                 0.94
1980             0.99                1.04                 0.92
1981             0.96                1.04                 0.90
1982             0.94                1.05                 0.89
1983             0.94                1.05                 0.90
1984             0.94                1.05                 0.90
1985             1.10                1.21                 1.05
1986             1.10                1.20                 1.06
1987             1.10                1.20                 1.06
1988             1.11                1.19                 1.07
1989             1.11                1.19                 1.07
1990             1.12                1.19                 1.08
                       Table 6a
         Investment: Variable Interest Rates
                 (Perfect foresight)



Year    Equipment           Structures         Total

1953      0.030                0.030            0.030
1954      0.044                0.048            0.047
1955      0.043                0.048            0.046
1956      0.042                0.046            0.045
1957      0.041                0.043            0.042
1958      0.039                0.041            0.040
1959      0.039                0.040            0.040
1960      0.040                0.040            0.040
1961      0.041                0.041            0.041
1962      0.059
lr        u.u                  0.048
                                0.048
                                                0.052
                                                0.051
 1964     0.057                 0.047           0.050
 1965      0.052                0.046           0.048
 1966      0.051                0.047           0.049
 1967      0.038                0.048           0.044
 1968      0.058                0.053           0.055
 1969      0.055                0.052           0.053
1970       0.039                0.044          0.042
 1971      0.038                0.042          0.040
1972       0.058               0.040           0.047
1973      0.055                0.039           0.045
1974       0.052               0.039           0.044
1975      0.047                0.035           0.039
1976      0.038                0.030           0.033
1977      0.034                0.027           0.030
1978      0.031                0.023           0.026
1979      0.026                0.018           0.021
1980      0.024                0.014           0.018
1981      0.025                0.023           0.024
1982      0.023                0.020           0.021
1983      0.019                0.019           0.019
1984      0.020                0.015           0.017
1985      0.008                0.022           0.016
1986      0.010                0.022           0.017
1987      0.013                0.022           0.018
1988      0.014                0.022           0.019
1989      0.016                0.022           0.020
1990      0.018                0.023           0.021
                      Table 6b
       Investment: Variable Marginal Products
                 (Perfect Foresight)



Year   Equipment           Structures           Total

1953     0.030                0.030             0.030
1954     0.037                0.040             0.039
1955     0.038                0.039             0.039
1956     0.036                0.038             0.037
1957     0.036                0.038             0.037
1958     0.037                0.037             0.037
1959     0.040                0.037             0.038
1960     0.040                0.037             0.038
1961     0.041                0.036             0.037
1962     0.058                0.041             0.047
1963     O.0S4                n -   flAfl       fl   flA
1964     0.051                0.036             0.041
1965     0.043                0.033             0.036
1966     0.037                0.031             0.033
1967     0.019                0.028             0.025
1968     0.034                0.030             0.031
1969     0.030                0.029             0.029
1970     0.014                0.023             0.020
1971     0.016                0.022             0.020
1972     0.038                0.022             0.028
1973     0.035                0.021             0.026
1974     0.033                0.022             0.026
1975     0.035                0.023             0.027
1976     0.032                0.028             0.030
1977     0.031                0.028             0.029
1978     0.029                0.028             0.028
1979     0.027                0.027             0.027
1980     0.029                0.027             0.028
1981     0.034                0.039             0.037
1982     0.034                0.039             0.038
1983     0.032                0.039             0.036
1984     0.033                0.036             0.035
1985     0.016                0.038             0.030
1986     0.018                0.037             0.030
1987     0.020                0.036             0.030
1988     0.021                0.035             0.030
1989     0.023                0.035             0.030
1990     0.024                0.034             0.031
                               Table 6c
       Investment: Variable Interest Rates and Marginal Products
                          (Perfect Foresight)



Year            Equipment           Structures              Total

1953              0.030                0.030                0.030
1954              0.043                0.046                0.045
1955              0.043                0.046                0.045
1956              0.039                0.043                0.042
1957              0.037                0.041                0.040
1958              0.037                0.038                0.038
1959              0.040                0.039                0.040
1960              0.041                0.039                0.039
1961              0.043                0.040                0.041
1962              0.063                0.047                0.053
1963              0.060                0.047                0.052
1964              0.058                0.045                0.050
1965              0.051                0.043                0.046
1966              0.046                0.042                0.043
1967              0.029                0.040                0.036
1968              0.045                0.044                0.044
1969              0.040                0.041                0.041
1970              0.023                0.033                0.030
1971              0.024                0.032                0.029
1972              0.044                0.030                0.035
1973              0.040                0.028                0.033
1974              0.037                0.027                0.031
1975              0.034                0.025                0.028
1976              0.027                0.021                0.023
1977              0.023                0.017                0.020
1978              0.019                0.013                0.015
1979              0.014                0.008                0.010
1980              0.012                0.005                0.008
1981              0.016                0.015                0.015
1982              0.014                0.012                0.013
1983              0.012                0.012                0.012
1984              0.015                0.009                0.011
1985              0.003                0.016                0.011
1986              0.005                0.016                0.012
1987              0.006                0.017                0.013
1988              0.010                0.017                0.015
1989              0.012                0.018                0.016
1990              0.014                0.018                0.017
                      Table 7
        U.S. Corporate Investment, 1953-1984


Year   Equipment          Structures           Total

1953     0.051               0.037             0.042
1954     0.036               0.035             0.035
1955     0.047               0.041             0.043
1956     0.050               0.043             0.045
1957     0.049               0.039             0.043
1958     0.005               0.031             0.021
1959     0.023               0.028             0.026
1960     0.030               0.032             0.031
1961     0.020               0.032             0.028
1962     0.035               0.033             0.034
1963     0.041               0.031             0.034
1964     0.060               0.034             0.043
1965     0.081               0.044             0.057
1966     0.096               0.045             0.064
1967     0.070               0.041             0.052
1968     0.070               0.041             0.052
1969     0.073               0.041             0.054
1970     0.052               0.036             0.042
1971     0.036               0.030             0.032
1972     0.053               0.031             0.040
1973     0.076               0.034             0.051
1974     0.066               0.030             0.045
1975     0.028               0.021             0.024
1976     0.034               0.020             0.026
1977     0.054               0.018             0.034
1978     0.062               0.022             0.040
1979     0.062               0.027             0.043
1980     0.054               0.024             0.038
1981     0.052               0.023             0.036
1982     0.029               0.021             0.024
1983     0.036               0.014             0.024
1984     0.067               0.027             0.046
