NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTIVE AND EQUITABLE ADOPTION OF OPT-IN RESIDENTIAL DYNAMIC
ELECTRICITY PRICING
Severin Borenstein
Working Paper 18037
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18037

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

I am grateful to Walter Graf and Erica Myers for excellent research assistance. I benefitted from comments
from Andrew Bell, Lucas Davis, Walter Graf, Stephen Holland, Paul Joskow, Rob Letzler, Karen
Notsund, Michael Sullivan and seminar participants at the 2011 POWER conference at U.C. Berkeley,
PG\&E's Regulatory Relations Division, the California Energy Commission, and the California Public
Utilities Commission. Thanks also to Andrew Bell, Amrit Singh, Zeynep Yucei, and Jane Yura at
PG&E for making the load reasearch dataset available and explaining it to me, and to Russ Garwacki,
Cyrus Sorooshian, and Ron Watts for doing the same at Southern California Edison. This research
was supported in part by a research gift from Microsoft and in part under a research contract from
the California Energy Commission to the Energy Institute at Haas. Any remaining errors are solely
my responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Severin Borenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Effective and Equitable Adoption of Opt-In Residential Dynamic Electricity Pricing
Severin Borenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18037
May 2012
JEL No. L51,L94
ABSTRACT
While time-varying retail electricity pricing is very popular with economists, that support is not matched
among regulators and consumers. Many papers have been written estimating and extolling the societal
benefits of time-varying rates -- especially dynamic rates that change on a day's notice or less. Yet,
such tariffs have been almost completely absent in the residential sector. In this paper, I present a
potential approach to implementing an opt-in dynamic pricing plan that would be equitable to both
customers who choose the rate and to those who choose to remain on a default flat-rate tariff. The
approach bases the dynamic and the flat rate on the same underlying cost structure, and minimizes
cross-subsidies between the two groups. I study the potential distributional impact of such a tariff
structure using hourly consumption data for stratified random samples of customers from California's
two largest utilities. I find that low-income households would, on average, see almost no change in
their bills, while low-consumption households would see their bills decline somewhat and high-consumption
households would see their bills rise. I also show that the opt-in approach is unlikely to increase the
flat rate charged to other customers by more than a few percentage points. I then discuss the most
common approach to implementing dynamic electricity pricing -- critical-peak pricing -- and suggest
how it might be designed to more accurately match retail price spikes with periods of true supply shortages.
Finally, I study the incentive problems created by an alternative program in growing use that pays
customers to reduce their consumption on peak usage days.

Severin Borenstein
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
borenste@haas.berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
Economists who study electricity markets are virtually unanimous in arguing that timevarying retail pricing for electricity would improve the efficiency of electricity systems
and would lower the overall cost of meeting electricity demand. Because it is very costly
to store electricity, wholesale electricity prices can vary greatly – in some cases by more
than an order of magnitude – over a single day.2 Yet, retail prices almost never change
over such short time periods, so retail customers are given little or no incentive to reduce
consumption when power is expensive. Retail prices that more accurately reflect the timevarying true cost of power would shift usage to lower cost periods in a way that would
ultimately improve the economic welfare of customers. Besides the direct cost impact,
greater adoption of dynamic pricing – time-varying pricing where prices are set a day or
less in advance in order to be responsive to system conditions – could potentially also help
in integration of intermittent generation resources, such as wind or solar power, and could
improve the cost-effectiveness of electric vehicles.
Yet, only the simplest forms of time-varying pricing have been widely adopted for commercial and industrial customers in the U.S. – time-of-use pricing, in which a price for
the peak period and a different price for the off-peak period (and in some cases, a third
“shoulder” period) are set for months or even a year at a time. At the residential level,
time-varying pricing has gotten very little traction in any form. In this paper, I examine the
reasons for customer resistance to time-varying pricing, and particularly dynamic pricing,
and I present an approach to opt-in dynamic pricing that might increase acceptance and
also improve the effectiveness of the pricing. I then study the likely distributional impact
of dynamic pricing using stratified random samples of residential electricity customers in
the service territories of Pacific Gas & Electric and Southern California Edison, the two
largest utilities California.

2. Variations In Retail Electricity Pricing
Throughout the United States, most residential customers purchase electricity at a simple constant price per kilowatt-hour that does not vary over time within a billing period.
A significant minority – probably around one-third – of customers face “increasing-block
2

California wholesale electricity prices have been much less volatile in recent years – due to excess
capacity, the operating reserve policies of the CAISO, and other factors – but in other states, and in
California in earlier years, price movements of a factor of 10 would not be considered extraordinary.

2

pricing,” under which marginal price rises as the customer consumes more power over the
billing period. The prices, however, do not depend on the time at which the power is consumed. Such time-insensitive rates probably cover over 99% of residential customers and
I’m aware of no place in the U.S. that time-sensitive rates are the default for residential
customers.
In terms of time-sensitive retail electricity tariffs, the opposite end of the spectrum would
be a real-time pricing (RTP) structure in which the price varies hour to hour (or even more
frequently) reflecting changes in the wholesale price of electricity. RTP prices are dynamic,
meaning that they are set at the time the transaction takes place or shortly before hand
(generally less than 36 hours). Many hybrid forms lie between these approaches. The most
common is time-of-use (TOU) pricing in which different prices are charged at different
times of the day or week. TOU pricing is not dynamic; the prices and the times at which
those prices will be charged are set months in advance, so they cannot reflect shorter run
variation in the supply/demand balance of the wholesale electricity market.
Critical Peak Pricing (CPP) is a hybrid form that combines a static price structure,
either constant or TOU, with occasional dynamic departures from the tariff when demand
is high and power is in short supply. Typically, a CPP structure permits the utility to
declare a critical peak day up to 10-15 days per year. Such declarations normally mean
that the price of electricity during the peak consumption part of the day (e.g., 1 PM-7
PM) is many times higher than it would otherwise be. A representative CPP tariff would,
for example, start with a TOU price structure of $0.15/kWh from 10 AM to 7 PM on
weekdays and $0.06/kWh at all other times. Then, up to 15 days per year, the seller may
declare a critical peak day, with that declaration usually made in the afternoon of the
previous day. On the critical peak day, the price during the peak period (or some part of
it) might be, for instance, $0.75/kWh. CPP can provide some of the same incentives as
RTP – particularly to conserve power when the supply is very constrained – while being
substantially simpler and easier to explain to customers than RTP. One disadvantage of
CPP is the coarseness of pricing; that the price is either set at a “normal” level or at an
extremely high level. There is nothing in between. Also, the limited number of times that
the utility can call a critical peak day creates strategic concerns in declaring a critical peak
that are not necessarily well-aligned with efficient pricing. I return to this issue below.

3

3. Benefits of Dynamic Pricing
The focus of this paper is not on measuring or listing the benefits of dynamic pricing. I
and others have written extensively on the subject.3 Still, it is worth recalling what those
benefits are that motivate sellers and regulators to consider implementing more complex
pricing structures than consumers are used to.
The primary attraction of dynamic pricing is that it allows the seller to give buyers
an incentive to reduce consumption at times when the market supply is strained and
potentially to substitute towards consumption at times when supply is plentiful. By doing
so, it lowers the need for investment in reserve generation capacity for which the capital
costs and some maintenance costs must be paid regardless of how frequently the capacity
is used. At the same time, it raises the capacity factor of the generation capacity in the
market, thus lowering the capital costs per kilowatt-hour. My previous research suggest
that savings of at least 3%-5% of electricity generation costs are likely to result.4
A second benefit of dynamic pricing is that giving customers an incentive to reduce
consumption when wholesale prices skyrocket reduces the incentive of a seller with market
power to withhold electricity from the market in order to drive up prices. The incentive
of a seller to reduce output depends in large part on the elasticity of demand. If buyers
respond rapidly to price increases by significantly lowering the quantity they demand, then
withholding output will cause the producer to lose sales without getting much benefit in
higher prices. With static retail prices, consumers have no incentive at all to respond if
a seller tries to exercise market power in the wholesale market, because the retail price
they see is unaffected. In contrast, if the utility purchasing wholesale power can credibly
threaten to reduce its purchases if the price goes up – which is only credible if the end-use
customers of the utility reduce their consumption – then sellers will find the exercise of
market power to be less profitable. Had the California market been using dynamic pricing
during the electricity crisis of 2000-2001, sellers would have found it less profitable to
withhold power in order to drive up prices and as a result would have been less inclined
to do so.5
Both of these benefits follow from the fact that dynamic pricing allows the retail prices
3

See Borenstein (2005a), Borenstein (2005b), and Faruqui and Hledik (2009) among others.

4

See Borenstein (2005a).

5

See Borenstein (2002) and Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002).

4

that consumers face to more accurately reflect the true acquisition costs in the upstream
wholesale market. The cost of acquiring power in the wholesale market can fluctuate
by many times the average price within just a few hours. The extreme price fluctuations
result from the fact that electricity is not storable, demand and supply fluctuate somewhat
unpredictably, demand tends to be fairly insensitive to price, and supply may also be priceinsensitive if the market is already using nearly all of the available capacity. These factors
are exacerbated when there is a seller in the market who is large enough to influence price,
because that seller’s incentive to withhold power is greatest at the time when the market
is already strained.
Dynamic pricing also has the potential to help integrate intermittent generation resources
such as wind power and solar power. Integration of these intermittent resources generally
focuses on the need for standby generation to compensate for exogenous fluctuations in
their output. Dynamic pricing makes it possible to more closely match demand fluctuations
to the exogenous supply fluctuations and, thus, reduce the system costs of integrating these
renewable energy sources.
The social returns to dynamic pricing may also increase with the widening adoption of
electric vehicles. Scheduling vehicle charging not just at off-peak times, but using a more
sophisticated response to fluctuating prices could both reduce the cost of charging these
vehicles and reduce the cost of accommodating them on the grid.

4. Barriers to Acceptance of Dynamic Pricing
Though the benefits from dynamic pricing are potentially quite significant, the tariff
changes necessary for adoption often face substantial barriers. Some of the objections
relate to the cost of infrastructure and associated concerns: the cost of purchasing and
installing smart meters, the accuracy of such meters, the need for changes in back-office
billing systems, as well as health, security and privacy issues that smart meters may or may
not raise. I do not address these issues. Some of these are no doubt reasonable concerns,
but I do not claim to have any insights that shed light on them.
I focus on the economic impact on consumers of implementing dynamic pricing, assuming
that the smart meters are already installed and that the infrastructure-related concerns
have been addressed. Even setting aside infrastructure issues, recent experience has made
it clear that at least some consumer groups will object specifically to implementation of
5

dynamic pricing.6
Probably the most common objection to implementation of a dynamic pricing tariff is
the concern that it would be mandatory, or even that it would be the default option,
requiring non-participants to take an action in order to opt out. While mandatory or
default dynamic pricing tariff may be good policy, it is clear that it is unlikely to be
politically acceptable for residential customers in the near future. Therefore, I begin from
the constraint that the new tariff will have to be offered on an opt-in basis, and most
customers will likely remain on the default tariff in the short run.
Even opt-in dynamic pricing faces resistance from some organizations who are concerned
that consumers will not understand the nature of the tariff they are opting in to. In
particular, some households with high consumption at peak times could find that their
bills are much higher on average under the new tariff. Closely related, there is concern
that even if the average bill of a household is no higher, it will be substantially more
volatile, which the household will have difficulty managing.7
These concerns are voiced particularly strongly on behalf of low-income households who
have less resilience to financial shocks. More generally, organizations representing lowincome customers express concern that dynamic pricing will raise the electricity bills of
the needy on average, or at least that a significant subgroup will be made worse off.
In the next section of this paper, I suggest approaches to transitioning to residential dynamic pricing that attempt to address these concerns, an opt-in dynamic pricing tariff that
may help to elicit substantial participation by well-informed customers. The implementation minimizes the risks that a customer with peaky demand will make a costly mistake
of choosing to be on the dynamic tariff. It also offers options to minimize the volatility
of bills for customers who do choose to switch to the dynamic pricing tariff. Finally, I
study empirically the potential impact of such a transition and new tariff on customers in
general and low-income customers in particular.
Before proceeding, however, it is worthwhile to state explicitly four fundamental goals
of residential tariff design:8
6

See Alexander (2010) for a recent discussion of consumer concerns.

7

See Maryland Public Service Commission, September 2010, pp. 49-51 and American Association of
Retired Persons et al, August 2010.

8

These are a subset of the principles presented by Bonbright, Danielsen, and Kamerschen (1961).

6

I. Revenue Adequacy: In aggregate, revenues raised from residential tariffs should cover
the cost of providing power to the residential sector.9
II. Efficient Pricing: Prices should reflect the marginal cost of providing power at the time
and location it is provided so that the customer has efficient incentives to consume.
III. Minimizing Volatility: Customers should be able to insure in some way against excessive volatility in their electricity bills.
IV. No Undue Cross-Subsidization: Persistent cross subsidies among customers should be
avoided except to the extent that they are designed explicitly to help customers who are
deemed needy or disadvantaged.
Traditional flat rate residential tariffs have done a relatively good job of meeting goals
I and III, but have performed poorly on II and IV. Flat rates have been designed to meet
expected cost forecasts, though they obviously are not so reliable when fuel or wholesale
electricity costs shift significantly in the middle of the typical multi-year ratemaking period.
In those cases, revenue shortfalls or surpluses are generally offset by adjustments in the
flat rate over succeeding tariff periods. While this approach assures revenue adequacy and
reduces volatility of bills, it results in prices that can deviate substantially from efficient
levels and it introduces substantial cross subsidies: (a) between those who consume at peak
versus off-peak, (b) between those who consume in high-cost locations versus those who
consume in low-cost locations, and (c) between those who consume in a period in which
retail prices are not adequate to cover wholesale costs and a period in which they are set
above costs to make up for previous shortfalls.
Taking as given that the utility will be allowed to recover its costs over some reasonable
time horizon, any cost that is not paid by one customer must be absorbed by others.
Traditional flat rate tariffs result in a form of inter-household group pooling of revenue
responsibility. Just as with insurance, however, all customers do not necessarily impose
the same average costs on the system. If rates do not recognize these differences it results
in cross-subsidies and inefficient incentives. In particular, if consumers do not face the
true time-varying cost of consuming electricity, they have too much incentive to consume
at peak times and too little incentive to shift usage to off-peak times.
9

In reality, there may be some cross subsidy among residential, commercial and industrial customers,
but taking that cross subsidy as given, revenues must cover the cost of power plus or minus the cross
subsidy. This doesn’t change the fundamental goal.

7

5. An Equitable Opt-in Dynamic Tariff
A significant source of opposition to dynamic tariffs is that they are perceived as punishing the customers by charging high prices just when the customer needs the power most.
Of course, if those high prices reflect truly high costs, then these costs aren’t avoided by
charging flat rates for power; payment is just shifted away from peak hours and spread
over all hours. In fact, those costs are exacerbated, because the failure to raise retail prices
at peak times undermines the normal demand response when supply is limited and the
wholesale price rises. To make dynamic prices appealing on equity grounds, it has to be
made clear that high peak prices aren’t avoided through flat retail tariffs.
An opt-in dynamic tariff is likely to achieve greater actual and perceived equity if both
the dynamic tariff and the flat-rate tariff are based on the same publicly posted underlying
costs. To begin, the utility and regulator could agree on a dynamic retail tariff that
would be revenue-adequate if all customers were on it. Ideally, this tariff would reflect
true marginal costs during each period or at least reflect marginal cost differentials across
periods, but that is not critical for the implementation and it may not be possible to reflect
marginal costs exactly given the long-run break-even requirements of the utility.
To fix ideas, assume that costs are deemed to be fairly approximated by a CPP rate
with an off-peak, peak and critical peak price per kWh, pop , pp and pcp . For those who
opt in to the dynamic rate, they would face these prices during the relevant periods. For
those who choose not to opt in, they would face a flat rate pf = αoppop + αp pp + αcppcp ,
where αop + αp + αcp = 1. The α weights are the shares of the total consumption by
the entire flat-rate pool of customers that occurs within each of the three rate periods. If
historical hourly consumption data were available for each customer – which will be the
case if there is a significant lag between installation of smart meters and any large-scale
dynamic residential pricing program – then the utility could estimate pf fairly precisely
once it knew which customers had opted to join the dynamic rate and which had not.
If such historical load pattern data were not available at first, then pf could initially be
set at the previous flat rate until sufficient load data were collected. In either case, this
approach requires that the utility have access to actual load pattern data of customers in
each group, which is now possible with smart meters.10
10

Some systems may allow customers to opt out of receiving a smart meter, which would eliminate their
opportunity to participate in time-varying pricing. Implementation of this approach, however, requires
only that the utility can accurately estimate the aggregate load pattern of those who do not opt in

8

Fundamentally, this approach bases the rates for all customers on the same underlying
price structure: the dynamic price structure that reflects the costs of the utility. Customers
who opt in face that structure directly. All customers, however, continue to have the option
to be part of a group of customers that form a sort of “flat rate” insurance pool: individually
each customer in the pool pays the same flat rate regardless of his or her consumption
pattern, but in aggregate this group of customers pays a total revenue that covers the
groups’ pattern of electricity consumption as if it were charged under the dynamic rate.
As with insurance, the costs paid by the two groups will be influenced by both selection
effects and incentive effects. The selection effect would manifest as customers with relatively lower consumption at peak (and critical peak) times disproportionately opting in
to the dynamic rate, while those who consume a greater share of their total consumption
during peak times would disproportionately opt to stay on the flat rate. The incentive
effect would result in those who opt in to the dynamic rate achieving savings by shifting
consumption out of peak periods, while those who choose the flat rate would have no
incentive to shift their load.
This opt-in approach does not raise the coercion issues of a mandatory or opt-out dynamic tariff. It has the equity and credibility appeal that all consumers face the same
publicly posted underlying rates. Some choose to be in the opt-in group that pays those
rates directly while others choose to be in the default group that pools consumption of the
group across all hours and customers in the group, and pays the average rate for the default
group as a whole. Customers in the default group are protected from price volatility, but
give up the ability to reduce their bills by shifting consumption across hours.
In practice, the selection effect at first is likely to be more significant than the incentive effect in determining electricity bills. Households with flatter load profiles – due to
household demographics, work schedules, local weather, or other factors – are more likely
to opt in and the opt-in group is quite likely to pay a lower overall average price than
the customers in the default group. Still, any customer has the option of choosing to be
in either group. Over time, the incentive effect will at least partially offset the impact of
selection on the default group. As customers on dynamic ratse respond to peak prices,
the system operation becomes more efficient and the utility’s cost per kWh falls. Those

to time-varying pricing. Utilities have done this in most or all areas with retail choice by collecting
real-time consumption data on a stratified random sample of households.

9

system operation savings can be shared by all of the utility’s customers.11
In theory, the selection effect can be so strong as to create an “unraveling”: the flat rate
rises as customers with lower-cost load profiles shift to the dynamic rate, which causes the
dynamic rate to be economic for a larger share of customers, which causes still more to
switch to the dynamic tariff, which raises the flat rate further as the population still on
the flat rate becomes a set of customers with ever higher-cost load profiles. In Borenstein
(2005b), I referred to this as the virtuous cycle by which the unwinding of the current
cross-subsidy (towards customers who consume disproportionately at peak times) yields
stronger incentives to switch to the dynamic rate and further isolates the highest-cost
customers on the flat rate.
In practice, this unraveling may not boost the adoption of dynamic tariffs very much. As
I show later, the bill change from a switch to the dynamic tariff may not be very large even
for customers with fairly flat load profiles, so many may choose to skip the small expected
gain. Of course, if those customers can also respond by lowering their consumption at
peaks times, then their savings could be substantially enhanced. That sort of efficient
response of consumption to prices, however, will tend to lower, not increase, the price for
customers who remain on the default flat rate, as shown by Borenstein and Holland (2005).
Encouraging Positive Selection with Shadow Billing
Perhaps the greatest barrier to opt-in dynamic tariffs is low enrollment rates. Customers
are likely to stick with the default rate if they don’t see tangible benefits available with
the opt-in. To better inform customers of their options, a straightforward technique that
has now been used in many pilot programs is shadow billing. In this application, it means
that every bill would include information about how much the customer would owe if they
had been on the alternative tariff. This would be the case regardless of which tariff the
customer chooses: a customer on the default rate would receive a bill that has an additional
line saying something like, “If you had been on the opt-in dynamic tariff, your bill this
month would have been $78.41.” while a customer signed up for the dynamic tariff gets an
additional line on his bill saying, “If you had been on the default flat tariff, your bill this
month would have been $78.41.” In either case, the customer can compare his bill to what
he would have owed had he been on the alternative rate schedule. For more information,
the customer could be referred to a bill insert or to a website where the details of the tariff
11

See Borenstein and Holland (2005).

10

choices would be spelled out.
Over time, the customer is likely to notice how his bill compares to the alternative and
migrate towards the tariff that offers the lower bill. The comparison will likely vary month
to month and may be affected by seasons and weather. Thus, it would be valuable to
add the same information for the last 12 months, e.g., “In the last 12 months your total
electricity bill was $722.14 on the default flat tariff. If you had instead been on the opt-in
dynamic tariff, your bill would have been $698.11 over the same period.”12
Making these comparisons easier will lead those with flatter load profiles to shift to the
dynamic tariff in greater numbers. When customers do switch, or when they consider
switching, it will be important to inform them of how they can increase their savings
by shifting consumption away from high-price periods. Shadow bills are also likely to
cause some customers on the dynamic tariff to switch back to the default. These will of
course include customers who would pay less under the flat rate, but it will also include
some customers who pay less under the dynamic tariff, but not enough less to justify the
savings: “I’m going to all this trouble to lower my peak consumption and I’m only saving
$2 a month? Forget it.” Still, overall it is almost certain to help demystify the opt-in
dynamic tariff and encourage some customers to join, maybe not after the first month, but
after many months of seeing that they would have paid less on the dynamic tariff.
Shadow billing has another value in addressing concerns about bill shock. Bills under the
dynamic tariff will be more volatile, as I show empirically later. If a customer is exposed
to shadow bills for some period of time before going on the opt-in tariff, he will see that
volatility. That might be enough to discourage him from opting in, which would be the
efficient choice if the volatility is truly costly. Still, it also might allow the customer to see
that the volatility may lead to surprisingly high bills in some months, but leads to lower
bills in most months and overall leaves him better off. That is likely to reduce distress if
the customer does opt in to the dynamic rate and then receives an unusually high bill.
Addressing Bill Volatility: Hedging and Borrowing
Even if customers are relatively well informed and choose to opt in to dynamic pricing,
12

For customers who have lived in their dwelling less than 12 months, one alternative would be to offer
the comparison for the period since the customer moved in. Alternatively, the utility could offer an
estimated comparison based on a simple statistical model of usage and dwelling characteristics. It might
also be useful to offer a website with a questionnaire that helps the customer determine whether he is
likely to save money by switching to the dynamic tariff.

11

they will still face increased bill volatility. As discussed later, the increase in volatility from
a CPP tariff may not be great enough to create significant adverse reaction, especially given
that all participants have opted in. Still, some customers will not be that well informed
even after the efforts of the utility, and well-informed customers might still be put off by
the increased volatility and might choose not to enroll. Thus, strategies for reducing the
impact of bill volatility are still relevant.
The most obvious strategy from an economic point of view is hedging. With a CPP
program, hedging could be done fairly simply, though even a very simple hedge strategy
may still be more complex than the typical customer can understand or wants to deal with.
The straightforward hedge for customers on CPP would be for them to purchase fixedquantity peak-period electricity contracts at a fixed price – a price slightly higher than
the peak-period price and much lower than the critical-peak price – which cover all peak
periods, both critical peak and not (because no one knows which days will be a critical peak
at the time the contract is signed). Such a fixed-quantity hedge contract would supply, for
example, 12 kWh during the peak period for every non-holiday weekday of the summer
period. For peak periods in which no critical peak is called, this has a slight negative
impact on the customer since she is buying some fixed quantity of power at a higher price
than the peak retail price she would otherwise face. For critical-peak periods, this has a
positive effect for the customer because she has pre-purchased some power for the day at
a price that is much lower than the price she would otherwise face. In both cases, the
customer pays the CPP tariff rate (peak price if it is a normal day, critical peak price if it
is a critical peak day) for any power consumed above the hedge quantity and is rebated at
the CPP tariff rate for any excess power in the hedge contract that she doesn’t consume.
Thus, the marginal incentive to consume is the same as for customers on CPP who do not
hedge.
The main question in such hedge contracts would be the quantity that a household
should hedge. If the goal is to minimize bill volatility, the customer would probably want
to hedge at least 100% of her average peak-period consumption if her consumption is
positively correlated with the price, i.e., if she consumes more on critical-peak days than
on days with a normal peak period.13 Unfortunately, if consumers don’t distinguish clearly
between the average price they pay and the price they face on the margin, such hedging is
13

Borenstein (2007a) discusses optimal hedging when consumption quantity is correlated with price.

12

likely to reduce the impact of the price increase on critical-peak days.14 Even if they do
understand the distinction, hedging activity of this sort may seem like more effort than is
warranted given the limited risk.
That doesn’t mean that a low-hassle protection against unanticipated bill spikes would
not have appeal. One type that is already offered by most utilities goes by “Balanced
Payment Plan,” “Level Pay Plan” or similar terms. These plans estimate the customer’s
expected bill over the year and require payment each month of the estimated average bill
rather than the actual bill for that month. These programs have some true-up mechanism
– in some cases at the end of the year, in other cases periodic adjustments when actual
consumption deviates too much from predicted consumption – so that the customer ends
up paying the same as she would have without the plan. While these plans do help to
smooth payments for cash-constrained customers, they also probably reduce the salience
of energy bills – particularly the causal impact that the actual bill liability incurred could
have on behavior – and thus might lead to less efficient consumption behavior.
An alternative plan might be able to capture the payment smoothing without losing
the bill salience. Rather than an automatic bill smoothing, this approach, which I will
call a “SnapCredit” plan, would kick in only if a customer had an unusually high bill.
Essentially, a SnapCredit plan would automatically offer to allow the customer to defer
paying the unusually high component of the bill. The deferred payment would then be
spread over the next 6 or 12 months. Each month the customer would still receive a bill
for the energy consumed that month, which indicates the cost that will eventually have to
be paid. But if the bill were more than a certain amount above the expected bill for that
month (using basically the same tools currently used to calculate expected bills for plans
like Level Pay), the bill would include an offer of the SnapCredit option to pay only the
expected amount and to have the remainder spread out over some number of months in
the future. The utility could charge interest or not, though most Level Pay plans do not
charge interest.15
Like the Level Pay plans, the SnapCredit plan would help consumers who are surprised
by a higher-than-expected bill in one month and do not have the financial cushion to

14

“I don’t need to adjust my thermostat since I’ve already purchased most of the power I need today.”

15

Letzler (2010) presents an alternative approach that in effect has customers by default save up for CPP
days and then draw down on those savings to reduce bill shocks when CPP calls occur.

13

manage the shock. Unlike the Level Pay plan, this would not create a general cognitive
disconnect between consumption and payment. The full bill would still be presented as the
default payment, so the customer’s attention would still be focused first on that liability.
But the consumer would have the option to spread out payments on the component of
the bill that is higher than expected. To exercise the SnapCredit option, however, the
consumer would have to take an action in order to choose a payment that is lower than the
full bill. This would reduce the loss of salience that results from the Level Pay plans, but
would still address the problem of bill shock.16 There is no reason to limit this approach
to customers on a dynamic tariff, but it would be helpful in addressing the concerns that
the dynamic tariff will result in volatile bills – particularly, under CPP, in the months in
which multiple critical peaks are called on very hot days.17
Dynamic Pricing and Increasing-Block Tariffs
In many parts of the country, and nowhere so much as in California, a major barrier to time-varying pricing is the pre-existing complexity of retail tariffs. In particular,
about one-third of U.S. utilities use an increasing-block pricing schedule in which the
marginal price per kilowatt-hour increases with the customer’s consumption quantity during a billing period.18 Among customers of California’s three large investor-owned utilities,
the marginal price for about the highest-use one-third of residential users is nearly three
times the marginal price for lowest-use one-third of consumers. The differential pricing
under IBP has no cost basis; it has been supported based on the beliefs that it encourages
conservation and it benefits low-income customers. Ito (2010) demonstrates that it probably has nearly zero net impact on total consumption. Borenstein (forthcoming) shows that
it does result in a modest average savings for low-income customers, about $5 per month
after accounting for other subsidies to poor households.
IBP also complicates implementation of time-varying pricing. The two largest California
16

In practice, a SnapCredit program would look a lot like a credit card payment plan in which the customer
has the option of paying off the full liability or carrying a loan into the next period, though the utility
would probably offer lower interest rates than credit card companies.

17

Both hedging and SnapCredit could be used indefinitely to reduce bill volatility. Utilities already use
“bill protection” to reduce the customer’s risk from switching to a new tariff. Under bill protection,
the utility caps the customer’s bill under the new tariff at the bill they would have owed under the
old tariff. This structure undermines the price incentives to some extent and it necessarily reduces the
utility’s revenue, so it is used only as an aid to transition, typically for the first year on the new tariff.

18

Borenstein (forthcoming) analyzes in detail the efficiency and equity issues associated with such pricing.

14

utilities have taken different approaches to this issue in their small opt-in TOU pricing
programs. PG&E has implemented a fairly complex tariff that combines TOU and IBP
by creating separate IBP tariffs for peak and off-peak consumption. The exact points
of consumption at which the marginal price increases, however, depends in part on the
share of the customer’s consumption that is during peak and off-peak periods, and these
shares change with every billing period. The result is a tariff that both the utility and
the regulator recognize as hopelessly confusing. SCE dropped the IBP concept entirely for
its opt-in TOU rate, but it maintained it for its default rate that is not time-varying. As
documented in Borenstein (2007c), this set up perverse incentives for any large customer
to avoid the high prices on the highest IBP tiers by switching to the TOU rate, while
making the TOU rate completely uneconomic for any small customer.
Nonetheless, it is worth pointing out that time-varying pricing can be combined with
IBP. PG&E’s SmartRate tariff is a good illustration of how it can be done. Rather than
time-varying retail prices in the basic tariff, the time-variation is designed as a revenueneutral set of rebates and surcharges that can be considered independent of the underlying
tariff. Off-peak periods have rebates that are paid with every kilowatt-hour used in those
periods, while peak and critical peak periods have surcharges.
To follow the concept of the equitable opt-in dynamic pricing tariff I have described,
however, it would be very important that the rebates and surcharges are set so that
they would be revenue-neutral if all customers signed up for the program. In practice,
customers with flatter load profiles will volunteer in greater numbers, which means that
this program will run a deficit. That deficit would be offset not by changing the rates for
the rebate/surcharge program, but by raising the rate for the basic electricity tariff.
The accounting for this program can be (and in PG&E’s case is) done entirely separately
from the underlying IBP tariff. This doesn’t remedy the distortions introduced by IBP, but
it shows that IBP need not be a complete barrier to introducing more economic pricing.
Opt-In Dynamic Pricing and Retail Direct Access
The tariff design I study here assumes a single monopoly utility supplier. In parts of
the country, however, residential customers are able to choose a retail energy supplier that
is different from the local distribution company. Competitive retail suppliers are free to
price with whatever time variation they want, though most have primarily offered flat-rate
tariffs.
15

In most such areas, there is still a dominant regulated incumbent utility that offers
retail power. That utility is usually the default provider and the provider of last resort
if no other seller can reach a mutually agreeable contract with the customer. In such
situations, the pricing approach described here could still be used by the incumbent utility.
In fact, such an approach would make the incumbent utility less vulnerable to “cherry
picking” by competitive retailers than under a single flat-rate tariff. If the utility offers
only a flat-rate tariff with no option for time-varying pricing, retail competitors may be
particularly interested in acquiring customers with less-expensive consumption profiles.
Whether competitors actually have such an incentive depends on whether the retailer is
required to obtain power to match the actual time-varying consumption pattern of its
customers or just a standardized consumption profile that is assumed for all residential
customers. Presumably, if the technology is in place to allow the incumbent to bill on a
time-varying basis, then competitive retailers would be able to do the same.

Impact on Low-Income Customers
One of the most frequent policy concerns about dynamic pricing is the impact it will
have on low-income customers. Of course, no policy change will have a uniformly positive
or negative impact on poor households. Within that group of customers there will be
some winners and some losers. An opt-in dynamic tariff with a default flat rate has two
potential types of losers. Those who stay with the flat rate are likely to see an increase in
that rate as customers who consume less on-peak disproportionately switch to the dynamic
tariff. This increase, the result of ending the current cross-subsidy of consumption at peak
times, would probably be quite modest, as shown in the next section. Whether it would
disproportionately impact rich or poor customers is hard to know. A good starting point,
however, is to ask whether the poor typically consume a larger share of their power during
peak periods. As discussed below, the answer seems to be that the poor are not very
different from the rest of residential customers.
The second set of potential losers are those who opt in to dynamic pricing and find
that they have costly load profiles so that they would have been better off staying on
the flat rate. Shadow billing seems likely to be an effective mechanism for informing such
customers of their mistakes, either before they switch or after. A plan like SnapCredit may
help customers deal with mistakes in the short run while still making clear the full cost
of the chosen plan and alternative. The combination of shadow billing and SnapCredit
16

wouldn’t eliminate all concerns about customer mistakes, but it seems likely to make them
less common and less costly.

6. Empirical Investigation of Bill Changes Under Dynamic Pricing
In order to study the likely magnitudes of the policies and responses discussed above,
one needs to know the demand patterns of households. To pursue this issue, the U.C.
Energy Institute obtained access under confidentiality agreements to the load research
data that Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) and Southern California Edison (SCE) have
collected on stratified random samples of residential customers for many years. The data
made available to UCEI cover 2006-2009 for PG&E and 2004-2008 for SCE.
The data include hourly consumption of each customer. The only other information in
the dataset is the approximate location of the premise (9-digit Zip Code or census block
group), the rate schedule the premise is on and whether it is a single-family or multi-family
dwelling. The data are cross-indexed to general population demographic categories – by
climate area/average daily usage category/dwelling type – in order to develop observation
weights that make the sample reflective of the population as a whole. The data also include
ID numbers that allow matching of the same premise across days. The number of premises
tracked varies year to year ranging from 859 in 2006 to 1034 in 2009 for PG&E and 2761 in
2004 to 2845 in 2008 for SCE. Some premises drop out and others are added over time.19
Because the data are stratified random samples that oversample some categories of
customers relative to others, weighting observation is important in studying population
average effects. All of the results reported here are based on use of all premise-years in
the data in which a premise’s average consumption is at least 1 kWh/day. For each year,
the included premises are then weighted to be representative of the premise shares within
each climate area/average daily usage/dwelling type category in the entire population.
Results are very similar doing the same analyses using only premises that are missing in
no more than 30 days out of all days in each utility’s sample, and appropriately re-weighting
19

Premises stay in the dataset even when the occupant changes. Thus, I am assuming the basic characteristics of the premise occupants doesn’t change. Two premises were dropped from the PG&E data.
The consumption reported for these two customers was many times higher than all other customers. It
is not clear if these are estates, if these customers also have commercial operations, or if these are data
errors. The results would be slightly skewed by these two households and it would be difficult to report
data by segments without potentially revealing information about these households.

17

Table 1: Hypothetical Tariffs

observations.20 An observation is a premise-year in the statistical analysis I report. All
statistical tests reported cluster observations from the same premise to avoid understating
standard errors.
Hypothetical Critical-Peak Pricing, Time-of-Use and Flat Tariffs
In order to analyze the switch from a flat tariff to time-varying alternatives, I create for
each utility dataset revenue-neutral alternatives to the flat rate, under the assumption of
zero price elasticity. Obviously, this ignores the potential behavioral changes that timevarying tariffs could incent. It also ignores the fact that in reality these customers are
on increasing-block tariffs, which vary depending on region and whether the customer has
electric heat. In addition, some of these customers are already on a TOU tariff. Less
than 1% of customers are on TOU for both utilities, but they are greatly over-sampled in
PG&E, making up 10% of households in the load research data. The weighting corrects
20

Results change somewhat, though the basic conclusions remain the same, if all observations are equally
weighted, though such analyses end up substantially over-representing some regions and types of
customers.

18

for this over-sampling.21 Below, I incorporate demand elasticities, but consistent with my
own previous work, and demand elasticity estimates by others, this does not significantly
change the distributional impact analysis.22
I start from a systemwide flat rate for residential customers of $0.16/kWh, the approximate rate in 2006. I then create a time-of-use rate that results in the same total revenue
over the full sample as under the flat rate for the (weighted) stratified sample and the
same price ratios between TOU periods. For both utilities, I set the peak, off-peak and
shoulder times as shown in Table 1.23 This is intended to be a fairly representative TOU
tariff, though it does not exactly match the timing of the PG&E or SCE rates. The rates
and time periods are shown in Table 1.24
To create hypothetical CPP tariffs, I start from the hypothetical TOU rates and then
identify the 15 highest-demand days of the year in the California ISO system for each year
based on the day-ahead forecast of demand, because CPP days generally are called on the
prior day. Those are designated as CPP days and the price is set to $0.80/kWh for the
peak period on those days, which are all during the summer tariff period. All other rates
are readjusted downward to maintain revenue neutrality and maintain the price ratios
between all other periods. The CPP rates are also shown in Table 1. Under the zeroelasticity assumption, I then calculate the bills of each customer for each month under
TOU, CPP and the flat rate.
This is clearly not a perfect simulation of the CPP tariff. The days actually called as CPP
21

Throughout the analysis I also ignore the fact that about 20%-25% of the customers are on CARE
rates, reduced rates for low-income customers. Consumption patterns of this group do not seem to
differ from other low-income customers as indicated by the statistical matching methods below. Still,
the existence of the CARE program serves as a reminder that special protections could be given to
low-income customers who opt in to a dynamic tariff.

22

See Borenstein (2007b) and Borenstein (forthcoming). Longer run demand elasticities may be somewhat
higher than analyzed in these papers, but those estimated long-run elasticities are based on general rate
level changes, not for the short-term price variation of dynamic pricing. The elasticities implied by
analyses of, for instance, the California Statewide Pricing Pilot, as well as programs in Anaheim and
Washington, D.C. are consistent with those simulated in my earlier distributional studies. See Faruqui
and George (2005), Herter, McAuliffe and Rosenfeld (2005), Letzler (2009), Wolak (2006) and Wolak
(2010).

23

The rates shown are set to be revenue-neutral under the stratified sample weighting that includes all
premises, as described above. The TOU and CPP prices are slightly different when the sample is limited
to those premises for which there are data on nearly all days.

24

PG&E differs in that it also has a Saturday shoulder period. SCE differs in that its summer critical
peak used for peak-time rebates is only 2-6pm on weekdays. I use the PG&E summer CPP period, May
1 through October 31.

19

PG&E

SCE

Figure 1: Distributions of Annual Bill Change from Flat-rate to Mandatory TOU or CPP
may not turn out to be the 15 highest-demand of the year (based on day-ahead forecast),
because the utility has imperfect information about the weather for the remainder of the
year when it makes a CPP call. Below I consider the problem of calling CPP days when
there is uncertainty about future weather and a fixed number of days to be called each
year. I am also ignoring the issue of increasing-block pricing (IBP), which was discussed
earlier.
Winners and Losers Under Mandatory TOU and CPP Pricing
While it will likely be many years, if ever, before mandatory time-varying pricing is
implemented for residential customers, it is still a useful starting point to examine how
such a change would affect customers. Besides suggesting the impact of a mandatory
time-varying tariff, it also sheds light on the incentives customers would have under an
equitable opt-in dynamic tariff as described earlier. Figure 1 shows the overall distribution
of rate changes across customers of PG&E and SCE. Most notable is the relatively narrow
range of bill changes. For PG&E with no demand response to the change in rates, 96.2%
of customers would see their bill in a given year change by less than 20% up or down under
20

CPP compared to a flat rate, 3.1% would see an increase of more than 20% and 0.7%
would see a decrease of more than 20%. The figures are about the same with SCE: 96.9%
of customers would see their bill change by less than 20% up or down under CPP, 2.6%
would see an increase of more than 20% and 0.5% would see a decrease of more than 20%.
Not surprisingly, the changes are less dispersed under TOU.
Table 2 breaks out the average change that would result from CPP by location, average
usage and income.25 Not surprisingly, coastal areas would benefit since they consume
a smaller share of their power on hot summer days. The further east one goes within
each utility’s territory the more the mandatory CPP program modeled here would raise
bills. These average differences are all highly statistically significant. If it were politically
desirable, this difference in average impact would be easy to offset with rate variation by
location, or less-expensive baseline power (or higher baselines, as is done now) in the inland
area.
The second column shows changes broken out by quintiles of average daily usage among
the households in the load research data. Low-usage households consume a smaller share of
their power at peak times which results in a more favorable impact from a switch to CPP.
The pattern is statistically significant for both utilities. Still, the percentage differences
are fairly small with the exception of about a 4% average bill decline for the lowest-usage
customers, and even that reflects a quite small dollar change in the monthly bill. This
correlation with usage in part reflects the fact that low-usage households are more likely
to be coastal, but that does not explain the entire difference. The difference across usagelevel households remains statistically significant even after controlling for average region
differences. High usage households still see bill changes that are about three percentage
points higher than the lowest usage households.26
The third and fourth columns present results from two different approaches to matching
25

These average changes in the percentage bill are weighted by the premise’s daily usage, so higher-use
households within each category are weighted more heavily. This corresponds approximately to the
change in the aggregate consumption of premises in the category. It avoids the representation that
the average household in every income category saves money, which is driven by the fact that lowconsumption households are more likely to save money.

26

This is based on regressions of the percentage bill change on dummy variables for each climate region
and all usage categories except the lowest. For both utilities, an F-test of the usage category dummies
rejects pooling across the categories. For SCE, the two highest-usage categories are estimated to average
3.5% (next to highest category) and 3.2% (highest category) higher bill changes than the lowest category,
both significant at 1%. For PGE, the differences are estimated to be 2.2% (significant at 1%) and 0.4%
(not statistically significant), respectively.

21

Table 2: Distributions of Average Annual Bill Change By Region, Usage and Income
Notes: Percentage changes are weighted by the premise’s daily usage, so higher-use households within
each category are weighted more heavily. For PG&E “Coastal” is regions is baseline regions Q, T and V,
“Hills” is region X, “Inner Valley” is regions P and S, and “Outer Valley” is regions R, W, Y, and Z. For
SCE “Coastal” is climate regions 10 and 16, “Inland” is 13, 14, and 17, and “Desert” is 15.
∗ ∗ ∗ =significantly different from zero at 1%, ∗∗ =significant at 5%, ∗ =significant at 10%

of households in the dataset to income brackets. The typical approach to such questions
has been to assign to each household the median household income of the census block
group (CBG) in which the household resides, but Borenstein (forthcoming) shows that
there is a great deal of heterogeneity within CBGs. Borenstein (forthcoming) presents two
different approaches to handling this heterogeneity. The first approach randomly assigns
households to income brackets within the CBG. This “random rank” method incorporates
the distribution of income within the CBG, but implicitly assumes that there is no correlation between income and the variable of interest, in this case the bill change that results
from a shift to dynamic pricing. The second approach rank orders households by a predictor variable – in this case, electricity consumption – and then allocates households to
the income brackets in ascending (or descending, depending on the believed correlation)
order. This “usage rank” approach almost certainly overstates the correlation between
income and electricity usage. Under either approach, each premise is assigned to one of
five income brackets that are approximately quintiles. As table 2 shows, neither approach
suggests that a change to TOU or CPP would substantially alter the average electricity
bills of households in the lowest income brackets. In fact, for all of the income brackets,
22

the estimated average change is 2.1% or less and most are under 1%.27
The result does not appear to support the common view that lower-income customers
have substantially less peaky load profiles, at least in the service territories of these two
utilities. In fact, it appears that the average impact is close to neutral for households in
all five income brackets. By region, however, the story is slightly more consistent with
the common view. Wealthier customers in both utilities’ territories live disproportionately
on the coast. After controlling for climate regions, the lowest-income bracket does better
than the wealthiest. The difference is statistically significant in SCE territory, but the
difference is only 1.5%-2.5%. Estimates for PG&E indicate a difference of less than 1%
and are still not statistically significant. Overall, there seems to be very little systematic
relationship between household income and the impact of CPP.28 These results contrast
with those of Faruqui, Sergici and Palmer (2010) who find that low-income customers have
less peaky demand than other customers. The authors, however, don’t disclose where the
“large urban utility” they study is located or whether there is a correlation between climate
and household income within that utility’s service territory.
Incorporating Demand Response
Incorporating demand elasticity in response to time-varying prices has the anticipated
effect of making dynamic pricing more attractive. Results similar to Table 2, but presenting
changes in consumer surplus (as a percentage of the flat-rate bill) rather than bills, are
shown in the appendix table A1 for elasticities of 0, -0.1 and -0.3. In the short run, it seems
unlikely that the elasticity of demand is larger than -0.1 (in absolute value) in response
to time-varying prices, but as technology for price-responsive demand improves, including
more automated demand adjustment in response to prices, the -0.3 elasticity might be a
better guide.
To calculate the impact of demand elasticity, I assume that each premise, i, has a demand
in each hour h of qih = aih ph . The parameter aih is inferred from the premise’s actual
consumption in the hour assuming that they faced the flat rate of $0.16/kWh. Their
change in quantity consumed and consumer surplus as prices change is then calculated
27

Households are matched to CBGs based on their 9-digit Zip Code. Of the 2845 SCE premises, 130 have
only 5-digit Zip Code information. For these premises, the same procedure as described here was used,
except at the 5-digit Zip Code level.

28

These changes are also small enough that even small changes in behavior on average would cause the
average bill in every income bracket to decline.

23

along the constant-elasticity demand curve.
Implicitly, this calculation assumes that changes in quantity in response to the CPP rate
impose marginal costs that are exactly equal to the CPP rate in that hour, so the change
in quantity does not require a tariff change in order to hold constant the profit level of the
utility. The assumption is not entirely benign – reducing peak demand would likely lower
long-run marginal cost at peak times and might raise long-run marginal cost off peak –
but it is a reasonable starting point for this calculation.
The impact of -0.1 elasticity is fairly modest, increasing the average consumer surplus
of nearly all categories by between 1% and 2% of the flat-rate bill. The impact of -0.3
elasticity is about three times larger in most categories. That would be sufficient to make
the average consumer in all usage and income categories better off, as well as in all regions
except the sparsely populated eastern-most regions of each utility’s service territory.
This is not to suggest that all households would be winners from a shift to mandatory
CPP. With no elasticity, the share of premises made better off in any given year by a switch
to CPP is 63% in PG&E territory and 64% in SCE territory. With a demand elasticity of
-0.3, those figures increase to 76% and 77%, respectively, still leaving nearly one-quarter
of customers at least slightly worse off.
Bill Volatility
Besides concerns about increases in a customer’s overall cost of electricity, there is also
concern about bill volatility under TOU and CPP rates. Some of the increase in bill
volatility would be predictable: TOU and CPP rates are higher in the summer than
the winter, which systematically increases summer bills and lowers winter bills. Some of
the increased volatility is due to consumption shocks that are correlated with high-price
periods. To examine the change in bill volatility – using households that are in the sample
for at least 36 months – I estimate the volatility of each household’s bills under the flat
rate tariff, the TOU and the CPP. The bars in figure 2 present the coefficient of variation
in monthly bills under the alternative tariffs for each utility.29
The results show that just switching to TOU raises bill volatility substantially even
though the rate is not dynamic. For PG&E, average bill volatility, measured by the
29

To be precise, this is the estimated standard deviation (corrected for degrees of freedom) of daily average
electricity cost in a month (to adjust for varying number of days) divided by the sample mean daily
average electricity cost for each household.

24

PG&E

SCE

Figure 2: Measures of Monthly Bill Volatility Under Alternative Tariffs

coefficient of variation, increases 14% with a switch from flat tariff to TOU. Going the
next step to a CPP rate increases the volatility more, a 28% increase over the flat rate.
The changes are somewhat larger for SCE, increasing 24% with a change to TOU and 44%
with a switch to CPP.
Bill volatility, however, can be decomposed into predictable seasonal variation and unpredictable – or at least less obviously predictable – variation. For each premise, I do
this by regressing monthly bills under each tariff on month-of-year dummy variables to remove predictable monthly variation. After correcting for degrees of freedom lost from the
monthly dummies, the standard deviation of the residuals from these regressions represent
the component of bill variation for that premise that is not predictable from the seasonal
variation. The bars in figure 2 show the average values from this decomposition. While
TOU and CPP do make bills more volatile, the decomposition shows that most of that
additional volatility is the predictable effect of charging higher average rates during summer afternoons, when consumption is also higher on average. Taking out the predictable
volatility – the cross-hatched part of the bars – the difference is much smaller. For PG&E,
TOU increases average residual bill volatility by 3% over flat rates, while CPP increases
25

residual volatility by 12%. For SCE, the increase is 6% under TOU and 19% under CPP.
These results suggest that the majority of bill volatility under CPP – and the great majority of unpredictable bill volatility – would be caused by quantity volatility, not by price
variation. Even a flat-rate tariff doesn’t eliminate the risk due to quantity volatility.
The Potential Impact of Opt-in Dynamic Pricing
As explained earlier, if the flat rate for customers who don’t opt in to dynamic pricing is
set equitably, as defined earlier, the flat rate is likely to rise, because customers who don’t
opt in will disproportionately be those who consume more at peak times. The price for the
group of customers who remain on the flat rate will increase due to this selection effect.
There is also an efficiency effect that tends to lower the flat rate in the long run as capital
adjusts, as shown by Borenstein and Holland (2005), but that effect may be small if the
response of CPP customers to peak prices is modest. For this analysis, I focus solely on
the selection effect, so this could be thought of as a worst-case scenario for the customers
who do not opt in.
It’s impossible to predict what share of customers will opt in at first and exactly what
part of the distribution they will be drawn from, but experience suggests that most people
will choose not to join, at least at first. Counterbalancing the potential savings is the higher
bill volatility, and the hassle factor associated with switching tariffs or even having to think
about electricity prices. In all likelihood – particularly if shadow billing is employed – those
who opt in will disproportionately be customers with flatter load profiles, those who would
gain from the mandatory CPP tariff examined in the previous subsection even if they don’t
change their behavior.
To get an idea of the potential impact on the flat-rate customers under the equitable tariff
opt-in approach, I investigate the change in the default flat-rate tariff that would result
with different assumptions about the customers who opt in. Based on the calculations in
the previous section, it is straightforward to describe two boundary cases, one in which
there is no selection effect and another is which there is a very strong selection effect. In
the case of no selection effect – and continuing to assume no price response – the customers
opting in would on average have load profiles that are no more or less expensive than those
who don’t, so the cost of serving the remaining customers would not be changed, and
the flat-rate tariff would not change.30 A very strong selection effect would result in all
30

It is worth noting that more than one-third of the customers opting in in that case would be made worse

26

customers with load profiles that are less expensive than average opting in to the TOU or
CPP tariff. In that case, for PG&E the flat rate would increase by 6% if the opt-in tariff
were TOU and 9% if the opt-in rate were CPP. The numbers are nearly the same for SCE.
In reality, with shadow billing, most of those who opt in will probably be from the group
that is less expensive than average, but most of that group probably won’t opt in, at least
at first. To study the likely impact on rates, I examine cases that span a continuum of
participation rates and two possible selections of participants. In both cases the set of
people joining the CPP tariff are drawn entirely from customers who gain from switching
without any change in behavior or change in the flat rate. These types of customers are
often referred to as “structural winners” in the dynamic pricing literature. The dashed
lines in figure 3 shows the change in the flat rate tariff that results as a given percentage
of the structural winners, randomly chosen from among those who are structural winners,
opt in to the CPP tariff. As more of this group opt in, there are fewer remaining on the
flat rate to subsidize those with more expensive load shapes, so the flat-rate tariff must
increase. If 100% of structural winners opt in, the result is the flat-rate increases by slightly
less than 9%.
The solid lines present a case with much greater selection among participants: participants opt in strictly in order of the monetary gains from doing so. If only a small share of
customers participate, they are assumed to be the set of customers who have the very most
to gain by doing so.31 For any fixed percentage of structural winners (less than 100%), this
case of course causes a larger increase in the fixed-rate tariff than random selection among
structural winners. This is obviously a very extreme case and almost certainly overstates
the impact on those who do not opt in. Yet, even in this case, the change in the flat-rate
tariff is quite modest. Even if half of all structural winners switched to an equitable CPP
tariff, and even if the half that opted in were heavily drawn from the largest structural
winners, the increase in the flat-rate tariff would still likely be under 5%.
As I’ve done throughout, this analysis ignores demand elasticity. It also ignores the
“unraveling” effect that occurs as the increase in the flat rate puts additional customers
on the side of winning from a switch to CPP even without changing their consumption
off unless they changed their behavior. This seems very unlikely in the presence of shadow billing.
31

To be precise, the order in which customers opt in is determined by the absolute dollar gain – not
the percentage gain – from switching to CPP when the flat rate is at its original level (with no CPP
participation).

27

PG&E

SCE

Figure 3: Increase in Flat-Rate Tariff as More Customers Opt In to CPP
pattern. The results in figure 3, however, suggest that the unraveling effect is likely to be
quite small. For instance, if half of all structural winners opt in to a CPP rate, and they
were a random selection from among the structural winners, then the flat rate tariff would
rise by about 3%, which would make about 8% more of the customer population winners
from switching. If half of those additional customers switched, the additional increase in
the flat rate would be less than 0.1% and the cycle would quickly peter out.

7. Alternative to a fixed number of CPP calls
While critical-peak pricing may be a simpler way to make prices dynamic than a move to
full real-time pricing, the simplicity comes at a cost. Two costs are the fixed price during
critical peaks and the limited number of CPP calls that the utility can make each year.
The fixed CPP price means that the retail price cannot be adjusted to reflect more or
less constrained periods among the CPP days. In some implementations, this constraint
has been relaxed somewhat by allowing two different levels of CPP pricing. The utility
can call a regular CPP day with a high price or an extreme CPP day with an even higher
price. More pricing granularity would, of course, be attractive on grounds of economic
28

efficiency, but the incremental gains may be limited if consumers don’t make incremental
adjustments in response to greater price granularity. Given the dearth of evidence on the
impact of incremental price changes during CPP events, it is unclear how much is lost with
a simpler pricing scheme.
The fixed number of CPP calls in a summer or year may be a more costly constraint.
Generally, the policy gives the utility the right to call a CPP day up to a certain number of
days per year – usually 10 to 15. The utility, however, usually needs to call the full number
permitted in order to meet the revenue requirement allowed by regulators. Shortfalls can
generally be made up in later years, but there is still interest on the part of the utility
not to fall short of the planned number of calls. So, effectively, this rule leaves very little
flexibility in the number of CPP days in either direction. If the utility knew in advance
what the weather and other supply/demand factors would be for all days of the year, it
would be easy for it to call critical peaks on the most constrained days.
But in reality the fixed number of calls creates a complex dynamic optimization problem
for the utility. That optimization yields a trigger value for some indicator – such as system
load or market price – each day that is a function of the number of remaining calls the
utility has and the number of remaining days in which to use them, as well as demand and
supply forecasts. The trigger value early in the period will reflect the expected distribution
of system conditions for all future days of the period. As the days pass, the trigger value
will rise or fall depending on how many calls have been made so far as well as any new
information about future system conditions. The result of this dynamic optimization with
imperfect information is that the X days per year that that utility ends up calling a CPP
day will almost certainly not correspond to the X days of the year with the highest system
load or price. Furthermore, even if the utility could identify the best days within a given
year, the fixed number of days will be too many in some mild years and too few in some
years with more extreme weather.
An alternate approach has been proposed, but to my knowledge it has not been implemented anywhere.32 That is to “rebate” the excess revenue from a CPP call in hours
surrounding the CPP period, while at the same time removing the prescribed number
of calls. Instead of a prescribed number of calls, a threshold for CPP calls based on

32

Asking numerous people concerned with dynamic pricing, I have been unable to learn the original source
of this idea.

29

system conditions would be adopted.33 The idea is that instead of the utility’s revenue
requirement relying on calling a fixed number of CPP days in a year, each CPP call would
change prices in a way that is approximately revenue neutral. In this way, CPP calls could
occur as frequently or infrequently as they are actually needed given system conditions,
rather than according to a rigid prescription of days per year. As an example, every CPP
call could automatically be followed by lowering prices by ∆P in off-peak hours for the
following Y off-peak hours, where ∆P and Y are set to offset, in expectation, the excess
revenue collected during a CPP call.34
While it seems likely that this would greatly improve the efficiency of CPP programs,
there are two potential concerns. First, the efficiency gain from such an approach depends
on there not being too deep a discount off-peak if that leads to inefficient over-consumption.
There is, however, likely to be substantial opportunity for off-peak price reductions without
inducing inefficient behavior. This is the case both because off-peak prices are generally
well above the social marginal cost of power and because the inefficiency of mis-pricing
increases with the square of the deviation from marginal cost, so dropping price slightly
below marginal cost induces deadweight loss that is second order.
Second, an unlimited number of CPP calls may make some customers hesitant to sign
up. The utility would have to make clear that CPP calls are an opportunity to save by
shifting usage and communication would have to be sufficiently effective that consumers
are confident they will know when the calls occur. There is also an advantage in this area,
however. The fixed number of calls can lead to utilities calling CPP days when the weather
is mild and the system isn’t very constrained, which reduces the program’s legitimacy,
engenders consumer backlash, and suggests a disconnect from the original purpose of the
program. The unlimited calls would allow the utility to have CPP days if and only if
system conditions are very constrained, which is likely to make the program seem more
sensible to customers.
I empirically investigate the difficulty of a CPP design with a fixed number of CPP calls
per season or year in two ways. First, it would be useful to get some idea of how restrictive
the limited number of calls really is. PG&E has run a small residential CPP program since
33

The threshold could be a mechanical rule or could permit some judgment on the part of the utility,
subject to regulatory review.

34

Since the flat rate tariff is set prospectively based on expected load patterns of those on the flat tariff
and costs, the flat rate would still be set based on a agreed-upon set of time-varying costs.

30

2009, called “SmartDays.” I compare the actual SmartDays called in that program to the
day-ahead system load forecasts during CPP hours from the California Independent System
Operator. Using day-ahead load forecast rather than actual real-time load separates out
the day-ahead forecast error, which is unavoidable if CPP calls are required to be made
one day ahead. Systemwide peak-load forecast isn’t a perfect indicator of system stress,
but it is probably as good as any single indicator available on most days, particularly since
CPP days in these utilities are called for all residential customers or none. For each year
in table 4, the first column shows the days called as SmartDays, the second column shows
the day-ahead load forecast in the CAISO during the CPP hours, and the third column
shows the rank of that day among all the SmartDays eligible days that year, ranked by
day-ahead load forecast.35 The rank variable demonstrates the problem that utilities face:
Over these three years, 42% of the SmartDays called were not in the top-15 load forecast
days for their years. The bottom line of the table shows the 15th highest day-ahead load
forecast during SmartDay eligible days each year. The load on the 15th highest day-ahead
forecast is as high as 11% above the forecast load for some of the days that were actually
called. This also demonstrates some of the cross-year variation. Though the 15th-highest
load forecasts are nearly identical for 2010 and 2011, 2009 had more hot summer days; the
15th highest forecast was considerably higher, a value that would have made it the 8th
highest forecast in 2010 and the 5th highest in 2011.36
This is just an illustration of the problem – it doesn’t account for all the factors that
indicate the stress on the system and it doesn’t yields a calculation of the cost of calling
the wrong days. Still, it lends support to the analytical conclusion that fixing the number
of CPP calls for a year will lead to less efficient use of the CPP price flexibility.
In light of these problems with using a fixed number of CPP calls, it’s worth exploring
the practicality of the alternative, surrounding-hours revenue offset. The primary value of
this approach is to reduce the connection between calling CPP days and maintaining the
regulated profit level for the firm.
Using the load research data from PG&E and SCE, I study the magnitude of offsetting

35

PG&E called only 13 Smartdays in 2010.

36

Of the 5 highest-load days in each year, 15 days over the 3-year period, PG&E called 11 (73%) as CPP
days. These are the most important days from the system reliability perspective, so it is reassuring that
the hit rate is much higher, though the fact that 4 of even these highest (day ahead forecast) load days
speaks to how difficult it is to optimize CPP calls when there are a fixed number of days per year.

31

Table 4: PG&E SmartDays calls and actual day-ahead load forecasts

price decreases that would be needed to balance the revenues during CPP calls under
the alternative unlimited CPP approach. In particular, taking all days with a day-ahead
forecast 1pm-7pm total system load over about 249,000 MWh – which yields an average
of 15 days per year over the sample periods of each utility – I calculate how much and for
how long price would have to fall during off-peak periods around those CPP days to make
the program revenue neutral, which is the same as profit neutral under the assumption of
no demand response.37
In the equitable dynamic pricing approach presented earlier, the prices were set to be
revenue neutral among different tariffs when all customers are on each tariff in order to
avoid cross-subsidies. That calculation would still be done before each year or season for
a cost-representative price structure, as discussed earlier, and assuming that the expected
number of CPP days occur. In actual implementation, however, CPP prices could be implemented with slightly higher non-CPP prices at most times, but lower price surrounding
each CPP call than shown in the CPP tariff in table 1. The goal of these lower prices in
37

To be exact, I use as CPP days only those with CAISO day-ahead forecast 1pm-7pm total system load
of at least 249,094 MWh during 2006-2009 for PG&E analysis and 249,981 MWh during 2004-2008 for
SCE analysis.

32

hours that surround the CPP call would be to offset the revenue gain from a CPP call on
average given the set of customers who have opted in to the CPP tariff. By doing so, this
would neutralize the utility’s incentive to call CPP days, creating an incentive-compatible
policy in which the utility is permitted to call CPP days whenever they are appropriate,
rather than to raise revenue.
To analyze this possibility, I look only as customers who are “structural winners” under
the CPP tariff.

I study all such customers, which would be equivalent to any random

selection among these customers. So, the analysis assumes that a random selection of
customers among the structural winners, and none of the structural losers, sign up for the
CPP tariff.
Table 5 shows three levels of possible surrounding-hours prices that could surround a
CPP call and the two different surrounding periods to which those off-peak prices could
apply: (1) Same-Day Discount, all hours of the CPP day other than the CPP period
(1pm-7pm) and (2) Extended Discount, all hours from 7pm on the day prior to the CPP
day until 1pm on the day following the CPP day.38 Each cell of table 5 then shows, the
“rebate ratio”:

P
P
qch
h∈CP Psh (PT OUh − Psh ) ·
Pc
Rebate Ratio = P
c qch
h∈CP Pph (Pph − PT OUh ) ·

where h indexes hours and c indexes customers, CP Psh are the hours that surround the
CPP calls in which Psh applies (shown in the lefthand column of table 5 for each utility)
and CP Pph are the peak hours in which Pph (=$0.80) applies, and PT OUh is the TOU
price for that hour from table 1. A rebate ratio less than (greater than) 1 implies that
each CPP call increases (decreases) revenue.
Thus, starting from the TOU rate in table 1, if PG&E implemented a CPP rate by
raising the CPP price to $0.80 during CPP days from 1-7pm and lowering the price to
$0.05/kWh at all other times of the same days – and assuming no customer price response
– this would cause the PG&E revenue collection to be 52% higher than would be collected
under the TOU rate over the 60 CPP days of the four-year sample period. Table 5 shows
that lowering the price at all other hours of the same day for CPP days would result in
increased revenue even if the price were lowered to $0.01/kWh. The difficulty of lowering
the surrounding-hours price to offset revenue gains is even more pronounced for SCE
38

For consecutive CPP days, I do not “double count” the revenue decline from a lower price during the
hours between the two CPP periods.

33

Table 5: Rebate Ratios for CPP with Surrounding-Hours Price Reduction
Note: “Same-Day Discount” applies the surrounding-hours price to all hours of a CPP day except 1pm7pm. “Extended Discount” applies the surrounding-hours price from 7pm on the day before the CPP day
to 1pm of the CPP day and from 7pm of the CPP day to 1pm of the following day.

because its customers tend to have peakier demands.
However, table 5 also shows that using the extended discount hours it is possible to
lower the rebate ratio to 1, the point at which a CPP call would be revenue-neutral to the
utility. Using the extended discount hours, PG&E would have to lower the surroundinghours price to about $0.04/kWh to make CPP calls revenue neutral, while SCE would
have to lower the price to slightly below $0.02/kWh. While these are probably somewhat
below the true marginal cost for supplying power in these hours, they are likely not so low
as to create substantial deadweight loss from over-consumption.
Furthermore, in practice, the surrounding-hours prices would almost certainly not have
to be as low as shown in table 5 to neutralize the revenue change. These calculations
assume no customer price response. Customer price response would lower critical peak
consumption and raise surrounding-hours consumption, which would lower the rebate ratio,
and thus allow either reduction of the number of discounted surrounding hours or an
increase in the surrounding-hours price that would still yield a revenue-neutral CPP policy.
Also, the calculations in table 5 assume that there is no selection effect among the structural
winners who opt in. To the extent that customers with the most advantageous consumption
profile opt in disproportionately (among structural winners), that will also lower the rebate
ratio.
The number of CPP days called will also affect the rebate ratio. If the total load thresh34

old for a CPP day is set lower, yielding more than 15 CPP days per year on average, then
the incremental days would have lower peak demand on average, so extending the same
off-peak pricing policy would lower the rebate ratio. Put differently, lowering the threshold
for calling CPP days would mean that the size or duration of the surrounding-hours discount around each CPP period would not have to be as great in order to maintain revenue
neutrality. Conversely, reducing the number of CPP days by increasing the threshold could
mean each CPP event would require a larger or longer-lasting surrounding-hours discount
around each event (holding constant the level of the critical-peak price).

8. The Trouble with Peak-Time Rebates
While residential dynamic pricing has not been adopted in the U.S., there has been much
more interest among regulators and some utilities in an alternative known as peak-time
rebates (PTR). Under a PTR tariff, consumers are informed when the utility forecasts
a PTR event day (due to very tight supply/demand balance or high wholesale prices),
and are given a payment if they reduce consumption below some baseline level during the
PTR event period. Eligibility for PTR in some cases requires the customer to be on a
non-standard price schedule at all other times, which may be TOU or be set at different
price levels than the standard tariff. In most cases, however, all residential customers are
eligible.
A typical PTR gives the customer a rebate based on the difference between the baseline
level and the customer’s actual consumption during the PTR period. PTR periods are
similar to CPP periods, generally non-holiday weekday afternoon hours when supply is
expected to be very tight. If the customer’s consumption during these hours is above her
baseline level, then the PTR has no impact on her bill; there is no penalty. If it is below
the baseline level, then the customer is paid the PTR rebate for the difference from the
baseline.
The attraction of PTR is that it is seen as a less harsh approach to giving customers
an incentive to conserve when the system conditions are strained. Though the marginal
incentive to conserve appears at first to be similar to CPP, in practice it is likely to be
quite different.
The solid line in figure 4 illustrates the effective marginal price faced by a customer
during a PTR event, under the assumption that the flat-rate tariff is $0.15/kWh and the
35

Figure 4: Actual and Perceived Tariff Under Peak-Time Rebates

rebate for dropping below the baseline is $0.65/kWh. If the customer’s baseline were
completely exogenous and set so high that she would certainly be on the steep part of
the tariff, this would closely resemble CPP.39 Neither condition holds, however, causing a
number of implementation problems.
First, baselines are set endogenously. Typically, they are based on the same customer’s
usage during peak period hours on the just-preceeding non-holiday weekdays, e.g., the
customer’s average consumption during peak period hours in the previous 3 non-holiday
weekdays. This means that conserving on the days just prior to a PTR event lowers one’s
baseline and lowers the expected rebate. On the second day of a heatwave, with a third day
forecast, it may not make sense to conserve. More importantly, this approach to baseline
setting undermines the economic incentive to make investments that lower consumption
more generally, such as higher-efficiency air conditioning, insulation, shade trees, or a
whole-house fan for off-peak cooling. When those improvements lower consumption on
non-PTR afternoons, they reduce the expected rebate.

39

Even in that case, the PTR approach differs importantly in that it requires raising the retail price at
all other times compared to the outcome under CPP.

36

Second, the kinked price schedule illustrated in figure 4, along with the endogenous
baseline setting, means that a large share of customers probably won’t qualify for a rebate.
They will be on the flatter part of the tariff. If the baseline is set below the expected level
of consumption during the PTR event – as is generally the case when it is based on milder
preceeding days – then it is likely that about half or more of customers on the tariff face
almost no more incentive to conserve than if there were no PTR.
Almost no more incentive because the customer is, in fact, unlikely to know her exact
baseline and where her consumption during the PTR event stands in relation to the baseline. This uncertainty would alter the customer’s perceived tariff schedule to be more like
the dotted line in figure 4.40 This uncertainty would be in addition to the uncertainty that
customers face under all tariffs about the amount of electricity they are consuming. With
sufficient information technology – and customer attention to the information technology
– these uncertainties may be overcome, but in actual implementations they are likely to
make the incentives less understandable and less salient than under a CPP program.
PTR tariffs also face a problem of paying for behavior that would have occurred without
the incentive. In itself, that isn’t unique to PTRs; CPP rewards people who would have
consumed less at peak times even without the price incentive. What’s different about
PTRs is that the “no lose” option illustrated in figure 4 implies that random variation in
consumption will lead to net payments to customers, rather than netting out to zero. With
a CPP, if a customer happens to consumer more on one CPP day and less on another due
to random events, the two deviations balance out in the billing. In contrast, because of the
kinked tariff schedule, if a customer happens to consume less on one PTR day for reasons
unrelated to the tariff, she receives a payment, but that is not offset if she happens to
consume more than usual on another PTR day. That is, greater variance in consumption
on PTR days is rewarded per se, regardless of the net savings.
While the economics of PTR are clearly inferior to CPP, there is less resistance to PTR
among residential customers, and it could potentially play a complementary role. An optin CPP could be paired with a default flat rate with PTR. For customers who choose not
to opt in to CPP, an equitable flat rate tariff would be set as described earlier. Then the
rate would be further increased slightly to pay for the revenue shortfall that would occur
40

Borenstein(2009) shows that an optimizing customer facing such price uncertainty would respond to
the expected marginal price. Ito (2010) finds that when marginal rates are difficult to observe under
increasing-block pricing, customers tend to respond to an average price rather than the marginal price.

37

within this group from paying the peak-time rebates. Shadow billing could continue to
inform each customer whether they would be better off on the opt-in CPP tariff or the
default flat rate with PTR.

9. Conclusion
With the widespread introduction of smart meters and the continuing improvement in
this technology, the benefits from dynamic retail electricity pricing are more accessible
than ever before. Yet, public resistance to dynamic retail tariffs has been passionate at
times, though it is unclear how broad the resistance is. Mandatory or default dynamic
tariffs would be quite desirable from an economic point of view, but they seem unlikely to
be adopted any time soon in the residential sector.
In this paper, I have explored some options for successful implementation of an opt-in
residential dynamic pricing tariff. With smart meters installed, it is now straightforward
to base both an opt-in dynamic tariff and a default flat rate on the same underlying hourly
cost assumptions. Such an approach would bolster the legitimacy of the dynamic tariff
and would make clear how both tariffs would be adjusted as customers with varying load
patterns migrate between them. The technology also makes it possible to offer shadow
bills to all customers that inform them on a monthly and annual basis how their actual
bill compares to what they would have paid under alternative tariffs. These approaches
seem likely to substantially increase the attractiveness of dynamic pricing to the majority
of residential customers who would pay less overall under such a tariff.
Total payment is not the only criterion for customer acceptance, however. Bill volatility
is also a serious concern. I have suggested what I believe is a new approach to helping
customers deal with bill volatility while at the same time maintaining greater salience
of electric bills than results from the level payment plans that many utilities now offer.
The approach, which has some parallels to credit cards and revolving credit accounts that
department stores have offered, would still emphasize the liability that the customer has
incurred each month.
The empirical analysis that I report here – using stratified random samples of customers
in the service territories of Pacific Gas & Electric and Southern California Edison – suggests
that even without any demand response to peak prices, mandatory dynamic pricing would
have a fairly modest impact on the bills of most customers. Demand response would
38

improve the result. Low-income customers appear to have load profiles that are no flatter
or more peaky on average than other customers. Smaller-use customers, however, are more
likely to have lower-cost (flatter) load profiles. If customers can respond to peak prices –
and there is now broad research support for the conclusion that all types of consumers can
– that would make the dynamic tariff a winner for a substantially larger set of customers.
The empirical analysis also suggests that the opt-in dynamic pricing approach that I
describe here would have a quite modest impact on the bills of the customers who choose
to stay on the flat rate. Even a case with no demand response implies a likely increase in
the flat rate of just a few percent or less given the likely enrollment rates.
Implementation of dynamic pricing has focused primarily on forms of critical-peak pricing. I’ve shown that the common structure of CPP programs puts utilities in an impossible
demand forecasting position that seems virtually certain to leave them calling event days
when there is little supply/demand justification or being unable to call events when there
is. An alternative approach could remove the prescribed number of calls and still result in
a revenue-neutral program.
Finally, I contrast dynamic pricing with peak-time rebate programs that have garnered
support from some regulators. PTR appears at first to roughly mimic CPP, but in fact it
does less to incent conservation in the short run and can undermine longer run incentives
to invest in energy efficiency. Marginal prices are also more obscured under PTR and
therefore less likely to be effective. Still, a default PTR may be a useful complement to an
opt-in CPP for those who do not choose CPP.
My focus in this paper has been on the distributional and customer resistance issues
that have slowed the rollout of dynamic pricing, not on the benefits it can deliver. Those
benefits are significant, as shown in numerous studies. With the adoption of new metering
technologies, the value of addressing the remaining concerns about dynamic tariffs is even
greater than before.

39

APPENDIX

Table A1: Distributions of Consumer Surplus Ratio Change By Region, Usage and Income
For Alternative Assumed Demand Elasticities
Notes: Consumer Surplus Ratio Change is the change in consumer surplus divided by the customer bill
under flat-rate tariff. See table 2 for additional notes.

REFERENCES
Alexander, Barbara R. “Dynamic Pricing? Not So Fast! A Residential Consumer Perspective,” The Electricity Journal, 23(6), July 2010, pp. 39-49.
American Association Of Retired Persons et al. “The Need for Essential Consumer Protections: Smart Metering Proposals and the Move to Time-Based Pricing.” August
2010.
Bonbright, James C., Albert L. Danielsen and David R. Kamerschen. Principles of Public
Utility Regulation, 2nd Edition, Vienna, VA: Public Utilities Reports, 1989.
Borenstein, Severin. “The Trouble With Electricity Markets: Understanding California’s
Restructuring Disaster,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16, Winter 2002.
Borenstein, Severin. “The Long-Run Efficiency of Real-Time Electricity Pricing,” Energy
Journal, 26(3), 2005(a).
Borenstein, Severin. “Time-Varying Retail Electricity Prices: Theory and Practice,” in
Griffin and Puller, eds., Electricity Deregulation: Choices and Challenges, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2005(b).
Borenstein, Severin. “Customer Risk from Real-Time Retail Electricity Pricing: Bill
Volatility and Hedgability,” Energy Journal, 28(2), 2007(a).
Borenstein, Severin. “Wealth Transfers Among Large Customers from Implementing RealTime Retail Electricity Pricing,” Energy Journal, 28(2), 2007(b).
Borenstein, Severin. “Electricity Rate Structures and the Economics of Solar PV: Could
Mandatory Time-of-Use Rates Undermine California’s Solar Photovoltaic Subsidies?”
Center for the Study of Energy Markets Working Paper #172, University of California
Energy Institute, September 2007(c).
Borenstein, Severin. “To What Electricity Price Do Consumers Respond? Residential
Demand Elasticity Under Increasing-Block Pricing,” working paper, July 2009.
Borenstein, Severin. “The Redistributional Impact of Non-Linear Electricity Pricing”,
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell and Frank Wolak. “Measuring Market Inefficiencies in California’s Deregulated Wholesale Electricity Market,” American Economic
Review, 92, 2002.
Borenstein, Severin and Stephen P. Holland. “On the Efficiency of Competitive Electricity Markets With Time-Invariant Retail Prices,” RAND Journal of Economics,
36(Autumn), 2005.
Faruqui, Ahmad and Stephen George. “Quantifying customer response to dynamic pricing,” The Electricity Journal, May 2005, 53-63.
Faruqui, Ahmad and Ryan Hledik. “Transition to Dynamic Pricing,” Public Utilities
Fortnightly, March 2009.
Faruqui, Ahmad, Sanem Sergici and Jennifer Palmer. “The Impact of Dynamic Pricing
on Low-Income Customers,” Institute for Electric Efficiency Whitepaper, September
41

2010.
Herter, Karen, Patrick McAuliffe, Arthur Rosenfeld. “An exploratory analysis of California
residential customer response to critical peak pricing of electricity,” Energy, 32(1),
January 2007, pp. 25-34.
Ito, Koichiro. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing,” Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper #210, November
2010.
Letzler, Robert. “The impacts of residential critical peak pricing: Evidence from California’s Statewide Pricing Pilot,” Working Paper, November 2009. Available at
http://www.allorama.org/rl/letzler spp impact estimate working paper.pdf.
Letzler, Robert. “Using Incentive Preserving Rebates to Increase Acceptance of Critical
Peak Electricity Pricing,” Center for the Study of Energy Markets Working Paper
#162R, University of California Energy Institute, Revised May 2010.
Maryland Public Service Commission. In the matter of Potomac Electric Power Company
and Delmarva Power & Light Company Request for the Deployment of Advance Meter
Infrastructure, Case No. 9207, September 2010.
Wolak, Frank. “An Experimental Comparison of Critical Peak and Hourly Pricing: The
PowerCentsDC Program,” working paper, March 2010. Available at
http://www.stanford.edu/group/fwolak/cgi-bin/
Wolak, Frank. “Residential Customer Response to Real-Time Pricing: The Anaheim
Critical-Peak Pricing Experiment,” working paper, May 2006. Available at
http://www.stanford.edu/group/fwolak/cgi-bin/

42

