                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHY DO WE REDISTRIBUTE SO MUCH BUT TAG SO LITTLE? THE PRINCIPLE
              OF EQUAL SACRIFICE AND OPTIMAL TAXATION

                                         Matthew C. Weinzierl

                                         Working Paper 18045
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18045


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2012




I am grateful to Felix Bierbrauer, Kim Clausing, Raj Chetty, Mihir Desai, Rafael di Tella, Amy Finkelstein,
Victor Fleischer, John Friedman, Alex Gelber, Caroline Hoxby, Bas Jacobs, Louis Kaplow, Wojciech
Kopczuk, Camille Landais, Ben Lockwood, Greg Mankiw, Yoram Margalioth, Joe Mazor, Jean-Baptiste
Michaud, Je¤ Miron, Alex Raskolnikov, Meg Rithmire, Julio Rotemberg, Emmanuel Saez, Florian
Scheuer, Ali Shourideh, Stefanie Stantcheva, Alain Trannoy, Aleh Tsyvinski, Glen Weyl, John Weymark,
and Danny Yagan for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Matthew C. Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Why do we Redistribute so Much but Tag so Little? The principle of equal sacrifice and optimal
taxation
Matthew C. Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 18045
May 2012, Revised August 2012
JEL No. D63,H2,H21

                                               ABSTRACT

The workhorse model of optimal taxation strongly recommends tagging, but its use in policy is limited.
I argue that this puzzle is a symptom of a more fundamental problem. Conventional theory neglects
the diverse normative criteria with which, as extensive evidence has shown, most people evaluate
policy. In particular, if the classic principle of Equal Sacri…ce augments the standard Utilitarian criterion,
optimal tagging is limited. Calibrated simulations of optimal policy with normative diversity of this
type simultaneously match three features of U.S. policy: substantial income redistribution; rejection
of gender, race, and height tags; and acceptance of a blindness tag. Additional implications increase
the appeal of this revision to conventional theory.


Matthew C. Weinzierl
Harvard Business School
277 Morgan
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mweinzierl@hbs.edu
Introduction
Modern tax theorists have a workhorse model. Created by Mirrlees (1971) more than four decades ago, that
model has been used to study countless aspects of tax policy. It provides the benchmark guidelines against
which policy proposals are often judged, and its recommendations form the basis of prominent policy advice.
To cite only one example, the recent authoritative summary of modern tax theory and its policy implications
was entitled The Mirrlees Review (2010).
    It is a puzzle, then, that one of this conventional theory’s clearest implications stands in stark contrast
with real-world policy. "Tagging" is the dependence of taxes on personal characteristics, such as gender.
Conventional theory recommends widespread tagging because it can achieve redistribution of income without
distorting incentives to work. In so doing, tagging sidesteps the tradeo¤ between equality and e¢ ciency that
is at the heart of conventional theory. Real-world taxes, however, make only limited use of tagging. In other
words, tagging seems like a free lunch that real-world policy is largely leaving on the table.
    This paper argues that the puzzle of limited tagging is a symptom of a more fundamental problem:
conventional optimal tax theory evaluates policy based on a criterion that is unrealistically narrow. That
criterion, Utilitarianism, is powerful and compelling to many. But extensive evidence has shown that no single
criterion, however appealing, can claim to be the criterion of the tax design problem as society perceives it.
Di¤erent people …nd di¤erent criteria compelling, and most people …nd multiple criteria partially compelling.
Speci…cally, not all people are Utilitarians and, perhaps more important, most people are not all Utilitarian.
    The natural solution to this problem is to incorporate into optimal tax theory a realistically diverse
normative perspective that includes compelling alternative criteria.1 This paper develops an approach for
doing so and then shows that an application of that approach can resolve the puzzle of limited tagging.
    In particular, if the classic principle of Equal Sacri…ce augments the standard Utilitarian criterion, tagging
is no longer a free lunch, even in theory. The Equal Sacri…ce principle says that all taxpayers should bear the
same sacri…ce (in terms of reduced well-being) from paying taxes. Tagging violates Equal Sacri…ce because it
causes, for example, a tall person to pay more tax–and therefore bear a greater sacri…ce–than a short person
who has the same ability to earn income. A revised optimal tax theory that values Equal Sacri…ce will
determine whether to use a given tag by weighing the costs of such violations against the gains it generates
according to Utilitarianism.
    Equal Sacri…ce is a compelling additional criterion of optimal taxation for at least two reasons, aside
from its ability to resolve the puzzle studied here. First, its connection to the philosophical framework of
Libertarianism implies that it may serve as the main criterion of optimal policy for a portion of society.
Second, and arguably more important, it is likely to capture one component of the mix of criteria used
by most individuals. No less a Utilitarian than John Stuart Mill, for example, endorsed it as the proper
criterion for taxation.2 I develop the case for Equal Sacri…ce in detail below, but the key to its broad appeal
can be succinctly stated. Equal Sacri…ce rejects the assumption implicit in the conventional approach that,
as summarized in a critique by Martin Feldstein (1976), "all property and individual abilities should be
regarded as society’s common resource."
   1 Examining the degree of correspondence between policy and theory is a central task of optimal tax research (e.g., Saez

2001). To some, that task uncomfortably blurs the line between normative and positive analysis. In my opinion, that is a false
dichotomy. The most valuable goal of optimal tax research is not to impose a "correct" normative perspective on policy, but
rather to uncover and apply the normative perspective that members of society agree upon through the political process. Given
that goal, gaps between a model and policy present opportunities to …nd reasonable modi…cations to the theory or to reject a
policy as suboptimal. See Feldstein (1976) for an early statement of a similar perspective.
   2 See the discussion in Section 1 below.




                                                              2
    The payo¤ from recognizing and incorporating this3 realistic form of normative diversity in the optimal
tax model goes beyond simply providing a reason to avoid tagging. A role for Equal Sacri…ce can improve
the match between the recommendations of theory and the reality of policy in several ways.
    A role for Equal Sacri…ce can explain not only why tagging is limited but also the circumstances under
which tagging is likely to be optimal. Tags that are strongly correlated with underlying income-earning
ability, such as blindness and disability status, will generate smaller losses according to Equal Sacri…ce and
therefore be more acceptable to a society that balances that principle and Utilitarianism when evaluating
policy.4
    Moreover, incorporating Equal Sacri…ce can explain the coexistence of limited tagging and substantial
income redistribution, a challenge for conventional theory. The Equal Sacri…ce principle is consistent with
progressive taxation to pay for government spending if a given rate of taxation causes a smaller utility
sacri…ce for a higher-income individual than a lower-income one.5 Thus, even if Equal Sacri…ce is su¢ ciently
important to severely limit tagging, it may have much milder e¤ects on the conventional theory’s implications
for progressivity and redistribution.
    In this paper, I show that the potential for the Equal Sacri…ce principle to explain these features of tax
policy is not merely theoretical. Using microeconomic data on earnings and personal characteristics, I …nd
calibrations of the optimal policy model with normative diversity of this type in which society rejects the use
of three prominently-proposed tags–height, gender, and race–and accepts both sizeable tagging of blindness
and substantial redistribution through progressive income taxes, all as in the U.S. tax code.
    Finally, if correct, this paper’s explanation for limited tagging has additional implications. In fact, it
may contribute to resolving two additional high-pro…le puzzles in optimal tax research.
    First, Equal Sacri…ce o¤sets an implication of Utilitarianism that has long been a cause for concern: rank
reversals in the …rst best. In the standard model, if information is complete so that types are observable,
higher-ability types are generally left with less utility than lower ability types despite their ability to achieve
greater utility absent government intervention. This result has struck many as normatively undesirable.6
The Equal Sacri…ce principle discourages rank reversals because it recommends reducing each individual’s
utility from a laissez-faire starting point by the same absolute quantity. In the calibrated simulation described
above, I show that an optimal tax policy with a role for Equal Sacri…ce dramatically reduces rank reversals
present in the Utilitarian …rst-best.
    Second, Diamond and Saez (2011) show that the top marginal tax rate for the United States, according
to standard theory, is substantially (30 percentage points) higher than in current U.S. policy. Again using
the same calibration of the model with normative diversity described above, I show that the optimal top
marginal tax rate falls by seven percentage points relative to a conventional Utilitarian model. While the
magnitude of this e¤ect would vary across calibrations, the lesson is clear: if we care about Equal Sacri…ce
and avoid most tags because of it, we are likely to moderate our use of high marginal income tax rates at
the top of the income distribution.
   3 Using  the approach described by this paper to include other normative frameworks, such as the Rawlsian priority on the
least fortunate, would likely lead to further insights on existing policies.
    4 Note that this result contrasts with conventional theory, which endorses tags on inelastic and easily enforced traits regardless

of the strength of their correlation with ability.
    5 Equal Sacri…ce rejects redistribution, but to the extent that Utilitarian reasoning causes society to want to support low-

ability individuals with redistribution, the optimal sharing of that burden according to Equal Sacri…ce, much less to Utilitarians,
is likely to be progressive.
    6 For example, Zelenak (2006) writes: "Few people may remain utilitarians, however, if that requires accepting the conclusion

that the ideal tax-and-transfer system would make the most talented members of society the least well-o¤." In the second-best
solutions to conventional models, rank reversals are avoided only because the incentive constraints guarantee the higher types
more desirable allocations.



                                                                  3
    The revision to conventional theory proposed in this paper preserves the core of the Mirrlees (1971)
approach to optimal tax, an approach many (including this author) consider fundamentally convincing as
a basis for policy evaluation.7 At the same time, because alternative normative criteria imply di¤erent
standards for measuring policy optimality, this revision has a potentially wide range of implications beyond
those explored here.8
    This paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 presents the case for diversifying the normative objective of
the optimal tax model and for including Equal Sacri…ce as one component of that objective. Section 2
brie‡y reviews prior results and discussions of tagging in optimal tax research, including a discussion of the
relationship between this paper and the concept of horizontal equity. Section 3 generalizes the conventional
optimal tax model to include multiple normative criteria. Section 4 applies this generalized model in the
case of two criteria, Utilitarianism (i.e., maximal aggregate utility) and Equal Sacri…ce (i.e., uniform utility
losses). Section 5 derives conditions on optimal tagging and marginal distortions to labor supply in that
model, formally establishing that a role for the principle of Equal Sacri…ce reduces optimal tagging. Section
6 performs calibrated numerical simulations of optimal policy and discusses their implications, and section
7 concludes.


1     The case for normative diversity and Equal Sacri…ce
Starting with Mirrlees (1971), conventional optimal tax analysis has assumed the straightforward normative
criterion of generalized Utilitarianism. According to Utilitarianism, a social planner ought to maximize
the sum of the utilities of a population of individuals, in some cases applying a concave transformation to
the utilities before summing. Combined with the assumptions that individuals di¤er in their innate ability
to earn income and that preferences over consumption and leisure are common, this Utilitarian criterion
powerfully recommends income redistribution.9
    Economists, and especially optimal tax theorists, have been largely united around this Utilitarian per-
spective.10 The canonical justi…cation for it is due to John Harsanyi (1953, 1955), who argued that "value
judgments concerning social welfare and the cardinal utility maximized in choices involving risk may be
regarded as being fundamentally based upon the same principle." In other words, expected utility maxi-
mization, when the expectation is taken over all individuals in society, is pure-sum Utilitarianism.
    7 This feature of the approach taken here can be seen as answering the question raised in Mankiw and Weinzierl (2010) of

whether limited tagging could be explained without jettisoning conventional theory.
    8 For example, the mixed normative perspective detailed below may a¤ect optimal commodity taxes (e.g., capital taxes)

in the presence of preference heterogeneity. More broadly, this paper’s critique may apply to any research, on taxes or other
policies, that implicitly adopts the Utilitarian approach when making reduced-form welfare calculations.
    9 See Lockwood and Weinzierl (2012) for a treatment of optimal taxation with preference heterogeneity.
  1 0 Though generalized Utilitarianism dominates optimal tax research, especially when the theory is made quantitative in

numerical simulations, some important exceptions exist. Feldstein (1976), as noted elsewhere in this paper, was an early critic
of the purely Utilitarian approach in the optimal tax literature. Sen and Williams (1982) collect and analyze a number of
critiques and defenses of Utilitarianism, including from Mirrlees. Stiglitz (1987) and Werning (2007) describe Pareto-optimal
taxation. Their e¤orts are similar in spirit to mine, in that they widen the model’s normative perspective. They di¤er,
however, in that my approach provides a way to include a speci…c combination of normative perspectives held by society, while
these authors remain agnostic and, therefore, are able to provide less speci…c guidance to or explanation of policy. Related,
recent research by Saez and Stantcheva (2012) focuses on marginal social welfare weights through which tax reforms may be
evaluated. They allow these weights to take any positive values, including values based on principles or priorities at odds with
Utilitarianism. Their approach is complementary to mine, in that they focus on the welfare weights that one might derive from,
at least in part, the normative reasoning I model directly. Finally, speci…c normative limitations of the conventional model have
been addressed directly. Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006) allow for considerations of fairness and responsibility with respect to
preference heterogeneity. Besley and Coate (1992) allow for society to place particular emphasis on poverty alleviation. This
paper’s framework could accommodate these concerns.




                                                               4
1.1     Normative diversity
As even a casual observer of policy debates can attest, discussions of taxes by members of the public,
policymakers, and scholars do not re‡ect such a pure normative perspective. While some individuals …nd
the Utilitarian criterion appealing, others are drawn to sharply opposing criteria. For example, Milton
Friedman wrote in 1962: "I …nd it hard, as a liberal, to see any justi…cation for graduated taxation solely
to redistribute income. This seems to me a clear case of using coercion to take from some in order to give
to others and thus to con‡ict head-on with individual freedom." Statements, shown below, in which John
Stuart Mill and Henry Sidgwick endorse the principle of Equal Sacri…ce further demonstrate that the current
scholarly convergence on a Utilitarian perspective is at odds with important and long-lived strains of thinking
on the topic.
    More generally, decades of research in psychology, political science, and economics has shown that most
individuals, whether supportive of Utilitarianism or not, are not normative purists. Those who are fully
convinced by a single criterion are best seen as outliers occupying the extremes of a continuum, the interior
of which is populated by those for whom multiple normative criteria have appeal. For example, Frohlich,
Oppenheimer, and Eavey (1987) …nd that: "...subjects preferred a compromise. This implies that individuals
treat choice between principles as involving marginal decisions. Principles are much like economic goods
inasmuch as individuals are willing to trade o¤ between them [italics in the original]." Similarly, Scott,
Matland, Michelbach, and Bornstein (2001) write: "Experimental research reveals that distributive justice
judgments usually involve several distinct allocation principles."11 Policy driven by individuals (i.e., voters)
with this normative ambivalence will therefore balance competing criteria.
    The prevalence of normative ambivalence begs the question of why most people appear to …nd Utilitar-
ianism less appealing than standard optimal tax analysis implies. Perhaps the most prominent critique of
the purely Utilitarian perspective is that, in the words of John Rawls (1971), Utilitarianism "does not take
seriously the distinction between persons." Rawls, and others, are concerned that the Utilitarian’s willingness
to trade the losses of some for greater gains of others may, in some cases, compromise individual liberty.12
    Strikingly, the speci…c context in which this concern has been seen as most forceful is "endowment"
taxation, where individuals would be taxed on their potential to earn income rather than their actual earned
income. Of course, endowment taxation is exactly the preferred policy of the conventional Utilitarian optimal
tax model. Rawls (2001) argued that an endowment tax "would force the more able into those occupations
in which earnings were high enough for them to pay o¤ the tax in the required period of time; it would
interfere with their liberty to conduct their life within the scope of the principles of justice."13 The broad
  1 1 In addition to works cited in the text, see: Deutsch (1985), Feldman and Zaller (1992); Free and Cantril (1968); Frohlich and

Oppenheimer (1992); Gainous and Martinez (2005) ; Hochschild (1981); Konow (2001); Miller (1976); and Mitchell, Tetlock,
Mellers, and Ordonez (1993). In a valuable review of empirical …ndings, Konow (2003) argues that "each category [of justice
theories] captures an element that is important to crafting a positive theory of justice but that no single family or theory within
a family su¢ ces to this end." Other relevant …ndings include the following. Feldman and Zaller (1992) state: "Our results o¤er
strong support to studies, especially that of Hochschild, that have identi…ed ambivalence as a fundamental feature of political
belief systems...Even those who take consistently pro- or consistently antiwelfare positions often cite reasons for the opposite
point of view." The Hochschild (1981) study to which they refer consisted of long-term, in-depth interviews of a group of
individuals across a wide range of socioeconomic status. It concluded: "Some people...hold beliefs that are predominately clear
and sharp–but even they express some ambivalence. Others...hold beliefs that are predominately ambivalent and blurred–but
even they express the dominant pattern much of the time." Similarly, Gainous and Martinez (2005) conclude that "a sizable
chunk of the American public is, in fact, ambivalent to some degree about social welfare."
  1 2 Political philosophers and legal scholars have developed this critique in depth. As an example of the former, see Mazor

(2012) and Richard Arneson (2000), who writes: "It is better to regard Rawls as making the point that ...it is a ‡aw that
utilitarianism would have the decision about what should be done vary only with the utility total that di¤erent acts could
achieve."
  1 3 Legal scholars have extensively analyzed this issue with endowment (ability) taxation under the heading of "talent slavery,"

the heavy taxation of those with high ability that forces them to work exceptionally hard or at an occupation they dislike. See,



                                                                5
force of this critique is made clear when it is coupled with Robert Nozick’s (1974) claim that "taxation of
earnings from labor is on a par with forced labor" because "it is like forcing the person to work n hours for
another’s purpose." While Rawls and Nozick take from their critiques very di¤erent lessons, they share a
similar target: Utilitarianism’s potential to violate individual liberty.14
    Tagging is a clear, though perhaps more mild, example of a case in which the conventional model’s
Utilitarianism raises this concern. Tags treat an individual as a collection of characteristics whose statistical
relationships with innate ability a¤ect the individual’s tax treatment. In other words, tagging neglects an
individual’s speci…c circumstances and, instead, taxes him or her based on patterns that hold across the
population in aggregate. To tagging’s critics, this seems an unjust basis for taxation.


1.2     Equal Sacri…ce
As a prominent criterion that respects the individuality of taxpayers, Equal Sacri…ce has a strong claim to
being an important component of a realistically diverse normative framework for optimal taxation.
    First, a bit of history. John Stuart Mill (1871) was the most famous proponent of Equal Sacri…ce, and
his argument for it is worth quoting at length.

          "For what reason ought equality to be the rule in matters of taxation? For the reason, that it
      ought to be so in all a¤airs of government...Equality of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics,
      means equality of sacri…ce. It means apportioning the contribution of each person towards the
      expenses of government so that he shall feel neither more nor less inconvenience from his share
      of the payment than every other person experiences from his."

    Mill’s vision of Equal Sacri…ce was endorsed by other in‡uential thinkers, including Alfred Marshall and
Henry Sidgwick, the latter of whom claimed it was the "obviously equitable principle–assuming that the
existing distribution of wealth is accepted as just or not unjust." More recently, the late 1980s and 1990s saw
a temporary resurgence of interest in Equal Sacri…ce as a basis for policy, especially through the work of H.
Peyton Young (1987, 1988, 1990, 1994) but also including Yaari (1988), Moyes (1989), Berliant and Gouveia
(1993), Ok (1995), Mitra and Ok (1996), and D’Antoni (1999). That literature established conditions on the
progressivity of taxes designed in accordance with Equal Sacri…ce, and it argued for the centrality of that
principle from both normative and positive perspectives.15
    One channel through which Mill’s principle of Equal Sacri…ce enters the diverse normative perspective
apparent in modern tax policy debates is through its connection to the in‡uential philosophical framework of
Libertarianism. Under standard versions of Libertarianism, taxes are justi…ed to pay for public goods only.
While Libertarian writers are frustratingly imprecise about how they would allocate required taxes,16 one
natural benchmark for doing so is to share the (utility) costs of taxation equally across individuals. Martin
Feldstein (1976) made this link explicit in his critique of the Utilitarian focus of early optimal tax research:
"Nozick (1974) has recently presented an extensive criticism of the use of utilitarian principles to justify the
redistribution of income and wealth...In this context, the principle of bene…t taxation or of tax schedules that
impose equal utility sacri…ce have an appeal that is clearly lacking in the utilitarian framework."17 Similarly,
for instance, Hasen (2007), Markovits (2003), Rakowski (2000), Shaviro (2002), Stark (2005), Sugin (2011), and Zelenak (2006).
   1 4 Stark (2005) o¤ers a detailed argument that the concerns of Rawls and Nozick are closely connected. A related perspective

is captured in Immanuel Kant’s (1785) dictum "to treat man, in your own person as well as in that of anyone else, always as
an end, never merely as a means."
   1 5 Lambert and Naughton (2009) is a recent contribution that reviews much of this literature.
   1 6 Friedman (1962) does endorse a ‡at-rate income tax, but on intuitive rather than rigorous grounds.
   1 7 Robert Nozick is an in‡uential modern expositor of Libertarianism.




                                                               6
Liam Murphy and Thomas Nagel (2002) have argued: "If (and only if) [libertarianism] is the theory of
distributive justice we accept, the principle of equal sacri…ce does make sense." Sidgwick’s statement above,
with its caveat that speaks to the core of Libertarianism, suggests the same link. Public opinion surveys
estimate the proportion of individuals with traditional Libertarian views to be 10 to 20 percent in the United
States (Boaz and Kirby 2007). Cappelen et al. (2011) conduct experiments in which participants’choices
imply a preference among competing "fairness ideals," and in their preferred speci…cation 18.7 percent of
participants are classi…ed as "libertarians."18 The connection between equal sacri…ce and Libertarianism
therefore implies a sizeable portion of society may reasonably be described as using the equal sacri…ce
principle as its main criterion for optimal tax policy.
    A second and, arguably, more important channel of in‡uence for Equal Sacri…ce is its place in the
moral reasoning of the majority of individuals who feel normative ambivalence. Research has shown that
even those predisposed toward redistribution feel some pull toward normative principles that, like Equal
Sacri…ce, avoids Rawls’ and Nozick’s concerns about the treatment of individuals under Utilitarianism.
Feldman and Zaller (1992) conclude: "Most people are internally con‡icted about exactly what kind of
welfare system they want...Ambivalence with respect to social welfare policy is more pronounced among
welfare liberals...They end up acknowledging the values of economic individualism even as they try to justify
their liberal preferences."19 As Feldstein (1976) noted near the start of the modern era of Mirrleesian tax
theory: "Those who are fully persuaded by Nozick will thus completely rede…ne the problem of optimal
taxation. Others will reject Nozick completely...Many will be persuaded that the entitlement principle limits
the desirable degree of redistribution. Once again, optimal tax design involves a balancing of con‡icting
criteria."
    Mill himself provides a telling example of exactly this form of mixed normative reasoning, writing ap-
provingly of both Equal Sacri…ce and minimal total sacri…ce (which is similar to the Utilitarian criterion):

          As a government ought to make no distinction of persons or classes in the strength of their
      claims on it, whatever sacri…ces it requires from them should be made to bear as nearly as possible
      with the same pressure upon all, which, it must be observed, is the mode by which least sacri…ce
      is occasioned on the whole.

Mill is incorrect, as many others have noted, in the assertion that Equal Sacri…ce implies minimized total
sacri…ce. But this mistake reveals that, for Mill, both equal and minimized total sacri…ce were principles he
believed appealing and likely to be accepted by his readers. Mill’s split normative intuition is more the rule
than the exception, and I explore the implications of it in this paper.

 1 8 Konow  (2003) reports results consistent with these magnitudes.
 1 9 Though  the connection to problems of taxation is imperfect, Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Kurki (2004) show that "just
deserts" or "entitlements" exert an in‡uence on allocations for most dictators in allocation games with production.




                                                           7
2     Prior work on tagging
Tagging has an illustrious theoretical pedigree. James Mirrlees (1971) noted the potential of tagging in only
the …fth sentence of his Nobel Prize-winning analysis of optimal taxation. George Akerlof (1978), also a
recipient of the Nobel Prize, worked out the basic theory of tagging in a seminal paper just seven years later.
Forty years into the modern optimal tax literature, recent analyses have shown the substantial potential
gains from tagging according to three speci…c personal characteristics: height, gender, and race (see Mankiw
and Weinzierl 2010; Alesina, Ichino, and Karabarbounis 2011; and Blumkin, Margalioth, and Sadka 2009).
    In the modern theory of optimal taxation, tagging is a free lunch. That theory starts with the assumption
that individuals di¤er in their unobservable abilities to earn income but are equally able to enjoy consumption.
If social welfare is a weakly concave function of all individual utilities, income ought to be redistributed from
those with high ability to those with low ability. But, there is a tradeo¤. Taxing endogenous income rather
than exogenous ability discourages e¤ort, reducing economic activity overall. Tags carry information about
ability but are hard to modify, so taxing them allows for redistributive gains without e¢ ciency losses.
    According to this theory, a wide variety of candidate tags exist. Any observable and largely inelastic
characteristic across which the distribution of abilities di¤ers ought to a¤ect tax schedules. For example,
groups with higher mean ability ought to be taxed to support other groups, while groups with a higher
variance of ability ought to face a more progressive within-group tax policy. As Mirrlees writes: "One
might obtain information about a man’s income-earning potential from his apparent I.Q., the number of his
degrees, his address, age or colour..."20 There are many other potential tags–height, gender, facial symmetry,
place in birth order, native language, parental traits, macroeconomic conditions at age 18, and so on–all of
which relate systematically to income-earning ability and are largely exogenous to the individual. Genetic
information may someday provide particularly powerful tags.21
    In comparison, the role for tagging in modern tax policy is highly constrained. Some sizeable tagging
does occur, but only for tags that are virtually guaranteed to indicate that a taxpayer has low income-earning
ability. For example, disability bene…ts are common among developed countries, as are programs aimed at
alleviating poverty among the elderly. Indeed, nearly two-thirds of U.S. federal entitlement spending goes
to programs generally limited to the elderly and disabled (Viard, 2001). These groups are the prototypical
examples of those with systematically low income-earning ability.22 The other large example of tagging
is payments to families with young children, where the per capita ability to earn income is mechanically
low when compared to childless households. Other, isolated programs such as bene…ts for the blind follow
a similar pattern, so that existing tagging bears little resemblance to the broad and nuanced application
recommended by modern optimal tax theory.
    The main reasons why tagging may be unappealing in practice have been discussed from the beginning.23
   2 0 Despite this quotation, age should not be considered a tag. Unlike these other characteristics, age is shared by all individuals

(abstracting from mortality variation), so that age-dependent taxes do not achieve support for a disadvantaged group by taxing
another. In particular, age-dependent taxes do not violate equal sacri…ce once the full lifecycle of each taxpayer is considered.
See Weinzierl (2011) for a study of this and other aspects of age-dependent taxes.
   2 1 Note that privacy concerns may be relevant for some potential tags, such as genetic information. A concern for privacy is

one example of a value that could be incorporated into the optimal tax model using the approach of this paper, provided that
it can be translated convincingly into a preference over …nal allocations.
   2 2 The economic prospects for people over the age of 65 have improved in the decades since the programs designed to support

the elderly were created. The current debate over raising the retirement age in these programs may re‡ect, in part, skepticism
that age 65 is still a reliable indicator of lower income-earning ability. Also, see the earlier note in this section on age not being
a proper tag.
   2 3 Additional concerns about tagging exist. First, tagging could induce stigma. Stigma in this context is plausibly related to

the normative appeal of equal sacri…ce, as those receiving tag-based transfers would be sacri…cing less. Second, tagging could
slow the resolution of underlying distortions. If those distortions are due to irrational behavior by employers, it is unclear why



                                                                  8
Akerlof (1978) himself writes: "the disadvantages of tagging... are the perverse incentives to people to be
identi…ed as needy (to be tagged), the inequity of such a system, and its cost of administration."
   Akerlof’s …rst and third disadvantages of tagging are straightforward but of limited e¤ect. Tags are
undoubtedly less appealing if they are easily mimicked–as they would then distort behavior while failing to
redistribute–or costly to monitor and administer. Most of the candidate tags mentioned above and considered
in modern tax theory, however, are inelastic and cheap to enforce. Even a statistic such as "apparent I.Q.",
which may seem both elastic and costly to monitor, has such large implications outside the tax system for
individuals that we might argue it would be largely immune to these concerns.24 Certainly a characteristic
such as gender is highly inelastic and could be cheaply incorporated into the tax system.


2.1     Horizontal equity
Akerlof’s remaining disadvantage of tagging is that it could violate horizontal equity: the notoriously di¢ cult-
to-de…ne principle that "equals ought to be treated equally". This is a prominent concern: Boadway and
Pestieau (2006) write: "Of course, such a system may be resisted because, if the tagging characteristic has no
direct utility consequences, a di¤erentiated tax system violates the principle of horizontal equity". Similar
statements are made by, e.g., Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980) and Auerbach and Hassett (1999).
    On its own, the principle of horizontal equity o¤ers an unsatisfying explanation for the limits to tagging.
First, it is a tautological solution: it literally assumes that tagging is costly.25 It is also an unreliable solution,
as the choice of which characteristics are to be treated as "horizontal" is, at heart, arbitrary. For example,
if "equals" are de…ned by income, they cannot also be de…ned by income-earning ability if preferences over
consumption and leisure are heterogeneous. In that case, the principle of horizontal equity gives no guidance
as to how to resolve this contradiction. Most important, once one chooses a de…nition of "horizontal," it
remains to be explained why that de…nition is appropriate. Musgrave (1959) puts it best: "If there is no
speci…ed reason for discriminating among unequals, how can there be a reason for avoiding discrimination
among equals?"
    The core of the problem for horizontal equity is that, as Kaplow (2008) writes, it "lacks a¢ rmative
justi…cation." It o¤ers no defense of its limited form of equal treatment. In fact, its incompleteness as a
normative criterion for optimal tax is made clear by its inability to o¤er guidance on how taxes required for
public goods ought to be assigned–for that, its supporters must turn to vertical equity, a principle with an
entirely distinct normative basis.
    In contrast, the principle of Equal Sacri…ce is a comprehensive criterion of optimal taxation with a
solid normative foundation of equal treatment for all individuals that, as one of its outcomes, discourages
tagging.26 In other words, rather than a requirement of horizontal equity acting as an ad hoc explanation for
limited tagging, in this paper a concern for horizontal equity arises endogenously out of the classic principle
of Equal Sacri…ce. One contribution of this paper, therefore, can be seen as providing a normatively rigorous
foundation for the concern over horizontal equity long intuited as the obstacle to greater tagging and, then,
examining the broader consequences of that foundation for income taxation.
tagging would exacerbate their mistakes. If not, the distortions are likely to be persistent. Third, tagging may be against the
laws or constitutions of various nations. Any such prohibitions on tagging beg the question of why they are accepted by voters.
  2 4 Mirrlees (1971) makes the same point on I.Q. See page 208.
  2 5 Related to this point is that the narrowness of horizontal equity prevents it from capturing the broader critique of Utilitar-

ianism discussed above.
  2 6 The distaste for tagging under Equal Sacri…ce comes from such personal characteristics being irrelevant to the sacri…ce an

individual bears to pay a given tax.




                                                                 9
3     Generalizing the optimal tax model for normative diversity
Appealing as it may be to generalize the optimal tax model’s normative perspective to capture the diverse
moralities that drive public and scholarly debate over taxes, there is a methodological obstacle: many of
the most prominent normative criteria evaluate outcomes in ways that are not directly commensurable. For
example, Utilitarianism ranks all possible allocations, but Equal Sacri…ce yields only a most-preferred out-
come and fails to rank alternative allocations. To obtain a ranking of allocations that re‡ects the judgments
of both criteria therefore requires a translation of Equal Sacri…ce into a more complete form. This case is
an example of a more general problem.27
    This paper ensures commensurability by representing the priorities of each normative criterion with a
loss function that depends on deviations of the actual allocation of resources from each criterion’s optimal
allocation. Of course, specifying these loss functions is a matter of judment, and some may object to their use
altogether. In the end, the appeal of my analysis will depend on how closely the optimal allocations and loss
functions I use align with the priorities of the normative criteria. These loss functions can be speci…ed in a
way that respects Pareto e¢ ciency, as the examples below illustrate, avoiding the problem with non-welfarist
criteria noted by Kaplow and Shavell (2001).
    In this paper, a social planner minimizes a "social loss function" that is the weighted sum of these
criterion-speci…c losses. The weight on a given criterion’s loss represents the force that criterion exerts
on society’s moral evaluations. The social planner is therefore interpreted as an authority using a diverse
normative criterion that is the product of an (unspeci…ed) political process.
    This loss-minimization approach to combining disparate normative criteria appears to be consistent with
the "consequential evaluation" of Amartya Sen (2000).28 Sen does not specify how these criteria ought to be
combined, but a suggestive passage indicates that my approach of social loss minimization may not be far
o¤ the mark: "...rights-inclusive objectives in a system of consequential evaluation can accommodate certain
rights the ful…llment of which would be excellent but not guaranteed, and we can still try to minimize the
shortfall." Now I develop this generalized optimal tax model formally.


3.1     The model
Individuals di¤er in their innate ability to earn income, denoted wi for types i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig, with the
                                                                 PI i
proportion of the population with ability i denoted pi such that   i=1 p = 1. An individual of type i derives
utility from consumption c and disutility from exerting labor e¤ort y=w to earn income y. Denote the utility
function U (c; y=w).29
                                            I
    A planner chooses allocations ci ; y i i=1 to minimize social loss subject to feasibility and incentive
compatibility constraints. Formally, the planner’s problem is:
  2 7 For example, Utilitarianism has a consequentialist (i.e., welfarist) criterion, namely maximal aggregate utility, that ranks all

possible allocations based exclusively on the utility levels of the individuals in society. In contrast, some normative frameworks
stress the moral relevance of concerns such as freedom, rights, and rules, rather than the ends emphasized by Utilitarianism.
These frameworks are often referred to as deontological, and a long-standing concern in moral philosophy is whether the
judgments of consequentalist and deontological frameworks can be compared.
  2 8 In Sen (1982) he writes: "...both welfarist consequentialism (such as utilitarianism) and constraint-based deontology are

fundamentally inadequate because of their failure to deal with certain important types of interdependences present in moral
problems. This leads to an alternative approach... which incorporates, among other things, some types of rights in the evaluation
of states of a¤airs, and which gives these rights in‡uence on the choice of actions through the evaluation of consequent states
of a¤airs."
  2 9 As in most optimal tax analyses, I assume utilities are interpersonally comparable.




                                                                 10
Problem 1 Social planner’s problem (general case)
                                                                     X                                 I                   I
                                               min             L=                 L        ci ; y i    i=1
                                                                                                              ; ci ; y i   i=1
                                                                                                                                    ;                                 (1)
                                    fci   ;y i gIi=1 2fF\ICg
                                                                      2


where the criterion-speci…c loss functions L are de…ned below;
F denotes the set of feasible allocations for the economy:
                                                         (                        I
                                                                                                                  )
                                                                        I         X
                                                  F=           ci ; y i i=1   :         pi y i        ci       G ;                                                    (2)
                                                                                  i=1


where G is exogenous, required government spending on public goods;
IC denotes the set of incentive compatible allocations:
                               n               I
                                                                                                                                        o
                        IC =       ci ; y i    i=1
                                                     : U ci ; y i =wi         U cj ; y j =wi               for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig :                            (3)

    The novel component of this planner’s problem is its objective, captured in expression (1), to minimize
the weighted sum of criterion-speci…c losses across a set of normative criteria.
    The weights f g 2 applied to each loss function represent the importance each normative criterion
plays in society’s evaluations of policy. A number of models of the policymaking process could be used
to generate such weights. The most straightforward is that the median (pivotal) voter has his or her own
weights on each normative criterion, adopted by policymakers as a result of electoral competition.30 One
implication of this paper’s analysis is that future research estimating the values of these weights and how
they are generated by the political process would be valuable.
    The losses to which these weights apply are calculated using two components that, together, capture the
priorities of each normative criterion.
    First, each criterion generates a preferred, economically-feasible allocation of consumption and income
across types, which I label the " -optimal feasible allocation". To identify these allocations, start by assuming
that each normative criterion 2 implies a (possibly incomplete) preference relation               on the set F, so
                              i I                                                                          I
                          i
that we say allocation c1 ; y1 i=1 2 F is weakly preferred under the criterion to allocation ci2 ; y2i i=1 2 F
if
                                                      I               I
                                            ci1 ; y1i i=1   ci2 ; y2i i=1 :
                                                                                                                                  I                   I
Given       , the strict preference relation                       is de…ned as usual. For any ci1 ; y1i                          i=1
                                                                                                                                        ; ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                            2 F;

                       I                       I                    I                          I                                  I                         I
           ci1 ; y1i   i=1
                                   ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                     , ci1 ; y1i    i=1
                                                                                   ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                      but not         ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                ci1 ; y1i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                                  :

These preference relations allow the identi…cation of the                                        -optimal feasible allocations, which I denote
n         oI
 ci ; y i    , and formally de…ne as follows.31
           i=1
  3 0 If
       one wished to consider, instead, di¤erent groups engaged in a policy-setting game, alternative approaches could be used.
For example, the Nash bargaining solution would optimize a weighted combination of their interests. "Veto" models such as
that in Moulin (1981) would allow a coalition of voters to block some alternatives. Such formulations are conceptually similar
to this paper’s, as the key to this paper’s results is not the speci…c formalization of the tradeo¤ between normative criteria but
rather that the tradeo¤ is included at all.
  3 1 No incentive compatibility constraints are imposed on the set of feasible allocations because we want to compare allocations

to a constant ideal for each criterion when varying the constraints on the planner’s information sets.




                                                                                  11
                                                                          n         oI
De…nition 1 An -optimal feasible allocation                                ci ; y i           is any allocation in the set F for which there is
                                                                                      i=1
                                                                                                       n          oI
                                           I                                                    I
no other allocation ci ; y i               i=1
                                                 in the set F such that:              ci ; y i i=1       ci ; y i    :
                                                                                                                          i=1

   These -optimal feasible allocations provide a key link across normative criteria.
   Second, each criterion’s priorities are represented by a loss function that measures the costs of deviations
                                                                                   n         oI
                                                                                                           I
from the criterion’s most preferred allocation. I denote these loss functions L     ci ; y i    ; ci ; y i i=1
                                                                                                                                              i=1
   The loss functions fL g 2 that I use in this paper satisfy the following three conditions. The …rst two
are straightforward. The third, Pareto E¢ ciency, may be more controversial but is generally viewed as a
reasonable requirement in the optimal taxation literature.32

Remark 1 For all                 2 , the loss function L (x; y) satis…es:
                                                     I                   I
   1. Ordinality: For any ci1 ; y1i                  i=1
                                                           ; ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                               2 F,

                                 I                    I                               I                   I                        I                            I
                L     ci ; y i   i=1
                                       ; ci1 ; y1i    i=1
                                                                   L       ci ; y i   i=1
                                                                                            ; ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                    , ci1 ; y1i    i=1
                                                                                                                                                    ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                                      ;

      so that the loss from one allocation is no greater than that from another to which it is weakly preferred
      under criterion ;
                            n         oI  n         oI
   2. Normalization: L       ci ; y i    ; ci ; y i     = 0, so that the loss is zero33 when the equilibrium
                                                      i=1                  i=1
        allocation equals the -optimal feasible allocation.

   3. Weak Pareto E¢ ciency:

                    U ci1 ; y1i =wi              U ci2 ; y2i =wi for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig
                                                              n         oI                                          n         oI                                          (4)
                                                                                       I                                                                I
                                                  )L           ci ; y i    ; ci1 ; y1i i=1                L          ci ; y i         ; ci2 ; y2i       i=1
                                                                                                                                                                ;
                                                                           i=1                                                  i=1


        which can be converted into Strong Pareto E¢ ciency if desired.34

    In words, Weak Pareto E¢ ciency as de…ned here says that if all individuals do at least as well under
allocation 1 as they do under allocation 2, the loss from allocation 1 cannot be greater than the loss from
allocation 2. This condition will prevent the planner from rejecting Pareto-improving allocations. It is too
weak, however, to guarantee that the planner will avoid Pareto-ine¢ cient allocations–for that, Strong Pareto
E¢ ciency is required.35
    Together, -optimal feasible allocations and loss functions allow us to make commensurable a diversity
of normative frameworks that, then, can jointly in‡uence the determination of optimal policy.
  3 2 See,   for examples of contrasting views, Sen and Williams (1982, introductory chapter) and Kaplow and Shavell (2001).
  3 3 Any    constant would accomplish the same normalization, though zero is the natural choice.
                                                                                                          0     0     0               0   0         0
  3 4 Namely,   U ci1 ; y1i =wi       U ci2 ; y2i =wi for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and U ci1 ; y1i =wi                      > U ci2 ; y2i =wi              for some i0 2
                       n           oI                          n         oI
                                                   I                                      I
f1; 2; :::; Ig ) L        ci ; y i     ; ci1 ; y1i i=1 < L      ci ; y i      ; ci2 ; y2i i=1
                                     i=1                                          i=1
  3 5 TheStrong Pareto E¢ ciency condition states, in words, that if all individuals do at least as well under allocation 1 as
under allocation 2, and at least one individual does better, then the loss from allocation 1 must be strictly less than the loss
from allocation 2.




                                                                                 12
4      A two-criterion case: Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce
In this section, I apply the previous section’s approach to the case of two criteria: the Utilitarian criterion
of maximal aggregate utility and the principle of Equal Sacri…ce.


4.1        -optimal feasible allocations
The …rst step in this application is to de…ne the preference relations that determine the -optimal feasible
allocations. The preference relation for Utilitarianism is familiar from the conventional optimal tax literature:
allocations are preferred that generate a greater sum of individual utilities. Formally, U til is de…ned by:

                                                                        I
                                                                        X                            I
                                                                                                     X
                                  I                          I
                      ci1 ; y1i   i=1   U til    ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                   ,          pi U ci1 ; y1i =wi           pi U ci2 ; y2i =wi :   (5)
                                                                        i=1                          i=1


The Utilitarian-optimal feasible allocation is therefore:

                                                             I
                                                             X                                     I
                                                                                                   X
                                           I
                          ciU til ; yU
                                     i
                                       til i=1   2F:               i
                                                                   pU    ciU til ; yU
                                                                                    i
                                                                                      til =w
                                                                                             i
                                                                                                         pi U ci ; y i =wi ;
                                                             i=1                                   i=1

                            I
for all possible ci ; y i i=1 2 F:
    The preference relation for the principle of Equal Sacri…ce requires more discussion. The key question is
from what starting point is each individual’s sacri…ce to be calculated? Though one could defend a number of
choices for that starting point, one natural option is the allocation that would obtain absent any government
intervention, i.e., the no-tax allocation. In particular, the allocation with no taxation is the preferred
allocation of the Libertarian framework with which the principle of equal sacri…ce has been linked.36 For
clarity, I will refer to the allocation with no taxation as the laissez-faire allocation and formally de…ne it as
follows.
                                              n        oI
De…nition 2 The laissez-faire allocation, cilf ; ylf i
                                                            2 F, where G = 0, satis…es the following conditions
                                                        i=1
(where Ux (c; y=w) denotes the partial derivative of individual utility with respect to x) :

    1. Ucilf cilf ; ylf
                     i
                        =wi = Uylf
                                i  cilf ; ylf
                                           i
                                              =wi =wi

    2. cilf = ylf
               i
                  :

    These conditions are simply that each individual maximizes utility and there are no interpersonal trans-
fers. In the statement of the de…nition, I clarify that G = 0, as this is the allocation with no taxation and,
therefore, no government spending.
    A well-known conceptual issue with the idea of the laissez-faire allocation is that any economy is, in
reality, inseparable from the existing set of taxes that fund the government and state institutions. The
laissez-faire allocation is, therefore, not well-de…ned, because G = 0 implies a very di¤erent economy than
that the status quo. In other words, if G > 0 is required for the status quo economy to function, the
laissez-faire allocation is not in the feasible set F.
  3 6 As Liam Murphy and Thomas Nagel (2002) have argued: "The implication for tax policy of rights-based libertarianism

in its pure or absolute form is that no compulsory taxation is legitimate..." The caveat in Sidgwick’s earlier statement raises
the important issue of whether the laissez-faire allocation is, in fact, a just starting point. One alternative to the laissez-faire
allocation as a starting point is to provide redistribution prior to assessing equal sacri…ce. Though a detailed analysis of that
case is not pursued here, so long as the starting allocation does not use tagging, Equal Sacri…ce will continue to discourage its
use.


                                                                              13
    Fortunately, the Equal Sacri…ce principle provides a natural way to convert the hypothetical laissez-faire
allocation into a preference relation over feasible allocations and an Equal-Sacri…ce-optimal (ES-optimal)
feasible allocation. Consider the following thought experiment. Suppose that the public goods necessary to
support the current economy are sustained without any cost to the economy, so that G = 0 but the status
quo economic system is feasible. According to Equal Sacri…ce, the (no tax) laissez-faire outcome in this
scenario is surely optimal, as it satis…es Equal Sacri…ce with the smallest possible uniform sacri…ce–that is,
zero–for all individuals. Now, suppose that sustaining those public goods is costly, so that G > 0. The Equal
Sacri…ce principle implies that the cost of the public goods will be distributed across individuals such that
the utility loss is identical (and as small as possible) for all.37
    Formally, de…ne ES as the set of all feasible allocations that satisfy the principle of Equal Sacri…ce relative
to the laissez-faire allocation:
       n               I
                                                                                                                                                           o
ES =        ci ; y i   i=1
                             2 F : U cilf ; ylf
                                             i
                                                =wi                 U ci ; y i =wi = U cjlf ; ylf
                                                                                               j
                                                                                                  =wj                U cj ; y j =wj
                                                                                                                              for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig :
                                                                                                                                                (6)
   The Equal Sacri…ce preference relation, denoted                                       ES ; indicates that one allocation in ES is preferred to
another if it generates a smaller uniform sacri…ce:

                   I                             I
       ci1 ; y1i   i=1       ES     ci2 ; y2i    i=1
                                                       , U cilf ; ylf
                                                                   i
                                                                      =wi               U ci1 ; y1i =wi     U cilf ; ylf
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                         =wi      U ci2 ; y2i =wi ;   (7)

                   I                    I
for ci1 ; y1i i=1 ; ci2 ; y2i i=1 2 ES and for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig :
   Consequently, the ES-optimal feasible allocation is that which achieves the smallest equal sacri…ce while
                                                 I
funding G. Formally, we de…ne ciES ; yES     i
                                                 i=1
                                                     as follows:

                                  I
               ciES ; yES
                       i
                                  i=1
                                         2 ES : U cilf ; ylf
                                                          i
                                                             =wi              U ciES ; yES
                                                                                        i
                                                                                           =wi            U cilf ; ylf
                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                       =wi      U ci ; y i =wi ;

                                                                                  I
for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and for all possible ci ; y i i=1 2 ES:
    The next step is to specify the loss functions for the planner.


4.2      Loss functions
The Utilitarian loss function LU til converts the familiar goal of aggregate utility maximization into aggregate
sacri…ce minimization:
                                                                                  I
                                                                                  X
                         LU til         ciU til ; yU
                                                   i
                                                     til   i
                                                             ; ci ; y i   i
                                                                              =         pi U ciU til ; yU
                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                          til =w
                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                       U ci ; y i =wi   :             (8)
                                                                                  i=1


In words, it is the sum of individuals’utility losses from having the equilibrium allocation ci ; y i i deviate
from the Utilitarian-optimal feasible allocation. This loss function has the appealing property that it di-
rectly adopts the cardinal welfare comparisons underlying the Utilitarian preference relation and, thus, the
conventional optimal tax model.
    Unlike Utilitarianism, the Equal Sacri…ce criterion does not rank allocations that deviate from its pre-
ferred allocation. Instead, I will specify a loss function that is designed to re‡ect the priorities of the Equal
Sacri…ce principle. In particular, the Equal Sacri…ce loss function LES satis…es the following three proper-
  3 7 Equal Sacri…ce has at times been interpreted to mean equal proportional sacri…ce. Both interpretations share a distaste for

tagging, as sacri…ce depends only on income-earning ability.




                                                                                        14
ties:38 …rst, deviations of individual utility below the ES-optimal feasible allocation are costly but deviations
above the ES-optimal feasible allocation yield little or no o¤setting bene…ts39 ; second, losses increase more
than proportionally with the size of the deviation of individual utility below the ES-optimal feasible alloca-
tion; third, gains are concave in the size of the deviation of individual utility above the ES-optimal feasible
allocation. I formalize these properties as follows:

                                                                    I
                                                                    X
                   LES      ciES ; yES
                                    i
                                          i
                                            ; ci ; y i    i
                                                               =          pi V U ciES ; yES
                                                                                         i
                                                                                            =wi ; U ci ; y i =wi       ;    (9)
                                                                    i=1


where                                                    (
                                       i                                 U i UES
                                                                              i
                                                                                     if UESi
                                                                                             < Ui
                                 V    UES ; Ui      =                     i     i
                                                                                                  ,
                                                                        UES U       if UES U i
                                                                                         i                                 (10)
                                     for scalars f             0;       > , 2 (0; 1], > 1g :

Consistent with the …rst property, the loss function in expressions (9) and (10) applies weights and ,
where 0       < , to deviations of individual utility above and below the ES-optimal feasible allocation. The
asymmetric punishment of downward deviations from the ES-optimal feasible allocation implied by <
rejects the Utilitarian idea that the distribution of utility across individuals is irrelevant. The assumption
that      0 respects Weak Pareto E¢ ciency as discussed above ( > 0 would respect Strong Pareto E¢ ciency).
Consistent with the second and third properties, the parameters > 1 and 2 (0; 1] imply losses that increase
more than proportionally with deviations below and gains that increase (weakly) less than proportionally
for deviations above the ES-optimal feasible allocation.


4.3       Planner’s problem
                                                                                                                           I
With the loss functions de…ned by expressions (8), (9) and (10), the planner in this case chooses ci ; y i                 i=1
to solve the following problem.

Problem 2 Social Planner’s Problem (speci…c case)
                                         8                                                                         9
                                         >               P
                                                         I
                                                                                                                   >
                                         >                     pi U ciU til ; yU
                                                                               i        i
                                                                                            U ci ; y i =wi         >
                                         <      U til                            til =w                            =
                                                         i=1
                          min                                                                                          ;   (11)
                   fci ;y i gIi=1 2fF\ICg >
                                          >                    P
                                                               I                                                   >
                                                                                                                   >
                                         :      +        ES          pi V U ciES ; yES
                                                                                    i
                                                                                       =wi ; U ci ; y i =wi        ;
                                                               i=1


where
                                                                U til   +    ES   = 1;

V ( ) is de…ned in (10), F is de…ned in (2), and IC is de…ned in (3) :

    This planner’s problem is equivalent to the conventional approach if ES = 0:
    In the next two sections, the optimal policy generated by this planner’s problem will be analyzed in
depth. First, however, to illustrate the e¤ect of positive ES on optimal policy, I simulate a simple model
with two types of workers and show how this form of normative diversity a¤ects the well-being of individuals
in the economy.
 3 8 Inaddition to the three properties named above: Ordinality, Normalization, and Weak Pareto E¢ ciency.
 3 9 Thisproperty is consistent with the classic "loss aversion" of Kahneman and Tversky (1979). However, equal sacri…ce is
not consistent with the diminishing sensitivity to losses that is part of classic prospect theory.



                                                                            15
4.4    Example with two types
Individual income-earning ability is either w1 = 10 or w2 = 50, each of which makes up half the population,
so p1 = p2 = 0:5: The individual utility function is
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                         ci                  1         1          yi
                                                                      U ci ; y i =wi =                                                                         ;
                                                                                                              1                                   wi

where = 1:5; = 3. The Equal Sacri…ce loss function’s parameters are = 0:5; = 20; = 2:0; = 1:0,
and the social loss function’s weight on the Equal Sacri…ce loss function is ES = 0:20. Government spending
G is set to zero.
    This simple example is most useful for showing the e¤ect of normative diversity of this type on the
allocation of utility across individuals. Figure 1 plots the utility of the high-ability individual against that
of the low-ability individual. The bold solid line shows the utility possibilities frontier (UPF): that is, the
highest incentive-compatible, feasible utility for the low-ability individual given a utility level for the high-
ability individual. The thin solid and dotted lines are the indi¤erence curves passing through the -optimal
feasible (but not necessarily incentive compatible) allocations for the Utilitarian and Equal Sacri…ce criteria.
The dashed line is the indi¤erence curve for the planner that chooses (by tangency with the UPF) the optimal
allocation for the economy. Also shown are the optimal allocations chosen by each criterion.



                                               1.58

                                                          Equal Sac rific e optimum
                                               1.56


                                               1.54               Planner optimum



                                               1.52
                      U tility for high type




                                                1.5


                                               1.48
                                                                                      U tilitarian optimum


                                               1.46
                                                                                                                                             U tility Pos s ibilities Frontier
                                                                                                                                             U tilitarian indifferenc e c urv e
                                               1.44                                                                                          Planner indifferenc e c urv e
                                                                                                                                             Equal Sac rific e indifferenc e c urv e

                                               1.42
                                                                                                                  U tilitarian optimum (not inc entiv e c ompatible)

                                                1.4
                                                      1         1.1         1.2       1.3          1.4              1.5         1.6         1.7          1.8           1.9             2
                                                                                                         U tility for low ty pe




                     Figure 1: The Utility Possibilities Frontier and Indi¤erence Curves


     Figure 1 shows how the Equal Sacri…ce loss function, LES ; di¤ers from the Utilitarian, LU til . To remain
indi¤erent while moving away from its optimal allocation, LES requires a greater gain for the low-ability
individual in exchange for a given loss for the high-ability individual. Moreover, LES increases more than
proportionally with these deviations, while LU til is linear. The impact of incorporating this loss function in
the planner’s decisions is as expected: the planner compromises between the competing normative criteria,
implementing some redistribution but stopping well short of what a Utilitarian would choose. By varying
  U til , we can shift the planner’s chosen allocation along the UPF.




                                                                                                              16
5      Analysis of optimal policy with a role for Equal Sacri…ce
In this section, I examine analytically the characteristics of optimal policy with normative diversity as
formalized in Section 4, that is, with both Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce in the planner’s objective. I
consider two e¤ects of increasing the weight on Equal Sacri…ce in the social loss function. First, I show that
it reduces the optimal extent of redistribution through tagging. Second, I show that it has a theoretically
ambiguous impact on the pattern of optimal marginal tax rates.


5.1        Optimal tagging
To analyze optimal tagging, I modify the social planner’s problem so that individuals di¤er in two character-
istics: unobservable ability w indexed by i, and an observable, tagged variable indexed by m = f1; 2; :::; M g.
                                                I;M
Therefore, allocations are denoted ci;m ; y i;m i=1;m=1 and the population proportion of the individual with
                                                                 PI PM
ability i and tagged variable value m is denoted pi;m where             pi;m = 1. The modi…ed planner’s
                                                                                                 i=1 m=1
problem is as follows.

Problem 3 Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging
                                       8                            h                                                                   i   9
                                       >               P
                                                       I P
                                                         M
                                                                                                                                            >
                                       >                        pi;m U ci;m      i;m      i
                                                                                                                   U ci;m ; y i;m =wi       >
                                       <       U til                    U til ; yU til =w                                                   =
                                                       i=1 m=1
                   min                                                                                                                          ;   (12)
      fci;m ;yi;m gi=1;m=1 2fF\ICg >
                   I;M
                                   >                       PI PM                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                            >
                                   :           +       ES              pi;m V U ci;m   i;m
                                                                                 ES ; yES =w
                                                                                             i
                                                                                               ; U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                         ;
                                                            i=1 m=1


where
                                                                    U til   +    ES   = 1;

V ( ) is a modi…ed version of (10),
                                                            8          h                         i
                                                            <               U i;m       i;m
                                                                                       UES                     i;m
                                                                                                           if UES  < U i;m
                                 i;m
                              V UES  ; U i;m =                  h                                i                              ;
                                                            :            i;m
                                                                        UES           U i;m                   i;m
                                                                                                          if UES       U i;m                        (13)
                                  for scalars f         0;      > ,          2 (0; 1],        > 1g :

the feasibility set is a natural modi…cation of expression (2) ;
                                       (                                    I X
                                                                              M
                                                                                                                            )
                                                         I;M                X
                                           i;m
                                  F=       c     ; y i;m i=1;m=1        :              p   i;m
                                                                                                     y   i;m   i;m
                                                                                                               c          G ;                       (14)
                                                                            i=1 m=1


and the set of incentive compatible allocations IC is:
       n                  I;M
                                                                                                                                                      o
IC =       ci;m ; y i;m   i=1;1
                                  : U ci;m ; y i;m =wi          U cj;m ; y j;m =wi               for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m 2 f1; 2; :::; M g :
                                                                                                                                               (15)

   In this problem the incentive constraints (15) are m-speci…c. That is, the planner can restrict each
individual to the allocations within his or her tagged group, whereas if tagging were excluded the planner
would be required to ensure that each individual preferred his or her allocation to that of any individual in
any tagged group.



                                                                                17
   The following proposition is implied by the …rst-order conditions of this planner’s problem, assuming
separable utility between consumption and labor e¤ort. The proof can be found in the Appendix.

Proposition 1 If Uc;y=w (c; y=w) = 0, the solution to the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging satis…es:

                                                       1                                     i;m
                                                                                        @V (UES  ;U i;m )
                                    Ei     Uci;m                Ei    U til       ES         @U i;m
                                                      1
                                                            =                                 i;n
                                                                                                             ;   (16)
                                                                                         @V (UES  ;U i;n )
                                    Ei      Uci;n               Ei    U til        ES         @U i;n



where U i;m denotes U ci;m ; y i;m =wi              and Uci;m denotes @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi =@ci;m :

    The left-hand side of (16) is the ratio of the expected inverse marginal utilities of consumption across
tagged types. This equals the ratio of the cost in consumption units of an incentive-compatible marginal
increase in utility across all individuals with tagged value m versus n. The following corollary makes plain
why this ratio is of interest.

Corollary 1 If         ES   = 0, equation (16) simpli…es to:

                                                                              1
                                                           Ei    Uci;m
                                                                              1
                                                                                  = 1:                           (17)
                                                           Ei    Uci;n


    This result, also shown in Weinzierl (2011) for age-dependent taxes and labeled the Symmetric Inverse
Euler equation in that context, shows that the Utilitarian planner with access to tagging will equalize the
cost of providing utility to tagged groups. Intuitively, the planner has full information about the tag, so
any opportunity to raise overall welfare by transfers across tag values will be exploited.
    Next, I derive a condition analogous to (17) for positive ES . I make two mild assumptions to provide a
clean benchmark case.40 Importantly, both of these assumptions hold in the numerical simulations of Section
6.
    Assumption 1: At least one pair of tagged groups (m; n) 2 f1; 2; :::; M g can be ordered such that m < n
implies that the solution to the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging when ES < 1 satis…es

                                              U i;m        U i;n for all i = f1; 2; :::; Ig ;                    (18)

and
                                         U j;m > U j;n for at least one j = f1; 2; :::; Ig :                     (19)

   In words, Assumption 1 holds that tagged groups can be "ranked", for instance by some function of the
mean and variance of wages within each group, so that individuals in at least one higher-ranked group fare
no better, and in some cases worse, than individuals of the same abilities in a lower-ranked group when
the planner is at least in part Utilitarian. That is, individuals of any given ability obtain allocations that
generate greater losses or smaller gains when they are members of a higher-ranked group.
   Assumption 1 is closely related to a well-known result from previous optimal tax analyses that an "advan-
taged" tagged group is taxed heavily by a conventional Utilitarian-optimal tax policy. Mankiw and Weinzierl
 4 0 These   assumptions are su¢ cient, but not necessary, for the result in Corollary 2.



                                                                     18
(2010) show this numerically for the optimal height tax in the United States, under which a tall taxpayer
ends up with lower utility than a short taxpayer of the same ability. Intuitively, the planner treats those with
the advantaged tag as higher-skilled workers on average, requiring them to produce more income than others.
Mirrlees (1971, 1974) showed much the same result for higher ability individuals in the full information case
(which is the relevant analogue) of his optimal tax problem, a result discussed in a di¤erent context below
(in Section 6).
    Assumption 2: In the solution to the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging when ES < 1,

                              i;m
                             UES  6= U i;m for all i = f1; 2; :::; Ig and m 2 f1; 2; :::; M g :                             (20)

   Assumption 2 is a technical assumption that rules out the scenario in which the utility allocated to
any individual under the optimal policy exactly equals the utility that individual obtains under the ES-
optimal feasible allocation.41 This assumption is unlikely to bind because the optimal allocations with
 ES < 1 re‡ect not only the Equal Sacri…ce priorities but also the Utilitarian ones, and because incentive
compatibility is imposed on the optimal allocations but not on the ES-optimal feasible allocations. Again,
note that Assumption 2 is satis…ed in all cases in the numerical simulations of Section 6.
   With these assumptions, the following corollary to Proposition 1 can be derived and compared with
Corollary 1 above. The proof is in the Appendix.

Corollary 2 If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then the solution to Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging
satis…es
                                                                    1
                                                    Ei    Uci;m
                                                                    1
                                                                        < 1:                                                (21)
                                                    Ei    Uci;n

    Corollary 2 is the main analytical result of the paper. It states that the planner who puts positive weight
on Equal Sacri…ce allocates consumption in a way that leaves the cost of raising utility for the disadvantaged
group (i.e., m in this example) lower than that for the advantaged group. As shown in result (17), a purely
Utilitarian planner would transfer additional resources to the disadvantaged group, but the planner with
this more diverse objective stops short, redistributing less. The numerical simulations below reinforce this
lesson.42
    Intuitively, taxing the advantaged tagged group to aid the disadvantaged group generates costs in unequal
sacri…ce to this planner. A Utilitarian planner ignores the distribution of sacri…ce, caring only about total
sacri…ce (which tagging helps to minimize). This disparity in the treatment of transfers across tagged groups
causes an optimal policy based in part on Equal Sacri…ce to use tagging less than in conventional theory.
  4 1 In particular, the scenario it rules out, where these utility levels coincide, generates complications due to the nondi¤er-

entiability of the Equal Sacri…ce loss function at the point. An alternative assumption to Assumption 2 that yields the same
technical simpli…cation is that = 0.
  4 2 Corollaries 1 and 2 hold in the simulations of Section 6.




                                                               19
5.2    Optimal marginal distortions
To analyze marginal distortions to labor supply in this paper’s generalized model, I return to the Social
Planner’s Problem in (11), where individuals di¤er only in ability w. Denote with jji the multiplier on the
incentive constraint indicating that type i does not prefer type j 0 s allocation. We can show the following:

Proposition 2 The optimal marginal distortion to the labor supply decision of an individual with ability
type i, denoted i , satis…es the following condition.

                                                                         i
                                                                    @V (UES ;U i )                  P
                                                                                                    I
                      i   i   i
                                                 pi 1 +     ES         @U i          1          +         pj      jji     ijj

        i
              Uyi c ; y =w                                                                          j=1
  1         = i                    =                                                                                                        ;
             w Uci (ci ; y i =wi )                        @V (UES
                                                               i ;U i
                                                                      )              P
                                                                                     I                            U (ci ;y i =wj )
                                                                                                               wi yi
                                       pi   1+   ES          @U i          1     +         pj       jji
                                                                                                               w Uyi (ci ;y i =wi )
                                                                                                                j
                                                                                                                                      ijj
                                                                                     j=1
                                                                                                                                            (22)
where Ux is the partial derivative of individual utility with respect to x and U i denotes U ci ; y i ; wi .

   To interpret condition (22), start with the conventional case in which ES = 0. Then, because the
              ci ;y i =wj )
     wi yi (
         U
term w j U     i    i
           i (c ;y =w )
                        i   is less than one for wi < wj , binding incentive constraints on higher skill types (i.e.,
            y
 ijj
     > 0) drive the optimal distortion i above zero in the conventional model.
    A positive marginal distortion on type i has a bene…t and a cost in conventional theory. The bene…t of
such a distortion is that it allows the planner to o¤er a more generous tax treatment to i without tempting
higher-skilled individuals to claim it. The greater the gain in social welfare due to this redistribution
(measured by ijj for wj > wi ), the greater is the optimal distortion to i. The conventional cost of such a
distortion is the reduced e¤ort and, therefore, output from type i. The size of this cost increases with the
share of i in the population, pi , so i falls with larger pi .
    If ES > 0, both the bene…ts and costs of optimal marginal distortions are a¤ected.
    First, with ES > 0 marginal distortions have a second cost because they cause deviations from the
ES-optimal allocations. The social cost of this deviation for individual i is measured by the expression
              i
         @V (UES ;U i )
 ES         @U i        1 . A larger ES will increase this expression and decrease the optimal distortion on
             i
       @V (UES    ;U i )                          i
                                            @V (UES  ;U i )
i if       @U i          > 1. Note that         @U i        measures the marginal reduction in social loss from raising
the allocated utility of type i. Starting from the Utilitarian allocation, this reduction in loss will tend
to be greater for the high-skilled, as their utilities will be far below the laissez-faire allocation. Formally,
        i
  @V (UES  ;U i )
      @U i         is likely to be increasing in type because losses increase more than proportionally with deviations
below the laissez-faire allocation and gains are concave in deviations above it. This e¤ect of increasing ES
will tend to be a decrease in the optimal distortions on higher-skilled workers relative to lower-skilled workers.
     Second, the bene…ts of redistribution change when the planner puts weight on Equal Sacri…ce. In par-
ticular, the social value of redistributing from higher-skilled individuals ( ijj for wj > wi ) is less, because
the planner places less value on individuals (i.e., low earners) enjoying greater utility that in the laissez-
faire. With smaller bene…ts from redistributing to the low- and moderate-skilled individuals, the required
distortions on them are smaller. Therefore, this e¤ect of increasing ES will tend to decrease the optimal
distortions on low- and moderate-skilled workers relative to higher-skilled workers.
     The ambiguity in the e¤ects of positive ES on optimal marginal tax rates indicates the general di¢ culty
in obtaining de…nitive results from condition (22). For a more comprehensive characterization of optimal
income taxes with normative diversity, I turn to calibrated numerical simulations in the next section.


                                                               20
6      Numerical results
In this section I use numerical simulations calibrated to micro-level data for the United States to show
the quantitative e¤ects and explanatory power of including Equal Sacri…ce in the objective function of the
optimal tax model. First, I consider three prominent potential tags–height, gender, and race–and show that
parameter values for the model of Section 4 exist in which the optimal policy rejects the use of these tags but
accepts redistributive income taxes driven by di¤erences in income-earning ability. Second, I choose one such
parameterization and show that the model simultaneously endorses a sizeable and empirically reasonable tag
on blindness, one of the few personal characteristics explicitly tagged in the U.S. tax code.43
    These results show that the revision of the conventional theory proposed above can resolve the puzzle in
the title of this paper.
    It turns out that the same revision can help address two additional puzzles in optimal tax research.
First, I use the same parameterized model and a more detailed ability distribution to show that normative
diversity of this type substantially reduces the extent of a controversial feature of the …rst-best allocations
in the conventional optimal tax model–rank reversals in utility. Second, I show that optimal income taxes
under the same parameterization include a pro…le of marginal tax rates resembling that in Saez (2001) but
with a lower maximum rate. This …nding relates to the puzzle identi…ed in Diamond and Saez (2011) that
the conventional model implies substantially higher peak marginal rates than those prevailing in current
policy.


6.1         Optimal tagging with normative diversity
I use the following parameter values in the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging from Section 4:

                                                 Table 1: Parameter values
                                                                                            1
                                   ES                                                           1   G
                             f0:10; 0:20g      2:0    1:0    0:01    f10; 20g      1:5     0:5      20

The parameter ES = 1         U til is the weight on the Equal Sacri…ce loss function in the social objective
function. Two plausible interpretations of ES are as either the share of the population that uses Equal
Sacri…ce as its primary normative criterion or the weight of the Equal Sacri…ce principle in the median voter’s
normative preferences. Though I am not aware of any direct evidence on either of these interpretations,
evidence is available on opinions toward the Libertarian normative framework to which Equal Sacri…ce
has been linked (for instance by Murphy and Nagel, 2004). As noted earlier, public opinion surveys and
lab experiments estimate the proportion of individuals with traditional Libertarian views to be 10 to 20
percent in the United States (Boaz and Kirby 2007, Cappelen et al. 2011) Consistent with that …nding,
Konow (2003) reports the results of a survey testing an updated version of Robert Nozick’s famous Wilt
Chamberlain example, …nding that the case in which a talented basketball player earns (and keeps) an
extraordinarily high income due to voluntary payments by his fans is considered "fair" by at least 24 percent
of respondents. These results provide some support for the assumed values of ES shown in Table 1.
    The next four parameters determine the shape of the Equal Sacri…ce loss function as speci…ed in expression
(13): and determine its concavity, while and determine the extent of loss aversion. A larger relative
  4 3 For
        simplicity, I do not consider di¤erences in preferences or elasticities across these groups, though such di¤erences provide
an alternative justi…cation for tagging.




                                                                21
to means that the social loss function interprets downward deviations from Equal Sacri…ce as more costly.44
The …nal three parameters are familiar from conventional models: and 1 1 are the coe¢ cient of relative
risk aversion and the labor supply elasticity, and G is required government revenue. I choose and 1 1
to match mainstream estimates and G to approximate the current value (as a share of total income) in the
United States.

6.1.1     Rejecting height, gender, and race tags while accepting redistribution

The data required for the simulation of the optimal height, gender, and race taxes are ability distributions by
tagged type. I classify respondents to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth into three height categories,
two gender categories, and two race categories.45 For height, I use gender-dependent ranges, as the height
distributions of males and females are substantially di¤erent: for men the thresholds are 70 and 72 inches;
for women the thresholds are 63 and 66 inches. Table 2 lists the twelve tagged groups that these divisions
generate in descending order of their mean wage, where the wage is reported earnings divided by reported
hours in 1996.46 The table shows the mean and standard deviation of each group’s reported wages and the
population proportion of each group, all adjusted for the NLSY sample weights, as well as each group’s raw
sample size in the NLSY.

                                                     Table 2: Tagged groups
                      1       2          3         4        5         6        7         8          9         10      11        12
                    Tall    Med.       Short      Tall    Tall      Short     Med.     Med.       Short      Tall    Med.     Short
                      M       M          M         M        F         M        M         F          F         F        F         F
                    White   White      White      NW      White      NW       NW       White      White      NW      NW        NW
 Mean wage          17.7    16.9        16.3      15.3    14.3       13.6     13.5     12.8        12.3      11.2    10.7      10.5
  SD wage           11.3    11.0        10.4      12.3    11.6       9.9      10.4     11.6        10.3      5.9      6.2       5.7
 Pop. share         0.11    0.13        0.21      0.02    0.09       0.08     0.02     0.14        0.10      0.01    0.03      0.05
   Obs.              411     507        785       226      340       994      314       557        405       223     469       653

The di¤erences in wages among these twelve tagged groups are substantial. The highest-earning group in
Table 2 earns a mean wage nearly 70 percent greater than the lowest-earning group. Overall, average wages
are higher for those who are tall, male, and white. Appendix Table 1 provides more detail than Table 2,
reporting the (sample weights-adjusted) distributions of the members of the tagged groups across ten wage
bins. These wage distributions are the second key input to the numerical simulations (in addition to the
assumed parameters in Table 1).
   For each of the four parameter vectors implied by Table 1, I report measures of the optimal extent of
tagging and income tax progressivity in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively.
   To measure the extent of tagging, Table 3 reports the "extra" average tax paid by or transfer made to
the members of each tagged group as a share of their income when the planner can use tagging as compared
to when it cannot.47 More speci…cally, this is the ratio of total tax payments to total income for each group
  4 4 Simulations   with the special case of = 0 show that the results are virtually identical to those reported in the paper.
  45 I  omit individuals who report negative wages or earnings or who report less than 1,000 or more than 4,000 hours of annual
work. The results are not sensitive to these restrictions, which are likely to remove misreported data.
   4 6 Using all three tags in concert maximizes the power of tagging in the conventional model.
   4 7 The planner’s problem when it cannot tag di¤ers from the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging in that each individual

i; m must prefer its bundle to any other bundle j; n. In that problem, tagged groups with higher wage distributions will pay
greater average tax rates because the tax system is progressive. The "extra" taxes and transfers reported in Table 3 isolate the
direct e¤ects of tags on taxes.


                                                              22
under the optimal policy less the same ratio under the constrained-optimal policy with no tagging. If that
di¤erence is positive, the group is paying taxes in addition to what it would pay if tagging were prohibited.
If that di¤erence is negative, it is receiving an extra transfer. For reference, I report the same statistic for
the policy solution when ES = 0, the fully Utilitarian (conventional Mirrleesian) planner.


                         Table 3: Extent of Tagging (Extra tax or transfer rate, in percent)
                  1         2              3        4         5           6      7       8         9     10       11      12
                 Tall      Med.          Short     Tall      Tall       Short   Med.    Med.     Short   Tall    Med.    Short
                  M         M             M         M         F           M      M       F         F      F       F        F
  ES             White     White         White     NW        White       NW     NW      White    White   NW      NW       NW
  0      n/a      10.5      8.1            6.3     1.7        -4.3      -5.5    -3.6    -11.7    -13.4   -17.6   -22.0   -23.4
 0:10     10      1.8       1.3            1.3     0.9        -0.4      -0.5    -1.3     -2.0     -2.6    -2.4    -4.9    -5.2
 0:20     10      0.8       0.5            0.5     0.7        -0.1      -0.1    -0.9     -0.9     -1.2    -0.8    -2.0    -2.7
 0:10     20      0.6       0.5            0.6     0.3        -0.1      -0.2    -1.0     -0.8     -0.9    -0.3    -1.4    -2.0
 0:20     20      0.0       -0.1          -0.1     0.3        0.1       0.1      0.0     0.0       0.1    0.1     -0.4    -0.4

  To gauge the progressivity of the optimal income tax, Table 4 reports the average tax rate paid by the
members of each wage range under each parameterization.


                       Table 4: Extent of Progressivity (Average tax rates, in percent)
                                                      Average wage rate in range
          ES             2.81    6.50      10.03    13.82 17.80 21.70 27.28              43.25   62.06   95.96
          0       10     -396      -64       -5         17         27      32     38      50      52      53
         0:10     10     -300      -39        3         18         23      27     31      43      47      50
         0:20     10     -258      -29        7         17         22      24     28      40      44      47
         0:10     20     -228      -21       10         17         20      23     26      37      41      45
         0:20     20     -183      -10       13         16         19      20     23      32      37      42

   Finally, Table 5 shows the welfare gain obtainable from tagging in each case. To compute this welfare
gain, I calculate the increase in consumption for all individuals that would lower the total social loss under
the policy without tagging to the level of total social loss obtained by the optimal policy.

                                         Table 5: Welfare Gain from Tagging
                            ES                                  Percent of aggregate consumption
                           0                       10                            0.96
                          0:10                     10                            0.20
                          0:20                     10                            0.10
                          0:10                     20                            0.06
                          0:20                     20                            0.02

    The results in these three tables show that incorporating a concern for Equal Sacri…ce can explain the
coexistence of limited tagging and substantial income redistribution through progressive taxes observed in
policy. Table 3 shows that Equal Sacri…ce dramatically reduces the appeal of tagging according to height,


                                                              23
gender, and race, despite the substantial information that these three tags carry about income-earning ability.
While large group-speci…c taxes and transfers are optimal when ES = 0 and none are optimal once ES = 1
(not shown), even seemingly modest values for ES generate a steep decline in the use of tags. At the same
time, for these values of ES , Table 4 shows that in all cases the extent of redistribution and progressivity
remains quite high when measured by either the maximal average tax rate or the gap between the maximal
and minimal average tax rates. Table 5 shows that the welfare gains one might achieve through tagging are
estimated to be large in the conventional case of ES = 0 but are small in all other cases.
    As a speci…c example, consider the parameterization in which ES = 0:20 and = 10. The optimal
tag-based tax is 0.8 percent of the highest-earning group’s total income in this parameterization, whereas
the conventional model suggests a tax of 10.5 percent. Consistent with this reduced role for tagging, the
welfare gain from tagging in this parameterization is negligible: translated into the magnitudes of the current
U.S. economy, it is equivalent to approximately $15 billion. Assuming some costs from false tagging and
administration (Akerlof 1978), these tags would likely be welfare-reducing, on net, in this parameterization.
In contrast, the conventional model implies a gain worth nearly $150 billion. Nevertheless, in this para-
meterization top earners pay an average tax rate of 47 percent, close to the 53 percent recommended by
the conventional model, and a substantial transfer is made to the poor. To see this more clearly, consider
Figure 2, which plots the schedule of average tax rates for this parameterization and two polar cases: the
fully Utilitarian ( ES = 0) and the fully Equal Sacri…ce ( ES = 1:0) policies.48



                                                   1

                                                 0.8

                                                 0.6

                                                 0.4
                             Average tax rate




                                                 0.2

                                                   0

                                                -0.2

                                                -0.4

                                                -0.6
                                                                                                                   U tilitarian
                                                -0.8                                                               Mix ed (0.20, 10)
                                                                                                                   Equal Sac rific e
                                                 -1
                                                       0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8       1         1.2   1.4   1.6         1.8           2
                                                                              Annual dollar inc ome                                    5
                                                                                                                                x 10



                                                             Figure 2: Optimal Average Tax Rates


    As Figure 2 makes clear, the optimal policy according to the mixed social loss function is substantially
redistributive and much more closely resembles the pure Utilitarian, conventional optimal policy than the
policy that prioritizes only Equal Sacri…ce.
    The intuition for these results is as follows. The principle of Equal Sacri…ce is consistent with the
use of progressive taxes to pay for public goods if a given rate of taxation causes a smaller utility loss
for a higher-income individual than a lower-income one. But, that principle places little to no value on
  4 8 In this and the following …gures that show annual dollar income, I convert the results of the simulations to annual …gures

as follows. The average labor e¤ort in the more detailed simulation with Lib = 0:80 and = 10 (below) is approximately 0.60
of total time available. The mean worker in the sample works approximately 2200 hours per year. That implies 2200/0.6=3667
hours as the appropriate multiplicative factor for the earnings returned by the policy simulation.




                                                                                    24
redistribution.49 Similarly, while both Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce value the e¢ ciency gains from
tagging, tagging violates Equal Sacri…ce because such personal characteristics have no bearing on individual
utility. Altogether, the introduction of Equal Sacri…ce considerations into the evaluation of outcomes causes
optimal policy to move away from redistribution and, especially, tagging. For the range of parameters
considered here, those e¤ects are enough to make the optimal extent of tagging on height, gender, and race
negligible but leave substantial redistribution and progressivity intact.
    As this intuitive explanation suggests, the key forces determining the optimal extent of tagging in this
model will apply to di¤erent degrees for di¤erent tags. Most important, the costs that tagging generates
from the perspective of the Equal Sacri…ce principle will be smaller when a tag is closely correlated with
ability. If a tag were a perfect indicator of ability, it would generate no costs according to Equal Sacri…ce.
Given that such a tag would continue to generate e¢ ciency gains by being inelastic to taxation, it would
be more valuable to the social planner. In other words, the model suggests that personal characteristics are
more likely to be used as tags when they provide stronger and more reliable signals of income-earning ability.
I now turn to demonstrating this e¤ect for blindness.

6.1.2    Tagging blindness

To demonstrate the model’s potential not only to reject most tags but to accept those few tags that predict
ability su¢ ciently well, I consider blindness, one of the few characteristics used as a tag in existing (i.e., U.S.)
tax policy.50 Since 1943, the U.S. tax code has included a special deduction or exemption for individuals
with substantially impaired vision. To claim the exemption, individuals simply check a box on their tax
forms.
    The data source used for the previous tagging analysis has too few observations on the blind, so I combine
three years (1985, 1986, and 1987) of the Statistics of Income (SOI) microdata from the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service to obtain an earnings distribution of those who claim the blindness exemption. Lacking any
information on hours worked, I assume all individuals work the same number of hours (2,000 per year) and
calculate hourly wages using individuals’reported wage and salary incomes. I limit the sample to individuals
…ling as singles, to avoid complications with the proper treatment of couples that are abstracted from in
the model above. The distributions of calculated wages, adjusted for sampling weights provided in the SOI,
are shown in Table 6. The share of the population in each category also can be estimated from the SOI
sample, adjusting for sampling weights. Those claiming the blindness exemption make up 0.3 percent of the
population, with 99.7 percent not claiming the exemption.

                                 Table 6: Wage distributions for blind and non-blind
                                                      Average wage rate in range
           Status       0.00    1.73    4.44     7.12 9.60 12.61 15.08 19.17                  27.56     44.51     264.19
          Blind         0.79    0.08    0.05     0.06    0.02     0.00      0.01     0.005    0.001     0.000     0.000
         Not blind      0.17    0.31    0.17     0.12    0.09     0.05      0.03     0.030    0.010     0.002     0.001
  4 9 Note that the average tax rate on the lowest earner when
                                                                       ES = 1:0 is slightly negative in this …gure. If    = 0, the
otherwise same simulation sets that average tax rate to a positive value. To see why, note that = 0 represents the most severe
adherence to Equal Sacri…ce, which rejects redistribution. I use = 0:01 in the baseline simulation to avoid the concern that
  = 0 is a special case, and > 0 causes the purely Equal Sacri…ce policy to admit some, although quite limited, redistribution
despite the inequality of sacri…ce it entails.
  5 0 To the extent that disability status implies zero earning ability, it by de…nition merits tagging. Future work could usefully

focus on showing whether the model can explain the substantial tagging on dependent children in existing policy. That task
will require making judgments on the proper modeling and normative treatment of households.



                                                                25
As Table 6 makes clear, a large majority of those claiming the blindness exemption earned no wage and
salary income and are therefore assigned a zero wage by this calculation. Of course, these individuals would
be likely to earn positive wages in the labor market, but we cannot observe those wages, and a zero wage
may serve as a rough proxy for a combination of high …xed costs of work and low true wages. Moreover, I
will assign all of those who do not claim the blindness exemption but earn zero income a zero wage as well,
so both groups are treated the same.51
    Table 7 shows the optimal extent of tagging in the conventional calibration with ES = 0 and in the
calibration with ES = 20 and = 10, the case used to generate Figure 2 above. All other parameters are
as in Table 1 (though G is adjusted to be a similar share of total income).

                                             Table 7: Extent of Tagging
                                        (Extra tax or transfer rate, in percent)
                                          ES               Not blind         Blind
                                         0         10         0.07          -102.11
                                        0:20       10         0.01           -19.82

As with height, gender, and race, Table 7 shows that adding Equal Sacri…ce to the objective function
substantially reduces the optimal extent of tagging on blindness. Unlike those other tags, however, the
optimal extent of tagging on blindness in the Utilitarian benchmark is so great that even the dramatically
reduced extent of optimal tagging is sizeable–namely, a 20 percent transfer to the blind on average. Using
the data from Table 6, we can calculate mean income for the blind (including those with zero income) to
be approximately $2,350 per year. A 20 percent transfer to the blind on average is therefore equivalent to
approximately $470, not far from the value of actual blindness deductions and exemptions in the mid-1980s.


6.2     Rank reversals
It has been known since the analyses in Mirrlees (1971) and Mirrlees (1974) that an optimal Utilitarian
tax policy in the case of full information generally induces a negative relationship between innate ability
and the allocation of utility across individuals. This reversal of pre-tax and post-tax utility orderings has
generated considerable discomfort among tax law scholars (see, for example, Zelenak, 2006). Economists,
notably Feldstein (1976) and Mayshar and Yitzhaki (1995), have long noted that such rank reversals violate
the "Pigou-Dalton principle," which Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2011) de…ne as saying that "a transfer from
one agent to another with lower income reduces inequality, or increases social welfare, provided it does not
reverse their ranking..."
    In this section, I show that a social objective function that puts weight on Equal Sacri…ce reduces
substantially the extent of rank reversals that would be chosen in the full-information scenario. The reason
for this result is that Equal Sacri…ce’s optimal allocation reduces each individual’s utility by the same quantity
and thus leaves the utility ordering of agents unchanged. In the mixed objective functions used here, the
Utilitarian preference for rank reversals is tempered.
    To demonstrate this e¤ect, I use a detailed calibration of the U.S. ability distribution52 to simulate …rst-
  5 1 I excluded those who earn no income from the main analysis of tagging because they are so rare in the NLSY data. However,

simulations including these individuals leave the results on height, gender, and race taxation unchanged.
  5 2 The previous section’s simulation used a calibration of the U.S. ability (i.e., wage) distribution that was limited by the

availability of tagging data. Here, I use a lognormal-Pareto calibration of the U.S. wage distribution originally calculated by
Mankiw, Weinzierl, and Yagan (2009).




                                                              26
best (i.e., full information) feasible income tax policies for a range of model parameterizations. Figure 3 shows
the results by plotting utility as a function of ability in four scenarios. The thick solid line is the hypothetical
laissez-faire allocation in which no taxes are collected. It shows how utility increases monotonically with
ability absent government intervention. The other three lines show utilities under three parameterizations:
the thin solid line is for the Utilitarian case of ES = 0:00, the dotted line is for the Equal Sacri…ce case of
  ES = 1:00 and        = 10, and the dashed line is for the mixed case highlighted above in which ES = 0:20
and = 10. All other parameters are as in Table 1 (though G is adjusted to be a similar share of total
income).



                                        2



                                      1.5



                                        1
                          U tility




                                      0.5



                                        0



                                     -0.5       U tilitarian firs t-bes t
                                                Mix ed firs t-bes t
                                                Equal Sac rific e firs t-bes t
                                                H y pothetic al lais s ez -faire
                                      -1
                                            0             25                       50                     75   100   125
                                                                                        Ability (w age)



                       Figure 3: Utility levels by ability type under di¤erent objective
                             functions in full-information …rst-best allocations.


Figure 3 shows the rank reversals when going from the laissez-faire or Equal Sacri…ce allocations to the
Utilitarian allocation, as the upward sloping thick solid and dotted lines contrast sharply with the downward
sloping thin solid line. The mixed objective (shown as the dashed line) generates a far more uniform utility
distribution than either of the more pure objective functions. More important, the mixed objective chooses
a …rst-best allocation that substantially limits rank reversals.


6.3    Optimal income taxes
Finally, I use the more detailed ability distribution from the previous simulation to explore in depth the e¤ects
of a role for Equal Sacri…ce on optimal income tax rates. I use the same parameter values highlighted above
( ES = 0:20, = 10) in which the optimal policy rejected height, gender, and race tags, accepted tagging
on blindness and substantial redistribution, and largely avoided rank reversals in utility in the …rst-best. All
other parameters are as in Table 1 (though G is adjusted to be a similar share of total income).
    Figure 4 shows the optimal schedule of marginal tax rates for this calibration, and Figure 5 shows the
optimal schedule of average tax rates. Average tax rates are (y c) =y and marginal tax rates are as in (22).
All …gures show allocations for annual earnings up to $200,000. For comparison, each …gure also shows the
optimal results under a pure Utilitarian criterion, that is when ES = 0 as in the conventional model.




                                                                                          27
                              1                                                                                         1
                                                                     U tilitarian                                                                             U tilitarian
                             0.9                                     Mix ed (0.20, 10)                                0.8                                     Mix ed (0.20, 10)

                             0.8                                                                                      0.6

                             0.7                                                                                      0.4
         Marginal tax rate




                                                                                                  Average tax rate
                             0.6                                                                                      0.2

                             0.5                                                                                        0

                             0.4                                                                                     -0.2

                             0.3                                                                                     -0.4

                             0.2                                                                                     -0.6

                             0.1                                                                                     -0.8

                              0                                                                                       -1
                                   0   0.5            1             1.5                  2                                  0   0.5            1             1.5                  2
                                             Annual dollar income                        5                                            Annual dollar income                        5
                                                                                  x 10                                                                                     x 10


                              Figure 4: Optimal Marginal Tax Rates                                                      Figure 5: Optimal Average Tax Rates


    Figure 4 shows that marginal tax rates have the U-shape introduced by Diamond (1998) and Saez (2001)
whether ES = 0 or 0:20, though positive ES does lead to lower rates for all workers. The e¤ect of the
second factor highlighted in the discussion of result (22) is particularly apparent, in that optimal marginal
rates decline over a wider range of the ability distribution when ES is positive. The explanation for this
pattern is that the planner with ES > 0 redistributes less from high earners. This reduces the high earners’
temptation to mimic moderate income earners and thus the required distortions on the latter.
    The optimal marginal income tax rate at high incomes falls substantially, by about seven percentage
points, with this role for the principle of Equal Sacri…ce. Therefore, this paper’s explanation for the limited
use of tagging may help address the gap between conventional theory and existing policy noted by Diamond
and Saez (2011).53 Using the conventional model, they derive a formula for the optimal marginal tax rate
on high incomes as a function of utility parameters and the shape of the ability distribution. They conclude
that the optimal top rate is "73 percent, substantially higher than the current 42.5 percent top US marginal
tax rate (combining all taxes)." The top rate in the mixed policy shown in Figure 3 is 55 percent, compared
to 62 percent under the conventional Utilitarian criterion.
    Nevertheless, Figure 5 shows that substantial redistribution persists despite this role for the principle of
Equal Sacri…ce. The high-skilled continue to pay sizeable average tax rates of 45 percent, not far from the 54
percent rate under the Utilitarian policy. A related result (not visible in the …gures) is that the lowest-ability
type enjoys a level of consumption worth 52 percent of average consumption in the economy under the policy
with ES = 0:20 compared to 63 percent under the Utilitarian policy with ES = 0.
    These simulations show, therefore, that variation in unobserved income-earning ability remains a powerful
force for redistribution in a modi…cation of the conventional optimal tax model that includes su¢ cient weight
on the principle of Equal Sacri…ce to reject di¤erentiated taxation according to height, gender, and race. At
the same time, this form of normative diversity does lower optimal marginal distortions to levels closer to
that which we observe in reality.
  5 3 Of course, a number of other potential explanations exist for why top marginal tax rates are not higher, such as a higher

elasticity of taxable incomes at high income levels or preference heterogeneity (see Lockwood and Weinzierl, 2012).




                                                                                             28
7     Conclusion
Modern optimal tax research is inherently normative. Though controversial, being normative is also key to
the literature’s appeal, as it enables economists to apply their tools to a task of substantial importance: the
design of the tax system.
    A normative research agenda is only as relevant as its normative criterion, however, and herein lies a
problem. Optimal tax research has yet to adopt a normative perspective that captures the diverse criteria
with which di¤erent people and, in fact, most individuals have been shown to evaluate policy.54
    This paper argues that one speci…c manifestation of this problem is the conventional optimal tax model’s
recommendation of substantial tagging, the tailoring of taxes to personal characteristics. Though the the-
oretical case for widespread tagging has been clear for nearly four decades, policy includes tagging in only
limited ways.
    In this paper, I propose a way to expand the normative scope of optimal tax research to include criteria
other than the Utilitarianism that has dominated analysis since Mirrlees (1971). This expansion is intended
to bring optimal tax research closer to, and therefore make it more relevant for, real-world debates in which
normative heterogeneity plays a substantial role.
    I then apply this general approach to include a speci…c alternative normative priority, the classic principle
of Equal Sacri…ce, and show that doing so can explain the limited role of tagging in policy. Equal Sacri…ce
is a principle of long-standing importance in tax theory and is a plausible representation of prevalent beliefs
in the general population. With a social objective function that includes a role for Equal Sacri…ce, the
Utilitarian gains from tagging must be weighed against the costs it generates in unequal sacri…ce.55 Not all
tags are equal in this model: a tag generates greater costs in unequal sacri…ce the weaker is its correlation
to ability. Thus, this model can explain not only the rejection of most tags but also the few cases in which
tagging is used in real-world policy. At the same time, the model endorses substantial redistribution based
on unobserved ability, preserving the core result of modern Mirrleesian tax analysis.
    The appeal of this approach is not just theoretical. I simulate optimal policy with this form of normative
diversity, calibrating the model to U.S. data. I show that optimal policy can simultaneously match three
aspects of the U.S. tax code that are incompatible in conventional theory: it rejects the use of height, gender,
and race as tags; it accepts the use of blindness as a tag; and it provides substantial redistribution through
progressive income taxes.
    This paper’s model has two additional implications for income taxes that further increase its appeal. First,
it substantially reduces the optimal extent of utility rank reversals in the …rst-best policy–a controversial
feature of the conventional policy. Second, it has the potential to explain why marginal income tax rates
at high incomes are not as large in reality as conventional theory would recommend, a prominent puzzle in
recent research.
    In sum, revising the theory of optimal taxation to include normative diversity in general, and the principle
of Equal Sacri…ce in particular, substantially improves the match between that theory’s recommendations
and the reality of tax policy.
  5 4 After nearly completing this paper, I rediscovered Martin Feldstein’s (1976) discussion of the normative basis of optimal

tax models in their early years. Feldstein makes nearly the same assertion as do I, namely: "My purpose here is not to deprecate
the value of optimal tax theory but to emphasize that only a limited criterion of choice has been examined. The results of
optimal tax design...are only as compelling as the criterion of social choice from which they are derived." Also, see the note
in Section 1 on important exceptions to these statements in the work of Stiglitz (1987), Werning (2007), Saez and Stantcheva
(2012), Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006), and Besley and Coate (1992).
  5 5 As discussed in Section 2, the model’s conclusions on tagging are consistent with the more familiar critique based on the

idea of horizontal equity, but they are based on a comprehensive, rigorous, and precise normative justi…cation.



                                                              29
References
 [1] Akerlof, George, (1978). "The Economics of ’Tagging’as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax, Welfare
     Programs, and Manpower Planning," American Economic Review, 68(1), March, pp. 8-19.

 [2] Alesina, Alberto, Andrea Ichino, and Loukas Karabarbounis (2011). "Gender-Based Taxation and the
     Division of Family Chores," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2).

 [3] Arneson, Richard (1982), "Rawls versus Utilitarianism in the Light of Political Liberalism," published
     in Davion, Victoria and Clark Wolf, The Idea of a Political Liberalism: Essays on Rawls, Rowman &
     Little…eld: Maryland.

 [4] Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph Stiglitz, (1980). Lectures on Public Economics. McGraw-Hill.

 [5] Auerbach, Alan, and Kevin Hassett, (1999). "A New Measure of Horizontal Equity." Working Paper.

 [6] Berliant and Gouveia (1993). "Equal sacri…ce and incentive compatible income taxation," Journal of
     Public Economics, 51.

 [7] Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate (1992). "Workfare versus Welfare: Incentive Arguments for Work
     Requirements in Poverty-Alleviation Programs," American Economic Review 82(1).

 [8] Blumkin, Tomer, Yarom Margalioth, and Efraim Sadka (2009), "Incorporating A¢ rmative Action into
     the Welfare State," Journal of Public Economics 93, pp. 1027-1035.

 [9] Boadway, Robin and Pierre Pestieau, (2006). "Tagging and Redistributive Taxation," Annales
     D’Économie et de Statistique, 83/84.

[10] Boaz, David and Robin Kirby (2007)."Libertarian Voters in 2004 and 2006", CATO Policy Report,
     January/February.

[11] Cappelen, Alexander W., Astri Drange Hole, Erik O. Sorensen, and Bertil Tungodden, (2011). "The
     Pluralism of Fairness Ideals: An Experimental Approach," American Economic Review 97(3).

[12] D’Antoni, Massimo (1999). "Piecewise linear tax functions, progressivity, and the principle of equal
     sacri…ce," Economics Letters, 65.

[13] Deutsch, Morton (1985). Distributive Justice: A Social-Psychological Perspective. Binghamton: NY:
     Vail-Ballou Press.

[14] Diamond, Peter, (1998). "Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of Optimal
     Marginal Tax Rates," American Economic Review, 88(1).

[15] Diamond, Peter and Emmanuel Saez, (2011). "The Case for a Progressive Tax: From Basic Research
     to Policy Recommendations" forthcoming in Journal of Economic Perspectives.

[16] Feldman, Stanley and John Zaller (1992), "The Political Culture of Ambivalence: Ideological Responses
     to the Welfare State," American Journal of Political Science 36(1).

[17] Feldstein, Martin (1976). "On the Theory of Tax Reform," Journal of Public Economics, 6, pp. 77-104.

[18] Fleurbaey, Marc and Francois Maniquet (2011). A Theory of Fairness and Social Welfare. Cambridge.

                                                    30
[19] Fleurbaey, Marc and Francois Maniquet (2006). "Fair Income Tax," Review of Economic Studies, 73,
     pp. 55-83.

[20] Free, Lloyd A. and Hadley Cantril, (1968). The Political Beliefs of Americans. New York: Simon and
     Schuster.

[21] Friedman, Milton (1962). Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[22] Frolich, Norman, Joe A. Oppenheimer, and Cheryl L. Eavey, (1987). "Laboratory Results on Rawls’s
     Distributive Justice," British Journal of Political Science, 17.,

[23] Frolich, Norman and Joe A. Oppenheimer (1992). Choosing Justice: An Experimental Approach to
     Ethical Theory. Berkeley, CA: UC Press.

[24] Frohlich, Norman, Joe Oppenheimer, and Anja Kurki, (2004). "Modeling Other-Regarding Preferences
     and an Experimental Test," Public Choice 119(1/2), April.

[25] Gainous, Jason, and Michael D. Martinez (2005). “What Happens When We Simultaneously Want
     Opposite Things? Ambivalence about Social Welfare.”Ambivalence, Politics, and Public Policy, edited
     by Stephen C. Craig and Michael D. Martinez, Palgrave.

[26] Harsanyi, John C. (1953) "Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-Taking,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 61(5), (October), pp. 434-435.

[27] Harsanyi, John C. (1955). "Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Comparisons of
     Utility," Journal of Political Economy, 63(4), (August), pp. 309-321.

[28] Hasen, David. (2007). "Liberalism and Ability Taxation," Texas Law Review, 85, pp. 1057-1113.

[29] Hochschild, Jennifer (1981. What’s Fair? American Beliefs about Distributive Justice. Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard University Press.

[30] Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979). "Prospect Theory," Econometrica.

[31] Kant, Immanuel (1785). Groundwork on the Metaphysic of Morals. 1949, Modern Library Version,
     Random House, page 178.

[32] Kaplow, Louis (2008). The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics. Princeton.

[33] Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell (2001). "Any non-welfarist Method of Policy Assessment Violates the
     Pareto Principle," Journal of Political Economy 109(2).

[34] Konow, James (2001). "Fair and square: the four sides of distributive justice," Journal of Economic
     Behavior and Organization 46.

[35] Konow, James (2003). "A Positive Analysis of Justice Theories," Journal of Economic Literature XLI,
     December.

[36] Lambert, Peter J. and Helen T. Naughton (2009). "The Equal Sacri…ce Principle Revisited," Journal
     of Economic Surveys, 23(2).

[37] Lockwood, Benjamin B. and Matthew Weinzierl (2012). “De Gustibus non est Taxandum: Theory and
     Evidence on Preference Heterogeneity and Redistribution.”NBER Working Paper, No. 17784, January.

                                                   31
[38] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew Weinzierl, (2010). "The Optimal Taxation of Height: A Case Study
     of Utilitarian Income Redistribution," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(1), pp. 155-176.

[39] Mankiw, N. Gregory, Matthew Weinzierl, and Danny Yagan, (2009). "Optimal Taxation in Theory and
     Practice," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4), pages 147-174.

[40] Markovits, Daniel. (2003). "How Much Redistribution Should there Be?" Yale Law Journal, 112.

[41] Mazor, Joseph. (2012). "Who Should Pay for Entitlements," Working paper.

[42] Miller, David (1976). Social Justice. London: Oxford University Press.

[43] Mirrlees, J.A., (1971). "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review of Economic
     Studies 38, 175-208.

[44] Mirrlees, J.A., (1974). "Notes on Welfare Economics, Information, and Uncertainy," in Essays on eco-
     nomic behavior under uncertainty, M. Balch, D. McFadden and S. Wu, eds. New York : American
     Elsevier Pub. Co.

[45] Mirrlees, J.A., S. Adam, T. Besley, R. Blundell, S. Bon, R. Chote, M. Gammie, P. Johnson, G. Myles,
     and J. Poterba (eds.) (2010) Dimensions of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review. Oxford University Press.

[46] Mitchell, Gregory, Philip E. Tetlock, Barbara A. Mellers, and Lisa D. Ordonez (1993). "Judgments
     of Social Justice: Compromises between Equality and E¢ ciency," Journal of Personality and Social
     Psychology 65(4).

[47] Mitra, Tipra and Efe A. Ok (1996). "Personal Income Taxation and the Principle of Equal Sacri…ce
     Revisited," International Economic Review, 37.

[48] Moulin, Herve, (1981). "The Proportional Veto Principle," Review of Economic Studies 48, pp. 407-416.

[49] Moyes, Patrick (1989). "Redistribution e¤ects of minimal equal sacri…ce taxation," Journal of Economic
     Theory, 108.

[50] Murphy, Liam and Thomas Nagel, (2002). The Myth of Ownership. New York: Oxford University Press.

[51] Nozick, Robert (1974). Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.

[52] Ok, Efe A. (1995). "On the principle of equal sacri…ce in income taxation," Journal of Public Economics,
     58.

[53] Rakowski, Eric. (2000). "Can Wealth Taxes be Justi…ed?" Tax Law Review, 53.

[54] Rawls, John (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[55] Rawls, John (2001). Justice as Fairness. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[56] Saez, Emmanuel, (2001). "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates," Review of Economic
     Studies, 68.

[57] Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva (2012). "Optimal Tax Theory with Endogenous Social Mar-
     ginal Welfare Weights." Working paper.


                                                     32
[58] Scott, John T., Richard E. Matland, Philip A. Michelbach, and Brian H. Bornstein (2001). "Just Deserts:
     An Experimental Study of Distributive Justice Norms," American Journal of Political Science 45(4).

[59] Sen, Amartya, (1982). "Rights and Agency," Philosophy and Public A¤ airs, 11(1), Winter, pp. 3-39.

[60] Sen, Amartya, (2000). "Consequential Evaluation and Practical Reason." Journal of Philosophy, 97(9),
     September, pp. 477-502.

[61] Sen, Amartya and Bernard Williams, eds. (1982). Utilitarianism and Beyond, Cambridge.

[62] Shaviro, Daniel. (2002). "Endowment and Inequality," in Thorndike, Joseph J. and Dennis J. Ventry,
     Jr. (eds), Tax Justice: The Ongoing Debate. Washington D.C.: Urban Institute.

[63] Stark, Kirk J. (2005). "Enslaving the Beachcomber: Some Thoughts on the Liberty Objections to
     Endowment Taxation," Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence, 18.

[64] Stiglitz, Joseph E., (1987). "Pareto e¢ cient and optimal taxation and the new new welfare economics,"
     in: Auerbach, Alan and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook on Public Economics. North Holland: Else-
     vier.Science Publishers, pp. 991-1042.

[65] Sugin, Linda. (2011). "A Philosophical Objection to the Optimal Tax Model," Tax Law Review, 64.

[66] Viard, Alan D. (2001). “Some Results on the Comparative Statics of Optimal Categorical Transfer
     Payments.” Public Finance Review, 29(2): 148–80.

[67] Weinzierl, Matthew (2011). "The Surprising Power of Age-Dependent Taxes," Review of Economic
     Studies, October.

[68] Werning, Ivan, (2007). "Pareto E¢ cient Income Taxation," Working Paper, MIT, April.

[69] Yaari, Menahem (1988). "A Controversial Proposal Concerning Inequality Measurement," Journal of
     Economic Theory, 44.

[70] Young, H. Peyton (1987). "Progressive taxation and the equal sacri…ce principle," Journal of Public
     Economics, 32(2).

[71] Young, H. Peyton (1988). "Distributive Justice in Taxation," Journal of Economic Theory, 44.

[72] Young, H. Peyton (1990). "Taxation and Equal Sacri…ce," American Economic Review, 80(1).

[73] Young, H. Peyton (1994).Equity: Theory and Practice. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[74] Zelenak, Lawrence (2006). "Taxing Endowments," Duke Law Journal, 55.




                                                    33
8      Appendix
8.1    Proof of Proposition 1
The …rst-order condition of the planner’s problem with respect to ci;m is:

                                                    i;m
                                                @V UES  ; U i;m
                     i;m               i;m                                                             F
              U til p    +         ES p                                                                                pi;m +          jji;m             ijj;m
                                                                                                                                                                 = 0;
                                                     i;m        i;m                            i;m         i;m
                                                @U c       ;y         =wi             Uc c           ;y          =wi

where F is the multiplier on the feasibility constraint and jji;m is the multiplier on the incentive constraint
that type i prefers its allocation to any other type j, for any group m. In deriving this condition, I used
                                            Uc (ci;m ;y i;m =wj ;m)
separability in the utility function to set U ci;m ;yi;m =wi ;m = 1. Taking the sum across types and simplifying
                                             c(                    )
yields:                 2                                            3      2              3
                                                    i;m
                                           @V UES        ; U i;m
                     Ei 4 U til + ES                                 5 = Ei 4        F     5:
                                                 i;m i;m         i                i;m i;m
                                          @U c ; y =w                         Uc c ; y =wi

The analogous condition applies for ci;n , where n indicates a di¤erent tagged group:
                               2                             i;n
                                                                                           3               2                                     3
                                                         @V UES  ; U i;n
                          Ei 4          U til   +   ES
                                                                                           5 = Ei 4                             F                5:
                                                                  i;n          i;n                                     i;n
                                                         @U c             ;y         =wi                       Uc c            ; y i;n =wi

Combining these conditions, we can write:
                                   h                             i     1                                              i;m
                                                                                                                 @V (UES   ;U i;m )
                          Ei           Uc ci;m ; y i;m =wi                           Ei     U til            ES @U ci;m ;y i;m =wi
                                                                                                                       (                     )
                                   h                    i             1
                                                                               =                                          i;n
                                                                                                                                                     :
                                                                                                                     @V UES(  ;U i;n     )
                          Ei        Uc ci;n ; y i;n =wi                               Ei       U til           ES       i;n i;n
                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                    @U c ;y =wi              )

This is the result in Proposition 1.


8.2    Proof of Corollary 2
                         i;m    i;n
First, I establish that UES  = UES  for all m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g : Recall the de…nition of the ES-optimal feasible
allocation when individuals di¤er in only one dimension (ability) from the main text. The extension to two
dimensions of heterogeneity is straightforward:
n             oI;M
 ci;m
  ES  ; y i;m
         ES               2 ES : U ci;m   i;m
                                    lf ; ylf =w
                                                i
                                                                          U ci;m   i;m
                                                                             ES ; yES =w
                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                  U ci;m   i;m
                                                                                                                     lf ; ylf =w
                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                         U ci;m ; y i;m =wi ;
              i=1;m=1

                                                                                                                                 I;M
for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m 2 f1; 2; :::; M g and for all possible ci;m ; y i;m                                             i=1;m=1
                                                                                                                                                 2 ES; where the set ES
is de…ned as
       (                  I;M
                                                                                                                                                                                      )
           ci;m ; y i;m   i=1;m=1
                                         2 F : U ci;m   i;m
                                                  lf ; ylf =w
                                                              i
                                                                                      U ci;m ; y i;m =wi = U cj;n   j;n
                                                                                                              lf ; ylf =w
                                                                                                                          j
                                                                                                                                                                 U cj;n ; y j;n =wj
ES =                                                                                                                                                                                      :
                                                    for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g
                                                                                                                                                                           (23)




                                                                                     34
                                n             oI;M
   The laissez-faire allocations ci;m
                                  lf  ; y i;m
                                         lf                                   are de…ned by individual maximization, which depends
                                                                  i=1;m=1
only on ability as shown in the main text. Therefore, we know that

                                                                      ci;m
                                                                       lf        = ci;n
                                                                                    lf ;
                                                                       i;m          i;n
                                                                      ylf        = ylf  ;

for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g. By the de…nition in (23), this immediately implies:

           U ci;m   i;m
              ES ; yES =w
                          i
                            = U ci;n   i;n
                                 ES ; yES =w
                                             i
                                                                            for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g ;          (24)

which completes this step of the proof.
   Second, recall Assumption 1:

                              U i;m                    U i;n for all i = f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                                            (25)
                       and U j;m              >        U j;n for at least one j = f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:

Using (24), (25), and the technical Assumption 2 that rules out special cases in which the optimal allocation
of utility equals the ES-optimal allocation for any individual, I consider three exhaustive cases.

8.2.1   Case 1

In this case, all equilibrium allocations generate at least as much utility for all individuals as in the ES-
optimal feasible allocation and, for at least one individual, more utility than in the ES-optimal feasible
allocation. Formally,


                                                       i;m    i;n
                         U i;m                U i;n > UES  = UES  for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                                       (26)
                                                              j;m          j;n
                  and U j;m        >          U j;n >        UES      =   UES      for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:

The proof of the corollary for this case is as follows.
                                                        i;m
   First, given (26), we can take the derivative of V UES   ; U i;m                                        as speci…ed in (13) with respect to its
second argument and obtain,

                                 i;m
                            @V (UES  ;U i;m )
                                                                          h                   i        1
                          @U (c   i;m        i;m             =             U i;m        i;m
                                                                                       UES                     i;m
                                                                                                           if UES  < U i;m ;
                                        ;y         =wi   )
                           for scalars f                     0;       > ,     2 (0; 1],      > 1g ;

which directly implies
                                                                      i;m
                                                                  @V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                                                  0;                                         (27)
                                                                 @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi

with the inequality strict if       > 0. Taking the second derivative yields:

                              i;m
                      @ 2 V (UES  ;U i;m )
                                                                               h                   i        2
                                 i;m 2             =              (    1)          U i;m     i;m
                                                                                            UES                     i;m
                                                                                                                if UES  < U i;m ;
                          (@U )
                          for scalars f                      0;       > ,     2 (0; 1],      > 1g ;


                                                                               35
which directly implies
                                                                 i;m
                                                          @ 2 V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                               2           0:                                           (28)
                                                                  @U i;m

   Second, combine (27), (28) ; and (25) to obtain:

                    i;m
                @V UES  ; U i;m                       i;m
                                                  @V UES  ; U i;n
                                                                                   for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                 (29)
              @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                 @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi
                   j;m
               @V UES  ; U j;m                         j;m
                                                   @V UES  ; U j;n
        and                              >                                         for at least one j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:
              @U cj;m ; y j;m =wj                 @U cj;n ; y j;n =wj

   Third, use(24) to rewrite (29) as:

                    i;m
                @V UES  ; U i;m                        i;n
                                                   @V UES  ; U i;n
                                                                                   for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                 (30)
              @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                 @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi
                   j;m
               @V UES  ; U j;m                         j;n
                                                   @V UES  ; U j;n
        and                              >                                         for at least one j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:
              @U cj;m ; y j;m =wj                 @U cj;n ; y j;n =wj

which implies                     2                                   3             2                                  3
                                           i;m
                                       @V UES  ; U i;m                                      i;n
                                                                                        @V UES  ; U i;n
                                Ei 4                                  5 > Ei 4                                         5:               (31)
                                               i;m        i;m                                   i;n        i;n
                                       @U c          ;y         =wi                     @U c          ;y         =wi

   Finally, use expression (16) to show that (31) is a su¢ cient condition for Corollary 2 to hold. This
completes the proof in this case.

8.2.2   Case 2:

In this case, all equilibrium allocations generate no more utility for all individuals as in the ES-optimal feasible
allocation and, for at least one individual, strictly less utility than in the ES-optimal feasible allocation.
Formally,


                          i;m        i;n
                         UES      = UES  > U i;m                  U i;n for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                            (32)
                          j;m            j;n              j;m         j;n
                   and   UES      =     UES    >U               >U          for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:

The proof of the corollary for this case is as follows.
                                                        i;m
   First, given (32), we can take the derivative of V UES   ; U i;m                                   as speci…ed in (13) with respect to its
second argument and obtain,

                                i;m
                           @V (UES  ;U i;m )                                                    1
                                                                       i;m
                          @U (ci;m ;y i;m =wi )
                                                  =                   UES          U i;m                  i;m
                                                                                                      if UES           U i;m ;

                          for scalars f              0;         > ,     2 (0; 1],        > 1g ;




                                                                          36
which directly implies
                                                               i;m
                                                           @V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                                        0:                                      (33)
                                                       @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi

Taking the second derivative yields:

                               i;m
                       @ 2 V (UES  ;U i;m )                                                     1
                                                                       i;m
                                 i;m 2        =        (       1)     UES         U i;m                  i;m
                                                                                                     if UES    U i;m ;
                           (@U )
                           for scalars f              0;      > ,    2 (0; 1],         > 1g ;

which directly implies
                                                                  i;m
                                                           @ 2 V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                           2            0:                                      (34)
                                                                @U i;m

   Given (33) and (34), the remainder of the proof for this case repeats exactly the proof of Case 1 after
(28). This completes the proof in this case.

8.2.3    Case 3:

In this case, the equilibrium allocations give some individuals more utility than in the ES-optimal feasible
allocation and others of the same ability but di¤erent tagged values less utility than in the ES-optimal
feasible allocation. Formally,



                         U i;m           U i;n for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                                             (35)
                                          j;m          j;n
                   and U j;m       >     UES      =   UES     > U j;n for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:

The proof of the corollary in this case for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig such that either U i;m U i;n UES
                                                                                                 i;m    i;n
                                                                                                     = UES  or
  i;m      i;n    i;m     i;n
UES = UES U             U is the same as in Case 1 or Case 2, respectively. The new scenario is the second
line in (35), where the m type has been given more utility and the n type less utility than in the ES-optimal
feasible allocation. Using (24) and (13) and we can derive:

                                              j;m
                                         @V (UES  ;U j;m )
                                                                           h                     i    1
                                             @U       j;m        =             U j;m      j;m
                                                                                         UES
                                              j;m
                                         @V (UES  ;U j;n )                                            1
                                                                =               j;m
                                                                               UES       U j;n                                  (36)
                                                  @U j;n
                           for scalars f              0;      > ,    2 (0; 1],         > 1g ;

for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n.
                                             j;m                    j;m
                                       @V (UES   ;U j;m )      @V (UES  ;U j;n )
    Expression (36) implies that            @U j;m         and     @U j;n        are both negative (i.e., non-zero). Thus,
                        j;m                 j;m
                @V (UES     ;U j;m )   @V (UES  ;U j;n )
for some > 0 ,         @U j;m
                                     >     @U j;n
                                                         , and we have

                   i;m
               @V UES  ; U i;m                         i;n
                                                   @V UES  ; U i;n
                                                                               for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n             (37)
              @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                 @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi
                   j;m
               @V UES  ; U j;m                          j;n
                                                    @V UES  ; U j;n
        and                              >                                     for at least one j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n;
              @U cj;m ; y j;m =wj                 @U cj;n ; y j;n =wj


                                                                      37
which implies                 2                         3           2                         3
                                       i;m
                                   @V UES  ; U i;m                           i;n
                                                                         @V UES  ; U i;n
                           Ei 4                         5 > Ei 4                              5:                      (38)
                                  @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                   @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi

   The same last step as in the previous two cases completes the proof.


8.3      Wage distributions by tagged group
The following table lists the wage distributions by tagged group, adjusted for the NLSY’s sample weights.
The representative wage rate in each bin is the mean wage, again adjusted for sample weights, across the
population within that bin range. The sample weights adjustments have only minor e¤ects on the mean
wages and the population distributions. In particular, simulations using unweighted means and distributions
(reported in earlier, working paper versions of this paper) yield results on optimal tagging and income taxa-
tion that closely resemble the results with weighting and that are consistent with the qualitative conclusions
reached here.

                           Appendix Table 1: Wage distributions by tagged group
           1        2         3         4      5           6             7        8             9     10      11     12
          Tall     Med.     Short      Tall   Tall       Short          Med.     Med.         Short   Tall   Med.   Short
           M        M        M          M      F           M             M        F             F      F      F       F
 Wage     White    White    White      NW     White       NW            NW       White        White   NW     NW      NW
 2.89      0.02     0.03     0.03      0.03    0.04         0.06         0.09      0.08       0.12    0.05   0.12   0.12
 6.53      0.10     0.12     0.13      0.23    0.24         0.23         0.27      0.29       0.27    0.30   0.26   0.29
 10.07     0.21     0.22     0.23      0.23    0.24         0.24         0.16      0.23       0.23    0.31   0.31   0.25
 13.86     0.23     0.20     0.24      0.15    0.18         0.21         0.14      0.21       0.16    0.13   0.14   0.18
 17.82     0.15     0.15     0.14      0.21    0.13         0.09         0.15      0.08       0.09    0.13   0.08   0.09
 21.73     0.11     0.12     0.09      0.02    0.09         0.07         0.12      0.05       0.05    0.05   0.06   0.04
 27.26     0.11     0.09     0.08      0.10    0.04         0.06         0.03      0.03       0.06    0.02   0.01   0.03
 43.59     0.05     0.06     0.06      0.02    0.03         0.02         0.02      0.03       0.01      –    0.01    –
 62.20     0.02     0.01     0.01      0.03    0.01         0.01         0.03      0.01       0.01      –      –      –
 94.05     0.003   0.002    0.002        –     0.003        0.005          –      0.004       0.007     –      –     –




                                                            38
