NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRACKING VARIATION IN SYSTEMIC RISK AT US BANKS DURING 1974-2013
Armen Hovakimian
Edward J. Kane
Luc Laeven
Working Paper 18043
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18043
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

Previously circulated as "Variation in Systemic Risk at US Banks During 1974-2010." The authors
thank Charlie Calomiris, Gerald O'Driscoll, Bob DeYoung, Douglas Evanoff, Greg Udell, seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Bocconi
University, and the Institute for New Economic Thinking for helpful comments on earlier drafts of
this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the ECB, the International Monetary Fund, its Executive
Board, or its management.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Tracking Variation in Systemic Risk at US Banks During 1974-2013
Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven
NBER Working Paper No. 18043
May 2012, Revised August 2015
JEL No. G01,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a theoretically based and easy-to-implement way to measure the systemic risk
of financial institutions using publicly available accounting and stock market data. The measure models
the credit enhancement taxpayers provide to individual banks in the Merton tradition (1974) as a combination
put option for the deep tail of bank losses and a knock-in stop-loss call on bank assets. This model
expresses the value of taxpayer loss exposure from a string of defaults as the value of this combination
option written on the portfolio of industry assets. The exercise price of the call is the face value of
the debt of the entire sector. We conceive of an individual bank’s systemic risk as its contribution
to the value of this sector-wide option on the financial safety net. To the extent that authorities are
slow to see bank losses or reluctant to exercise the call, the government itself becomes a secondary
source of systemic risk. We apply our model to quarterly data over the period 1974-2013. The model
indicates that systemic risk reached unprecedented highs during the financial crisis years 2008-2009,
and that bank size, leverage, and asset risk are key drivers of systemic risk.
Armen Hovakimian
Department of Economics and Finance
Baruch College Zicklin School of Business
1 Bernard Baruch Way
New York, NY 10010
Armen_Hovakimian@baruch.cuny.edu
Edward J. Kane
2325 E Calle Los Altos
Tucson, AZ 85718
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Luc Laeven
Research Department
European Central Bank
Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu

Each new financial crisis intensifies efforts by policymakers and academics to improve
strategies and protocols for monitoring and resolving losses at large, complex, and politically
influential financial institutions. Key problems include the need to develop timely measures such
as CoVar (Adrian and Brunnermier, 2008) and SRISK (Brownlee and Engel, 2015) that link the
risk exposures undertaken by individual institutions to the risk of a breakdown in the financial
system as a whole. This risk of breakdown is known as systemic risk.
We follow Engle, Jondeau, and Rockinger (2012) in defining an individual bank’s
systemic risk as its propensity to be undercapitalized when the financial system as a whole is
undercapitalized. This definition allows us to include in the risk-generation process the channels
through which regulation and supervision might mitigate or amplify this risk. It is well known
that the existence of a safety net incentivizes banks to increase their exposure to ruinous losses,
to under-reserve for these loss exposures, and to conceal such losses when they occur (Kane,
1989; Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga, 2004; and Skinner, 2008). Profit-driven safety net abuse is
deeply implicated in modern financial crises (Rochet, 2008).

Even though policymakers

recognize the depth of this incentive problem and seek to monitor the regulatory arbitrage it
produces, profit-maximizing managers are driven to extract value from financial safety net
support in hard-to-observe ways.
When tail risks drive a large, complex, or politically influential bank into insolvency, the
difficulty of exercising the government’s call can transform safety-net management into a nasty
game of chicken whose outcome generates bailout expense for taxpayers.1 When deep or
widespread insolvencies emerge, fiscal and monetary authorities typically shift losses to

1

This is essentially what is known popularly as the “too big to fail” problem.

2

taxpayers because it is the path of administrative and political least resistance (Honohan and
Klingebiel, 2003; Veronesi and Zingales, 2010; Laeven and Valencia, 2013).
Regulators such as Timothy Geithner argue that it is in society’s best interest to minimize
the possibility of contagious defaults. As long as sovereign and cross-country credit support
remains credible, authorities can prevent widespread substantial spillovers of actual defaults
from taking place.

This has led officials around the world to block actual defaults by

“systemically important” firms. They have done this by guaranteeing such a firm’s access to
credit even when difficulties it encountered in rolling over its liabilities strongly suggested that it
had become economically insolvent.
The goal of this paper is to propose a measure of systemic risk that is based in theory and
easy to implement using publicly available financial and stock market data. Our methods are
rooted in academic literature for modeling credit risk pioneered by Merton (1974). Merton
models stockholder equity as a put option that stockholders write on firm assets. Merton (1977,
1978), Marcus and Shaked (1984), Ronn and Verma (1986), Duan, Moreau and Sealey (1992)
and others have adapted this approach to express the value of US deposit insurance as if it were a
one-year put option written by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). In this paper,
we build on this tradition, but reinterpret the losses to which banking-sector activity exposes
taxpayers through the safety net as an implicit contra-liability that transfers responsibility for
covering the losses of insolvent banks to taxpayers.
To fashion a role for forbearance, we interpret this contra-liability as the value of the
combination of a put option written on the losses that can be generated by a portfolio of
aggregate bank assets with a call on these same bank assets whose exercise price equals the face

3

value of aggregate bank debt.2 This interpretation treats the taxpayer put and call as helping to
complete markets and lets us calculate each individual bank’s systemic risk as its contribution to
the value of the banking sector’s aggregate portfolio of put-call positions.
From a contracting perspective, the option is a credit enhancement and the disruptive
effects on the real economy from bank distress are separable from this. The value of the put and
creditor predictions about the role of forbearance in exercising the associated call are impounded
into the stock price, borrowing rates, and margin requirements for derivative contracts of every
firm whose economic insolvency seems unlikely to be resolved promptly. The net value of the
portfolio of twinned options provides a gross estimate of the cost to taxpayers of supporting the
banking system. Given that benefits tend to dwarf deposit insurance premiums in crisis
circumstances, during panics, it may be a good approximation of the net costs as well.
We estimate our model over the period 1974-2013, using quarterly data on U.S. bank
holding companies. This 30-year observation window lets us compare the behavior of systemic
risk during the financial crisis period 2008-2009 with its behavior in earlier crises and recessions.
The results track the effects of bank risk taking and regulatory forbearance on taxpayer
risk exposure during and in advance of the last four business-cycle expansions and contractions,
reaching an all-time high at the peak of the 2008-2009 crisis. We estimate the annualized perquarter value of sample banks’ stand-alone and systemic risk using financial statements from the
Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns from CRSP. The cyclical and longperiod patterns that our model generates conform to conventional wisdom about how sectoral
risks actually varied over time. This supports our contention that our measure of risk tracks the
broad ways in which banking risk has waxed and waned over recent business cycles.
2

The simplicity of this approach is that the model need not limit the debt of banking organizations to deposits nor
explicitly model differences in maturity and credit quality.

4

Our paper proceeds as follows. Section I interprets the safety net as a contracting
structure that generates a contingent mix of benefits and obligations for taxpayers, regulators,
and protected institutions. Section II explains the assumptions we use to model banking-sector
exposure to default and individual banks’ contribution to systemic risk. Section III describes the
data sources and sampling procedures we use, and presents summary statistics for our estimates
of sectoral and individual systemic risk. Section IV examines the evolution of sectoral and
individual systemic risk over time. Section V analyzes the cross-sectional variation in sectoral
and individual systemic risk. Section VI summarizes our findings.

I. BANK AND TAXPAYER POSITIONS IN THE SAFETY NET
It is instructive to think of a country’s safety net as an incomplete contracting structure.
Contracts imbedded in this structure assign explicit and implicit responsibility for preventing,
detecting, and paying for crippling losses at protected institutions. The parties to the contracts
are banking organizations (“banks”), regulators, nonbank taxpayers, and institutional
stakeholders. Regulators may be conceived as parties to all safety-net contracts and to enjoy a
great deal of ex post flexibility in setting and enforcing contract terms. Although counterparties
cannot trade their positions in these contracts, they can lessen their exposure to loss by lobbying
and other forms of political or hedging activity.
There is no reason to expect that the balance of costs and benefits the safety net generates
is the same either for all banks or for all nonbank taxpayers. For a sample of banks, this paper
tracks the value of banks’ individual and aggregate claims on the safety net over time. At each
date, the value of an individual institution’s claim on the safety net is the expected difference
between the benefits of the particular protections it enjoys and the costs that safety-net

5

administrators might impose upon it. In principle, the discounted value of current and future
costs and benefits could be entered on institution balance sheets as intangible contra-assets and
contra-liabilities, respectively. Both costs and benefits may be treated as put options whose
control rights lie in the hands of regulators who are understood in difficult circumstances to favor
forbearance over strict and prompt exercise of taxpayers’ stop-loss rights. Protected institutions
are long an option to put losses in excess of stockholder capital to other banks and nonbank
taxpayers in various ways and short two other options. The first is an obligation to surrender the
assets to the FDIC if regulators exercise their right to take over an insolvent bank. Their second
position is an option to cover their share of safety-net expenses, including the future costs of
replenishing the insurance fund for losses incurred at other banks. The costs in a bank’s short
positions include explicit insurance premiums and various costs of complying with (and
sometimes circumventing) burdensome restrictions that safety-net managers might impose on
their operations.
Community banks have long complained that, on average, giant money-center and
regional banks enjoy a more favorable mix of safety-net costs and benefits than they do.
Moreover, they maintain that compliance burdens generated by the Dodd-Frank Act are
aggravating this situation. Our analysis provides an easy way to investigate and confirm this
claim quantitatively.
We focus especially on the period 2008-2009, which coincides with the maturing of the
mortgage securitization crisis that began in August, 2007. During that period, unprecedented
losses were incurred by large and systemically important U.S. financial institutions in particular.
A comprehensive review of salient events contributing to the crisis can be found in Acharya,

6

Schnabl, and Suarez, 2013, Gorton (2009), Laeven and Valencia (2012), Brunnermeier (2009),
Adrian and Shin (2010), and Lo (2012).
It is not necessary to sort out the causal origins of the crisis to see that the systemic risk
of U.S. financial institutions increased dramatically during this period, and was aggravated by ad
hoc and inconsistent policy responses (Kane, 2010). Authorities initially offered massive
liquidity support to troubled banks and began to lower interest rates. Because bailout programs
seemed to rob low- and middle-income Peter to pay rich Paul, the crisis surfaced popular concern
about the unfairness of too-big-to-fail policies (Veronesi and Zingales, 2010).
Other researchers propose alternative measures of systemic risk with which our results
can be compared.

Billio, Getmansky, Lo, and Pelizzon (2012) compare several of these

alternative systemic risk measures. Lehar (2005) and Avesani, Pascual, and Li (2006) propose
the probability of default as a measure of systemic risk, and they estimate this using CDS,
option, and equity market data. Additional measures include: conditional value at risk (CoVaR)
proposed by Adrian and Brunnermeier (2008), marginal expected shortfall (MES) proposed by
Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson (2010) and extended by Brownlees and Engle
(2015), and network-based measures of systemic risk based on interbank contagion as, e.g.,
proposed by Cont (2010). Kim and Giesecke (2010) study the term structure of systemic risk.
Our measure differs from other measures of systemic risk in two important dimensions.
First, our measure uses readily available stock market data on banking firms, and not data that
are either not readily available (such as data on financial networks and interconnectedness) or
market-value data for debt and derivatives that are available in thin markets or only for a small
subset of firms. Jarrow (2012) shows that implied default probabilities from CDS spreads cannot
provide reliable estimates. Second, our methods finesse the need to address the

7

interconnectedness of banking firms directly.

Instead, our measure of a banking firm’s

contribution to systemic risk gauges interconnectedness implicitly. It encompasses not only
contagion risks arising from direct contractual linkages between banks, such as those that occur
through interbank loans, but also from indirect linkages from balance sheet exposures to
common external shocks. We regard the more timely and comprehensive availability of the input
data our model needs to be a major advantage of our measure of systemic risk. In these respects,
our measure resembles that of Brownlees and Engle (2015). But whereas these authors focus on
estimating losses banking stocks might suffer during severe stock market declines, our model
tracks safety-net subsidies across a longer history and treats all phases of stock-market behavior
equally.

II. MEASURING STAND-ALONE AND SYSTEMIC BANK RISK

A. Structural Model of Bank Default
Our measures of stand-alone and systemic bank risk extend the structural model of
deposit-insurance benefits developed by Merton (1977). Merton assumes that the value of bank
assets is governed by geometric Brownian motion and that bank liabilities have a zero coupon
and mature in one year. One year is assumed to be the frequency of audit by bank regulators as
well. At the time the debt is due, the bank is assumed to default if the asset value falls below the
face value of debt. In earlier work, Merton (1974) showed that stockholders’ stake in such a firm
can be viewed as a call option on firm assets whose exercise price equals the face value of debt
and whose tenor (i.e., option maturity) equals the maturity of the debt. These assumptions let us
view the value of risky debt as the value of risk-free debt less the value of creditors’ side of a put

8

option on firm assets. Because it expresses the value of creditor loss exposure, this limitedliability put represents the fair cost of guaranteeing bank creditors against losses due to default
during the period it covers.
Our model portrays stockholder equity as a single-period European call option on the
bank’s assets and treats bank equity as the sum of a dividend-unprotected European call option
and the present value of dividends distributed before the option’s expiration date. The model
expresses the value of a bank’s equity, E, as:

E  DIV  (V  DIV ) N ( x1 )  DN ( x 2 ) .

(1)

In (1), E is the value of bank equity, V is the value of bank assets, DIV is the present value of
interim dividends distributed in the year before the debt becomes due, D is the face value of
outstanding deposits and other debt, and N(xi) states the probability that the variate value x is 
xi, given that x is distributed with zero mean and unit variance.3,4
The value of the limited-liability put can be extracted from the conservation-of-value
condition that the value of bank assets equals the value of all claims on those assets:

LLP  E  D  V .

(2)

Substituting equation (1) for E, the value of the limited-liability put becomes:

LLP  D(1  N ( x2 ))  (V  DIV )(1  N ( x1 )) .

(3)

The fair value of the annual premium for insuring a dollar of debt against creditor losses due to
default can then be found by dividing the LLP value obtained in (3) by the face value of debt, D:

3

x1 

2
ln[(V  DIV ) / D]   V T / 2

V T

, x 2  x1

 V

T , where V is the instantaneous standard deviation of asset

returns and T = 1 is the assumed maturity of debt.
We do not mean to imply that distributions with jumps or heavier tails could not be used or that such distributions
might not give more accurate estimates (see, e.g., Bollerslev and Todorov, 2011).

4

9

IPD  [1  N ( x2 )]  (V  DIV )[1  N ( x1 )] / D .

(4)

Because the explicit deposit insurance premiums that U.S. banks pay to the FDIC are minimal
(prior to the recent crisis, 97 percent of FDIC-insured institutions paid zero premia to the FDIC),
the fair value premium estimate can in most cases be interpreted as the subsidy a bank manages
to extract from the safety net.

B. Measuring Stand-Alone and Systemic Bank Risk
There is a long tradition in the literature on deposit insurance to use the fair annual
premium for insuring a dollar of deposits against depositor losses to measure fluctuations in the
size of the FDIC’s exposure to individual-bank default. Following this tradition, we make IPD as
defined in equation (4) our measure of stand-alone bank risk. Using equation (4) requires
knowledge of the value of bank assets, V, and asset risk, V, which are not directly observable.
Earlier literature [e.g., Marcus and Shaked (1984) and Ronn and Verma (1986)] solved this
problem by estimating V and V by numerical methods using two option-pricing equations. The
first equation is the call-option formulation (1) for equity, E. The second equation links V to E,
V and E as follows:
V = E(E/V) / N(x1).

(5)

Our calculations use the following definitions. The value of equity, E, is calculated as the
number of outstanding shares times the share price. The face value of debt, D, is calculated as the
sum of the balance-sheet values of total liabilities (quarterly Compustat item LTQ) and preferred
equity (PTSQ).5 The present value of the next four quarterly dividends, DIV, is calculated

5

The results are similar when the face value of debt is calculated as the sum of the balance-sheet values of deposits
(quarterly Compustat item DPTCQ), long-term debt (DLTTQ), debt in current liabilities (DLCQ), and preferred

10

assuming that, for the next four quarters, the bank will pay the same dollar amount as the last
quarterly cash dividends per share (DVPSXQ) times the number of shares outstanding (CSHOQ)
and using the yield on one-year Treasuries.6 The equity risk, σE, is measured as the annualized
standard deviation of one year of daily stock returns. This approach to modeling and estimating
individual bank risk has been applied in a large number of papers (see, for example, Pennacchi,
1987; Hovakimian and Kane, 2000).
Our goal is to use this framework to measure both: (1) the fragility of the entire banking
sector (i.e. a portfolio of banks) as the value of the put option on the portfolio of aggregate
sample-bank assets with an exercise price equal to the aggregate sample-bank debt, and (2) the
contribution that each individual bank makes to this notion of systemic risk. The details of this
calculation are as follows. At the end of each calendar month, we form a value-weighted
portfolio of all sample banks. We then calculate daily portfolio returns for the 12-month period
preceding the date of portfolio formation. In addition, we calculate this portfolio’s market value
as the sum of market values of component banks on the date of portfolio formation and portfolio
debt as the sum of debt values of component banks as of the last fiscal quarter ending on or
before the date of portfolio formation. For example, for the portfolio formed on June 30, 2000,
we use stock returns from July 1, 1999 to June 30, 2000, market values of equity as of June 30,
2000, and book values of debt as of June 30, May 31, or April 30, depending on the end of the
last fiscal quarter of each bank. In forming these portfolios, we limit the sample to banks with

equity (PTSQ). However, this alternative calculation cannot be performed for non-bank financial institutions that
were part of Supervisory Capital Assessment Program and are presented later in Table 8.
6
In Figure 5, we contrast results for this “dividend forbearance model” with estimates in which bailout packages
include an immediate “dividend stopper.” As suggested by the intensity of troubled banks’ efforts to use the
outcomes of Federal Reserve stress tests to win permission to increase or resume dividends, estimates of IPD that
ignore the possibility of dividend disbursements (such as Carbo, Kane, and Rodriguez, 2011) develop much smaller
values.

11

non-missing values of market value of equity, book value of debt, and at least 246 reported daily
returns.
We use these portfolio values to solve equations (1) and (5) numerically for the synthetic
values of banking-sector assets, VBS, and banking-sector asset risk, VBS. We plug these values
into equation (4) to obtain a fair value of the premium appropriate for guaranteeing a dollar of
debt against losses that would be generated by a hypothetical default of the whole banking
sector, IPDBS. Because the values of the assets held by various banks are imperfectly correlated,
the value of the put option on the portfolio of bank assets is less than the value of the portfolio of
put options on assets of individual banks. To the extent that this correlation varies over time, the
time profile of our sectoral risk measure will diverge from the time-series profile of the average
of individual-bank IPDs.
We estimate an individual bank’s systemic risk as its contribution to the sectoral IPD.
Specifically, for each bank i and month t, we modify our overall bank portfolio by removing this
particular bank from the portfolio and using the procedure we have just described to estimate the
hypothetical insurance premium for a sectoral portfolio that excludes bank i: IPDBSi,t. At each
date, t, an individual bank’s systemic risk emerges as the difference between the insurance
premium for the portfolio that includes the bank and the insurance premium for the portfolio that
excludes it:
IPDS i ,t  IPDBS t  IPDBS i ,t .

(6)

Our procedures for calculating the insurance premia from option-pricing equations (1)-(6)
incorporate a number of simplifying assumptions. These include assumptions about the structure
and the characteristics of debt and the assumption that regulators resist pressure for forbearance
and shut down economically insolvent banks promptly. Such assumptions introduce
12

measurement errors into our estimates and limit the economic significance of the numerical
values of individual estimates. Nevertheless, the risk measures we develop rise and fall
appropriately over recognized business cycles and crisis periods, which establishes a
presumptive case for their qualitative usefulness and reliability. On the hypothesis that the
measurement errors do not vary systematically across banks and across time, our estimates can
serve both as a timely guide to the ebb and flow of the systemic risk posed by the banking sector
as a whole and as a way to identify specific institutions whose activities impose substantial risk
on the safety net. The advantage of our method is that it is easy to implement using readily
available data, unlike other methods that require data that are not readily available, such as
information on counterparty risk and interbank exposures, or data that are available only for a
subset of firms, such as CDS spreads.
Our measure of an individual bank’s contribution to systemic risk reflects the spillovers
imposed on other banks when the bank fails (for example, through interbank exposures).
However, our measure of systemic risk [as is the case for other methods relying on financial data
to measure systemic risk (e.g., Acharya et al. 2010)] cannot capture knock-on effects on
employment and economic growth. For this reason, they all underestimate the full impact of
systemic risk.
Our concept of systemic risk is related to, but different from systematic risk. Systematic
risk is typically measured by the beta coefficient that a firm’s equity return receives in marketmodel regressions. Our measure of systemic risk captures the expansion of systematic risk in
extreme circumstances (as evidenced by the high realizations of our measure during the recent
crisis). But our measure of individual-bank systemic risks estimates indirectly the linkages that
tie the risks taken by any one sample bank to the systemic risks incurred by other banks. These

13

linkages transfer extreme risks from one or a few banks across the system and, as the Allen and
Gale model (2001) explains, can threaten its integrity.

III. SAMPLE SELECTION, DATA, AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
Our primary sample consists of commercial banking organizations (with a 3-digit SIC
code value of 602) with at least one million dollars in total assets. Bank-level data from 1974
through 2010 are constructed from two sources. Daily stock prices and returns are obtained from
CRSP. Quarterly balance-sheet accounting data come from Compustat (both Bank and
Fundamentals). Macroeconomic data, such as the consumer price index (CPI), one-year Treasury
yields, and real GDP growth rates are downloaded from the website maintained by the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis.7 Annualized standard deviations for stock returns are calculated using
daily returns for the latest quarter and a screen requiring a minimum of 58 non-missing returns
within the quarter. These screening criteria leave us with 40,522 bank-quarter observations.
Table 1 reports the number of quarterly observations and the mean values of assets and
Tier 1 capital by year. The number of sample banks starts at 497 in the first quarter of 1974,
expands steadily during the 1970s, remains stable in 1980s, almost triples in the fourth quarter of
1993, remains relatively stable during the rest of the precrisis period, and declines thereafter.
Average asset size for sample banks tends to grow over time, except it drops substantially in
1994 when the Compustat database for banks expanded its coverage to include a large number of
relatively small banks. Tier 1 capital ratios, which are available from 1993 on, hover around 1112% prior to the crisis and have risen into the 14% range since. The remaining sections of the
paper explore the time-series and cross-sectional behavior of our measurements.
7

http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/.

14

IV. AGGREGATE TIME-SERIES RESULTS

A. Variation in Stand-Alone and Systemic Risks over Time
In this section, we examine the time-series behavior of differently aggregated measures
of bank risk. For each of the 160 calendar quarters from 1974 to 2010 and for each sample bank,
we calculate values for an appropriate individual guarantee fee (expressed as an Insurance
Premium for Debt, IPD), implied volatility of assets, V, implied capital ratio, E/V, and Tier 1
capital ratio. The quarterly time series of mean IPD values (i.e., stand-alone risk) is plotted in
Figure 1. The chart shows that the mean value of IPD at sample banks surged during cyclical
contractions and fell back afterwards. But our evidence shows that the mean value of the standalone put grew larger in the 1990s and fell back more slowly in later business cycles. Because a
large number of small banks is added in the fourth quarter of 1993, data before and after that date
must be compared cautiously. Nevertheless, from a large-bank perspective, the 40 years of data
show the dangers of trying – as envisioned in the Basel system of capital control – to contain the
taxpayer loss exposure mainly by regulating the book value of bank leverage. The data show that
implied capital (Figure 2) and implied asset volatility (Figure 3) fluctuated substantially over
each cycle. But during 1993-2013 the value of regulators’ control variable --on-balance-sheet
Tier 3 capital (Figure 4)-- changed hardly at all.
Although IPD, implied capital, and asset volatility are not publicly reported or explicitly
monitored by banking regulators today, these measures have the advantage that they can be
calculated promptly from available data. Unlike methods that rely on the prices of credit default
swaps or on data measuring interbank exposures to one another, stock prices are available in

15

deep markets in real time and regulators collect intraquarter balance-sheet data for large banks
and could collect these data more frequently if they wished.
Swings in our synthetic measurements prove much more extensive than the swings in onbalance-sheet capital depicted in Figure 4. It is clear that although accounting leverage declined
during the 1990s, hidden leverage expanded in advance of the crisis. The difference between
reported and opportunity-cost values of leverage underscores the dangers of trying to control a
bank’s risk-taking by controlling its reported risk-weighted capital position. To control systemic
risk, it is necessary also to allow for the effects of the innovative ways in which bank managers
are bound to arbitrage patterns of fixed risk weights and unchanging statistical definitions of
regulatory capital.
Increases in individual-bank risk are especially worrisome when they propagate through
the banking sector. Figures 5A and 5B plot the time-series behavior of sectoral IPD (labeled
IPDBS). These charts underscore the extraordinary depth of the 2008-2009 financial crisis. A
comparison of Figures 1 and 5 shows that, although pre-2008 financial crises led to substantial
increases in mean IPDs, the aggregate risk of the banking sector (IPDBS) remained low because
significant parts of the financial system remained sound. Even in the absence of policies
designed to limit dividend payouts in banks receiving so-called “live-bank” assistance, the
insurance premium for the sectoral portfolio never exceeded a few basis points. In contrast, at the
peak of the crisis, Figure 5A that, if we assume dividend forbearance, the mean annualized IPD
reached 450 basis points. Figure 5B shows that this value could have been reduced by about 100
basis points if authorities had promptly stopped dividend payouts at assisted banks, something
the Dodd-Frank Act allows them to do going forward. In addition to the effect of sharp increases
in mean stand-alone risk, the surge in taxpayer loss exposure was driven by an increased

16

correlation in credit risk within the banking sector. Figure 6 reports average correlations of
individual-bank returns with an equal-weighted portfolio of sample banks. This chart shows that
correlation between individual-bank returns grew in advance of systemic distress, and grew
especially sharply during the years leading up to the crisis.
Figure 7 plots the time-series behavior of the cross-sectional mean of our measure of
individual-bank systemic risk. The mean value of systemic risk is small and moves only slightly
during most of the sample period, but in 2008-2009 the mean value surges dramatically, reaching
-2000 basis points in 2009. Although we maintain that the negative sign attached to these values
supports the claims made by community banks, this sign may seem counterintuitive and
surprising at first. Our interpretation is as follows. During a very deep financial crisis, bank asset
and equity values become more positively correlated, especially at very large and interconnected
banks. This means that the benchmark sectoral portfolios become much less diversified and that
adding a large bank to the sectoral portfolio offers little or no diversification or financing benefit.
On the other hand, assuming that small banks have very different business plans, portfolio risk,
and tax exposures than large banks, their asset values and survival would not be greatly
threatened by the collapse of the securitization and mortgage-lending bubbles. During crisis
periods, these banks give more support to the safety net than the safety net gives them in return.
An average bank in our sample is a relatively small bank. A negative mean value for
individual-bank systemic risk during the crisis years supports community-bank claims that the
future premiums and regulatory burdens regulators are likely to place on the assets of smaller
banks exceed the current costs of supporting these banks’ liabilities. As explained in the next
section, even though the contribution to mean systemic risk becomes negative during the crisis
period, the systemic risk of particular sample banks and the sector as a whole became positive

17

and very large during this period. Figures 8, 9, and 10 show that for very large banks systemic
risk surged and sectoral leverage and volatility expanded.
The results presented in Figures 1-7 are summarized in Table 2. The table reports mean
values separately for the precrisis period (1974-2007), crisis (2008-2009) and postcrisis (20102013) years.

Both statistically and economically, stand-alone risk (IPD) and sectoral risk

(IPDBS) run markedly higher during the crisis period. The table reports values in two ways: per
dollar of debt (in basis points) and in dollar value. While mean per-dollar values are negative,
mean dollar values of IPDBS are positive. This implies that larger banks tend to increase the
aggregate cost of guaranteeing the debt of the sectoral portfolio and that, on average, smaller
banks help taxpayers to finance this cost. In keeping with the literature on regulatory arbitrage,
asset and equity risks became significantly higher and implied bank capital became significantly
lower during the crisis period. In contrast, the differences in these periods between Tier 1, Tier 2,
and Tier 3 capital ratios are insignificant. These findings support Dodd-Frank and Basel
initiatives seeking to impose a capital surcharge or incremental dollar premium for banks of very
large size.
As noted earlier in this section, the time trends and patterns presented in Figures 1-7 and
our first two tables are consistent with small-bank complaints and with academic understanding
of how banking risks varied over time. We interpret this as evidence that our measures of standalone and systemic risk capture the broad outlines the behavior of these risks.

B. Time-Series Forecasts of Commercial Banking Sector Risk
An important academic and practical question is whether increases in sectoral risk can be
predicted and, if so, what explanatory factors might be identified. Table 3 reports on regression

18

models that use current values of bank sectoral risk (IPDBS) to forecast future sectoral risk at
one-to-twelve month forecasting horizons. At the one-month horizon, predictive power is strong:
the slope coefficient is 0.868, the t-statistic is 38.3, and the R2 is 0.754. The magnitude and
significance of the slope (and therefore model fit) decline monotonically as the forecast horizon
grows. At the nine-month horizon, the slope is no longer significant and the R2 of the regression
becomes trivial. These results suggest that rising levels of sectoral risk can serve as earlywarning indicators of further increases over the next few months and could be used to frame a
forward-looking policy response to evidence of impending crisis.
We next expand the forecasting model to examine whether business-cycle and bankingindustry characteristics might also help predict systemic pressures in advance. We introduce two
business-cycle variables: the US growth rate in real GDP and a recession indicator based on
NBER business-cycle expansion and contraction data. To measure banking concentration, we
use a Herfindahl index constructed based on the book values of sample-bank assets (whose timeseries behavior is shown in Figure 11). Panel A of Table 4 reports the results of regressions
using current values of the NBER business-cycle variable to predict systemic sectoral risk
contemporaneously and at horizons extending from one to twelve months. The recession
indicator significantly predicts sectoral risk at every horizon. The GDP growth rate has a
significantly negative effect on bank sectoral risk over 2- to 8-month horizons. At longer
horizons, the magnitude of the growth-rate coefficient declines and becomes insignificant
beyond the nine-month horizon. R2 lies in the 10% to 14% range for horizons of nine-months or
less. For longer horizons, the influence of the growth rate declines monotonically, and the R2
drops off to 4.7% at the 12-month horizon.

19

Panel B of Table 4 adds the sectoral Herfindahl index to the set of predictors. The results
show that when the banking sector becomes more concentrated (i.e., as the Herfindahl index
rises), sectoral risk rises, too. The effect of the Herfindahl index is statistically significant at all
horizons and the R2 of individual regression models average about six percentage points above
corresponding regressions that omit the Herfindahl variable. These results suggest that the
dramatically more concentrated structure Figure 11 shows for the US banking system in recent
years may have increased its susceptibility to systemic crisis. While there is considerable
industry resistance to the idea of breaking up large banks or capping their asset growth, our work
provides another drop in a rapidly filling bucket of evidence that mega-banking organizations
pose hard-to-manage problems for our nation’s financial stability.

V. BANK-LEVEL RESULTS

A. Univariate Results
This section focuses on variations in stand-alone risk (IPD) and systemic risk (IPDS)
across individual banks. We start by examining the impact of bank size on stand-alone and
systemic risks. For each year and quarter, we sort banks into size quartiles, based on the book
value of their assets. For each quartile, Table 5 contrasts the mean values of key variables during
the precrisis period (1974-2007), crisis (2008-2009) and postcrisis (2010-2013) years. Results
are qualitatively unaltered if we partition the sample by medians rather than means.
In the first two periods, the stand-alone risk premium tends to decrease across the first
three size quartiles, backs up a bit in quartile 4, but remains below the levels shown for quartiles

20

2 and (especially) quartile 1. The stand-alone premium for the fourth quartile drops off in the
postcrisis years.
While the smallest banks consistently pose the largest stand-alone risks, the pattern is
different for systemic risk. Systemic risk increases in the large-bank quartile. This finding holds
in all periods. This supports the hypothesis that a country’s largest banks are the main source of
systemic risk, which helps to validate our use of 1974-1992 data. However, before and after the
crisis, the difference we observe between the smallest and the largest quartiles is a mere 0.2 to
0.3 basis points. During the height of the crisis, the difference surges to over 600 basis points, a
number that is significant economically and statistically.
Interquartile patterns of variation in equity, asset volatility, and implied capital resemble
those shown for stand-alone risk. Equity and asset volatility tend to be highest and market capital
ratios tend to be lowest for the smallest banks. Tier 1 capital ratios vary only slightly and are
highest for small banks.
Table 5 indicates that banks that pose high stand-alone risk differ from those with high
systemic risk: stand-alone risk falls with asset size, while a bank’s contribution to systemic risk
increases with size. This shows that systemic risk does not arise as a straightforward aggregation
of individual-bank stand-alone risk.
Table 6 shows how different the top fifteen sample banks for stand-alone risk (Panel A)
are from the fifteen banks that posed the most systemic risk (Panel B). There is not a single
instance of overlap between these lists. As in Table 5, high stand-alone risk is found in small
banks, but high systemic risk depends on a bank’s business plan and can be posed by banks of all
sizes.

21

Table 7 identifies the 30 largest financial institutions in our sample by total assets in their
2007 fiscal year. It also states the maximum stand-alone and systemic risk premiums they
experienced during the 2008-2009 financial crisis. The high levels of these maxima underscore
how much value federal credit support contributed to these banks and to their counterparties due
to the subsidized terms on which it was supplied.
Next, we assess the validity of our measure of systemic risk by comparing our estimates
with those obtained from stress tests conducted by regulators and with more elegant measures of
systemic risk proposed in the literature. Specifically, we compare our measure of systemic risk
with the capital shortfall calculated in the supervisory Capital Assessment Program conducted in
February 2009 (referred to as SCAP) and with the Marginal Expected Shortfall (MES) calculated
by Acharya et al. (2010) from data in periods during which stock market returns lie below their
fifth percentile (taken to represent extremely bad outcomes). For 18 of the institutions that the
Fed stress-tested in March 2009, Table 8 compares our risk measures with the indices of capital
shortfall prepared by the Federal Reserve, Acharya et al. (2010), and Brownless and Engle
(2015) for these firms.8
The correlation between our dollar measures of stand-alone and systemic risk and the
SCAP measure of capital shortfall are respectively 0.723 and 0.791, indicating that our more
timely and simpler-to-compute measures of risk are good approximations for complicated
regulatory efforts to measure capital shortfall at major financial institutions. This supports the
usefulness of our measure of systemic risk. Still, our data suggest that some banks generated far
more systemic risk than was suggested by SCAP or acknowledged by regulators. The

8

The values of our measures of stand-alone and systemic risk presented in the table are for the fiscal quarters
starting in July 2008 and ending in June 2009. The values of SRISK are from Brownlees and Engle (2015) as
reported for first quarter of 2009.

22

correlations with the MES measure of capital shortfall developed by Acharya et al. (2010) are
lower at 0.461 for stand-alone risk and only 0.202 for systemic risk. The correlations of the
stand-alone and systemic risk premiums with the SRISK measure of Brownlees and Engle
(2010) are 0.072 for stand-alone risk and only 0.462 for systemic risk. The relatively low values
of the last two correlations suggest that they may span different components of systemic risk, so
that regulators might find all three approaches useful supplements to data now being generated
with considerably more effort by stress tests.

B. Regression Evidence of Other Influences on Stand-Alone and Systemic Risk
The univariate analysis presented thus far suggests that bank size is a key driver of
systemic risk. However, relating risk only to size is apt to exaggerate its effect on risk appetites.
We think it is useful to consider the effects of at least a few other variables on stand-alone and
systemic risks.
This section introduces controls for two determinants of credit risk: leverage and asset
volatility. Our method of calculating IPD makes stand-alone risk an explicit function of leverage
and asset volatility, and these variables' contribution to systemic risk is obviously substantial. In
addition, one might expect stand-alone risk to increase with the weight of insured deposits in an
organization's funding structure since non-deposit debtholders have a stronger incentive to worry
about risk-shifting than depositors do. A similar effect might be observed even for systemic risk.
However, on the dual hypothesis that systemically important banks tend to have more complex
balance sheets and that complexity raises the odds that an institution will be allowed to operate
for long periods as a government-supported zombie institution, then banks with high deposit-toasset ratios may prove less risky systemically.

23

Table 9 reports multiple regression equations for our measures of stand-alone risk (Panel
A) and systemic risk (Panel B), using size, deposits, leverage, and asset volatility as regressors.
Because substantial variation occurs in sectoral credit risk over time, we adopt a Fama-MacBeth
framework. This means that we estimate regressions separately for each quarter and analyze the
distribution of coefficients that emerges. In particular, we study the means of time series of
regression estimates. Because the distributions of the coefficient estimates are highly skewed
with particularly large values observed during the financial crisis, we use non-parametric
methods to assess their statistical significance.

Our inference focuses on the number of

coefficient estimates that show the same sign as the time-series mean. Significance tests are
conducted for the 160 quarters in the full sample period 1974-2013 and for the four crisis
quarters separately using a sign test.
The tests reinforce the hypothesis that systemic risk does not arise as the simple
aggregation of individual-bank risk and that systemic risk is related to asset risk and leverage in a
substantial way. Once we control for leverage and asset risk, the negative effect of size on
stand-alone credit risk actually disappears. The average size effect is positive, though not
significantly so, both in the full sample and during the four crisis quarters.

The positive

influence of size on systemic risk is significant even with these controls and is positive during all
four crisis quarters. This reinforces the hypothesis that bank size and leverage are key drivers of
systemic risk.
The effect of deposits on stand-alone risk is significantly negative in the full sample but
is significantly positive in the crisis quarters. The deposit effect proves significantly negative for
systemic risk in both the full sample and crisis subperiod. This pattern of results is consistent
with the hypothesis that authorities' rescue propensities provide banks that have more complex

24

liability structures with forms of implicit credit support that tempt such firms to make themselves
systemically riskier.
To test whether stand-alone and systemic risks are especially large for giant institutions,
Table 10 re-estimates these regressions adding indicators of great size to the right-hand side.
“Large” is an indicator set to one for top 10 percent (by book value of assets) of banks in each
calendar quarter. “Very large” is an indicator set to one for the top 5 percent of banks (by book
value of assets) in each calendar quarter. Neither indicator is significant in stand-alone risk
regressions. This is consistent with our earlier findings that asset size is not a major determinant
of stand-alone risk.
On the other hand, in the systemic risk regressions, the large-bank indicator is
significantly positive both in the full sample and during the four crisis quarters. The very large
bank indicator is significantly positive during the financial crisis but not in the full sample. The
magnitudes of these coefficient estimates imply that, during the financial crisis, systemic risk
premia for large banks ran almost 400 basis points higher than the risk premia of smaller banks.
The risk premia for the top 5 percent increased by an additional 400 basis points. Taken together,
these results indicate that taxpayer loss exposure reached unprecedented highs during the
financial crisis, and that not only leverage and asset risk but also bank size were key drivers of
systemic risk.

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The great financial crisis underscored the need to devise a timely and comprehensive
measure of the risk that particular institutions impose on the financial system as a whole. This

25

paper introduces a theoretically based measure for systemic risk that is easy to implement using
publicly available financial and stock market data.
The value of a firm’s taxpayer put represents the government’s implicit equity stake in its
future operations. Unless this stake is monitored and serviced at a market rate of return,
beneficiary firms are incentivized to increase the value of the credit enhancement that the put
conveys by undertaking excessively risky and hard-to-monitor balance-sheet positions. Bubbles
in the prices of hard-to-regulate assets caused by these risk-shifting activities harm the real
economy by diverting resources from more appropriate activities. Crisis-management policies
that unconditionally support the credit of large zombie firms prolong macroeconomic downturns.
They do this by encouraging bank managers to gamble for resurrection rather than to focus on
loans and investments that could more reliably expand job opportunities and customer profits.
Time trends and patterns in our aggregate and individual measures of systemic risk are
consistent with the outcomes of formal stress tests and with popular and academic understanding
of how systemic and individual risks varied over time and across institutions. In particular, we
find that during crises bank size is a key driver of systemic risk. We conclude that, although our
estimates of systemic and stand-alone risk might be biased in some way, they capture the
qualitative behavior of these risks. Our findings support the strategy of imposing a graduated
capital surcharge on banks of large size and suggest how such premia might be made
commensurate with measures of each bank’s quarter-by-quarter contribution to systemic risk.
Our ultimate goal is to help to enhance financial stability. We believe our methods
provide a useful starting point for tracking systemic banking pressures in a more timely fashion
and for promptly identifying institutions whose activities might generate dangerous amounts of

26

systemic risk. Because our measure is so uncomplicated, we hope further research will refine our
methods and deepen everyone’s understanding of systemic risk.

27

REFERENCES
Acharya, V., L. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson, 2010, Measuring Systemic Risk,
Working Paper, NYU Stern School of Business.
Acharya, V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez, 2013, Securitization Without Risk Transfer, Journal of
Financial Economics, 107, 515-536.
Adrian, T., and M. Brunnermeier, 2008, CoVar, FRB of New York Staff Report No. 348.
Adrian, T., and H. Shin, 2010, Liquidity and Leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation 19,
418–37.
Allen, F. and D. Gale, 2000, Financial Contagion, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1–33.
Allen, L., and A. Saunders, 1993, Forbearance and Valuation of Deposit Insurance as a Callable
Put, Journal of Banking and Finance 17, 629-643.
Avesani, R., A. Garcia Pascual, and J. Li, 2006, A New Risk Indicator and Stress Testing Tool:
A Multifactor Nth-to-Default CDS Basket, IMF Working Paper.
Bernanke, B., 2009, Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk, Speech given at the Council on
Foreign Relations, March 10.
Billio, M., M. Getmansky, A.W. Lo, and L. Pelizzon, 2012, Econometric Measures of
Connectedness and Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors, Journal of Financial
Economics, 104 (3), 536-559.
Bank for International Settlements, Financial Stability Board, and International Monetary Fund,
2009, Guidance to Assess the Systemic Importance of Financial Institutions, Markets and
Instruments: Initial Considerations, Report to the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors.
Bank for International Settlements, 2001, Group of Ten-Consolidation of the Financial Sector.

28

Bollerslev, Tom, and Viktor Todorov, 2011. Tails, Fears, and Risk Premia, Journal of Finance,
56 (December), 2165-2211.
Brickley, J.A. and C.M. James, 1986, Access to deposit insurance, insolvency rules, and the
stock returns of financial institutions, Journal of Financial Economics 16, 345-372.
Brownlees, C., and R. Engle, 2015, SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Index (January 1).
Available at SSRN: http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=1611229.
Brunnermeier, M., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007–2008, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23, 77–100.
Buser, S.A., A.H. Chen and E.J. Kane, 1981, Federal deposit insurance, regulatory policy, and
optimal bank capital, Journal of Finance 35, 51-60.
Calomiris, C.W., 1992, Getting the incentives right in the current deposit-insurance system:
successes from the pre-FDIC era, in: J.R. Barth and R.D. Brumbaugh, Jr. (Eds.), The Reform
of Federal Deposit Insurance: Disciplining Government and Protecting Taxpayers (Harper
Collins, New York), 13-35.
Carbo, S., E.J. Kane, and F. Rodriguez, 2013, Safety-Net Benefits Conferred in Difficult-to-Failand-Unwind Banks in the US and EU Before and During the Great Recession, Journal of
Banking and Finance, 37 (June), 1845-1859.
Cont, R., 2010, Measuring Contagion and Systemic Risk in Financial Systems, Working Paper,
Columbia University.
De Nicolo, G. and M. Kwast, 2002, Systemic Risk and Financial Consolidation: Are They
Related?, Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 861–880.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and H. Huizinga, 2004, Market discipline and deposit insurance, Journal of
Monetary Economics 51, 375-399.

29

Duan, J-C., A.F. Moreau and C.W. Sealey, 1992, Fixed-rate deposit insurance and risk-shifting
behavior at commercial banks, Journal of Banking and Finance 16, 715-742.
Eberlein, E., and D. Madan, 2012. Unbounded Liabilities, Capital Reserve Requirements and the
Taxpayer Put Option, Quantitative Finance, 12 (May), 709-724.
Engle, Robert, Eric Jondeau, and Michael Rockinger, 2012. Systemic Risk in Europe, Swiss
Finance Institute, Research Paper Series No. 12-45.
Gorton, G., 2009, The panic of 2007, in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,
Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Heckman, J., 1978, Dummy endogenous variables in a simultaneous equation system,
Econometrica 46, 931-959.
Honohan, P., and D. Klingebiel, 2003, The fiscal cost implications of an accommodating
approach to banking crises, Journal of Banking and Finance 27, 1539-1560.
Hovakimian A., and E.J. Kane, 2000, Effectiveness of capital regulation at U.S. commercial
banks, 1985-1994, Journal of Finance 55, 451-469.
Huang, X., H. Zhu, and H. Zhu, 2010, Systemic Risk Contributions, Washington, DC:
Unpublished Federal Reserve Board Working Paper (August).
Jarrow, Robert, 2012. Problems with Using Credit Default Swaps to Infer Default Probabilities,
Kamakura Corporation (available at http://www.kamakuraco.com).
Kane, E.J., 1989. The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen? Washington, DC: Urban
Institute.
Kane, E.J., 2010, Redefining and Containing Systemic Risk, Atlantic Economic Journal 38,
251-264.

30

Keys, B., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig, 2010, Did securitization lead to lax screening?
Evidence from subprime loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307–62.
Kroszner, R., Strahan, P., 1996, Regulatory incentives and the thrift crisis: dividends, mutual-tostock conversions, and financial distress, Journal of Finance 51, 1285-1319.
Laeven, L., and F. Valencia 2012. Systemic banking crises: An Update. International Monetary
Fund Working Paper 12/163.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia, 2013, The Real Effects of Financial Sector Interventions During
Crises, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 45 (Feb.), 147-77.
Lehar, A., 2005, Measuring Systemic Risk: A Risk Management Approach, Journal of Banking
and Finance 29, 2577–2603.
Lo, A.W., 2012, Reading About the Financial Crisis: A 21-Book Review, Journal of Economic
Literature 50, 151-78.
Madalla, G.S., 1983, Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Marcus, A.J., and I. Shaked, 1984, The valuation of FDIC deposit insurance using option-pricing
estimates, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 16, 446–460.
Merton, R.C., 1974, On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,
Journal of Finance 29, 449–470.
Merton, R.C., 1977, An analytic derivation of the cost of deposit insurance and loan guarantees,
Journal of Banking and Finance 1, 3-11.
Merton, R.C., 1978, On the cost of deposit insurance when there are surveillance costs, Journal
of Business 51, 439-452.

31

Murphy, K.M., and R.H. Topel, 1985, Estimation and Inference in Two-Step Econometric
Models, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 3, 370-379.
Pennacchi, G.G., 1987a, A reexamination of the over- (or under-) pricing of deposit insurance,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 19, 340-360.
Rochet, J.-C.s (Ed.), 2008, Why Are There So Many Banking Crises? The Politics and Policy of
Bank Regulation, Princeton University Press.
Ronn, E.I. and A.K. Verma, 1986, Pricing risk-adjusted deposit insurance: An option-based
model, Journal of Finance 41, 871-895.
Skinner, D., 2008. The rise of deferred tax assets in Japan: the case of the major Japanese banks.
Journal of Accounting and Economics 46, 218-239.
Veronesi, P. and L. Zingales, 2010, Paulson’s gift, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 339-368.

32

Figure 1. Mean value of IPD using the dividend-forbearance model, 1974-2013
This figure reports the average value of our estimate of stand-alone risk (IPD) in equation (4), assuming continuing
dividend forbearance. Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank holding companies over the 1974-2013
period and reported quarter by quarter in basis points. Financial statement data are from the Compustat database for
U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Mean Stand-Alone Risk Premium (IPD)
700
600

IPD (bp)

500
400
300
200
100
0
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12
Year

33

Figure 2. Mean ratio of model-implied equity capital to assets, 1974-2013
This figure reports the average value of the model-implied ratio of equity to assets (E/V), with E computed as in
equation (1), assuming continuing dividend forbearance. Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank
holding companies over the 1974-2013 period and reported quarter by quarter in percentage points. Financial
statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Mean Implied Capital Ratio
25.0
20.0

Capital (%)

15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
-5.0
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12
Year

34

Figure 3. Mean value of implied asset volatility, 1974-2013
This figure reports the average value of the model-implied asset volatility (σV), with σV computed as in equation (5)
under the assumption of continuing dividend forbearance. Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank
holding companies over the 1974-2013 period, reported quarter by quarter, and expressed as a decimal fraction.
Financial statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Mean Implied Asset Volatility
18.0
16.0
14.0

A (%)

12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12
Year

35

Figure 4. Mean ratio of Tier-3 capital to assets, 1993-2013
This figure reports the average value of the Tier-3 capital ratio. Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank
holding companies over the 1993-2013 period, reported quarter by quarter, and expressed in percentage points.
Financial statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks.

Mean Tier-3 Capital Ratio
18
16
14
Capital (%)

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
74

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

94
Year

36

96

98

00

02

04

06

08

10

12

Figure 5. Sectoral risk premium (IPDBS), 1974-2013
This figure reports average estimates of the sectoral risk premium (IPDBS) based on the dividend-forbearance
model (Figure 5A) or the dividend stopper model (Figure 5B). Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank
holding companies over the 1974-2013 period, reported quarter by quarter, and expressed in basis points. Financial
statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Figure 5A. Dividend-Forbearance Model
500
450
400

IPD (bp)

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
73

75

77

79

81

83

85

87

89

91

93
Year

37

95

97

99

01

03

05

07

09

11

13

Figure 5B. Introducing a Dividend Stopper
400
350
300

IPD (bp)

250
200
150
100
50
0
73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 13
Year

38

Figure 6. Correlations between individual bank and sectoral portfolio returns, 1974-2013
This figure reports average correlations between daily returns on an individual bank stock and bank sectoral
portfolio. Averages are computed over the 1974-2013 period, month by month, and reported as a decimal fraction.
Daily stock return data are from CRSP.

Mean Monthly Correlations
0.700
0.600

Correlation

0.500
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100
0.000
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Year

39

Figure 7. Mean individual-bank systemic risk premium (IPDS), 1974-2013
Figure reports mean values of the individual-bank systemic risk premium (IPDS) estimates using the dividendforbearance model. Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank holding companies over the 1974-2013
period. Averages are computed quarter by quarter and reported in basis points. Financial statement data are from the
Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Mean Systemic Risk Premium (IPDS)
500
0

IPDS (bp)

-500
-1000
-1500
-2000
-2500
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12
Year

40

Figure 8. Mean systemic risk premium (IPDS) for large banks only, 1974-2013
Figure reports mean values of the individual-bank systemic risk premium (IPDS) estimates using the dividendforbearance model for large banks only. Averages are computed across the top decile of sampled U.S. bank holding
companies over the 1974-2013 period. Averages are computed quarter by quarter and reported in basis points.
Financial statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Mean Systemic Risk Premium (IPDS)
350
300

IPDS (bp)

250
200
150
100
50
0
74

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

94
Year

41

96

98

00

02

04

06

08

10

12

Figure 9. Implied capital-to-asset ratio for the banking sector, 1974-2013
This figure shows the average synthetic capital-to-asset ratio implied by our model for the banking sector over the
period 1974-2013. Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank holding companies over the 1974-2013
period after aggregating individual bank data at the banking sector level. Averages are computed quarter by quarter
and reported in percentage points. Financial statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and
daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Implied Sectoral Capital Ratio
25.0

ICap (%)

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0
73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 13
Year

42

Figure 10. Implied asset volatility for the banking sector, 1974-2013
This figure shows the average asset volatility implied by our model for the banking sector over the period 19742013. Averages are computed across a sample of U.S. bank holding companies over the 1974-2013 period after
aggregating individual bank data at the banking sector level. Averages are computed quarter by quarter. Financial
statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Sectoral Implied Asset Volatility
14%
12%
10%

A

8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 13
Year

43

Figure 11. Herfindahl index for the banking sector, 1974-2013
This figure shows the Herfindahl index of banking assets for the banking sector over the period 19742013. The Herfindahl index is computed quarter by quarter across a sample of U.S. bank holding companies over the
1974-2013. Data on total bank assets for individual bank holding companies are from the Compustat database for
U.S. banks.

Herfindahl Index
0.180
0.160
0.140

Herfindahl

0.120
0.100
0.080
0.060
0.040
0.020
0.000
73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 13
Year

44

Table 1. Sample size, book value of assets, and Tier-1 capital ratios, 1974-2013
This table shows the variation in sample size, average book value of assets, and mean Tier-1 capital ratios for our
sample of U.S. bank holding companies, with averages computed annually, over the period 1974-2013. Asset values
are stated in billions of dollars and Tier 1 capital is reported as a percentage. Financial statement data are from the
Compustat database for U.S. banks.
Year
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Book Value of Assets
4,927
4,908
5,108
5,737
6,212
7,009
7,864
8,809
8,532
8,917
9,852
10,889
12,442
13,122
13,790
15,105
15,091
15,049
15,992
18,594
7,939
7,935
9,122
10,076
9,968
10,770
9,993
11,026
11,416
12,294
13,006
14,679
16,405
18,644
20,424
21,657
24,853
28,733
31,237
32,912
Sample mean = 14,048

Tier-1 Capital Ratio

10.9
12.3
12.4
12.2
12.3
12.2
11.9
11.4
11.2
11.5
11.8
12.0
12.0
11.8
11.4
10.9
11.9
13.1
14.7
14.4
14.4
Sample mean = 12.2

45

Number of Observations (N)
497
515
525
529
567
580
577
569
652
669
658
642
639
636
609
610
617
644
629
576
1,598
1,598
1,575
1,562
1,516
1,545
1,719
1,684
1,710
1,749
1,697
1,705
1,661
1,585
1,501
1,393
1,323
1,247
1,185
1,163
Total N = 42,656

Table 2. Averages of focal variables under dividend forbearance
This table reports mean values of our focal variables for the model assuming dividend forbearance, with averages
computed separately over the 1974-2007, 2008-2009, and 2010-2013 periods. Averages are computed across our
sample of U.S. bank holding companies. Financial statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks
and daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Variable

Stand-alone risk, IPD (bp)

1974-2007

2008-2009

2010-2013

15.7

256.9

28.0

Stand-alone risk ($MM)

2.1

900.3

6.6

Systemic risk, IPDS (bp)

0.3

-365.4

-1.7

Systemic risk ($MM)

0.0

215.9

0.9

Equity volatility (%)

31.8

79.8

41.9

Asset volatility (%/)

4.0

9.1

4.0

Market capital (%)

11.3

4.4

9.2

Tier 1 capital (%)

11.8

11.4

14.1

Tier 2 capital (%)
Assets ($BB)
Average number of banks

2.0

1.7

1.7

11,319
256

21,017
362

29,281
307

46

Table 3. Time-series regressions predicting banking sector risk
This table reports the results of time-series regressions predicting banking sector risk (IPDBS) at various horizons
using its current values. Banking sector risk is estimated using the dividend forbearance model. Financial statement
data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.
t

R2

Forecast horizon

Coef.

1 month

0.868**

38.3

0.754

481

2 months

0.771**

26.5

0.594

480

3 months

0.573**

15.3

0.328

479

4 months

0.520**

13.3

0.271

478

5 months

0.407**

9.7

0.166

477

6 months

0.345**

8.0

0.119

476

7 months

0.201**

4.5

0.040

475

8 months

0.111*

2.4

0.012

474

9 months

0.024

0.5

0.001

473

10 months

-0.003

-0.1

0.000

472

11 months

-0.015

-0.3

0.000

471

12 months

-0.016

-0.4

0.000

470

47

Observations

Table 4. Time-series regressions predicting banking sector risk using business cycle and
banking structure variables
This table reports time-series regressions predicting banking sector risk (IPDBS) at various horizons using its current
values as well as business cycle and banking structure variables. Regressions in panel A include recession indicators
and GDP growth and regressions in panel B also include the Herfindahl index of banking assets. Banking sector risk
is estimated using the dividend forbearance model. Recession indicator is based on NBER US business cycle
expansion and contraction data. GDP growth is the real GDP growth rate. Herfindahl index is calculated based on
book asset values of sample banks. Financial statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and
daily stock returns are from CRSP.

Panel A. Recession indicators and GDP growth
Forecast
horizon
0 months
1 month
2 months
3 months
4 months
5 months
6 months
7 months
8 months
9 months
10 months
11 months
12 months

Recession
indicator

t-stat

33.287**
30.280**
26.804**
24.284**
21.909**
21.156**
21.469**
23.097**
24.833**
27.817**
27.612**
26.518**
22.492**

GDP growth

t-stat

R2

Obs.

-1.892
-4.577
-7.500**
-9.597**
-11.536**
-12.119**
-11.844**
-10.477**
-8.756**
-5.866*
-3.638
-2.288
-1.540

-0.7
-1.7
-2.9
-3.7
-4.4
-4.6
-4.5
-4.0
-3.3
-2.2
-1.3
-0.8
-0.6

0.100
0.106
0.115
0.125
0.135
0.138
0.136
0.128
0.118
0.104
0.083
0.068
0.047

480
480
480
479
478
477
476
475
474
473
472
471
470

5.7
5.2
4.7
4.2
3.8
3.7
3.7
4.0
4.3
4.7
4.6
4.4
3.7

Panel B. Recession indicators, GDP growth, and Herfindahl index
Forecast
horizon
0 months
1 month
2 months
3 months
4 months
5 months
6 months
7 months
8 months
9 months
10 months
11 months
12 months

Recession
indicator
37.316**
33.982**
30.196**
27.269**
24.662**
23.740**
24.020**
25.542**
27.191**
30.125**
29.937**
28.808**
24.675**

t-stat

GDP
growth

t-stat

Herfindahl
index

t-stat

R2

Obs.

6.7
6.1
5.4
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.3
4.5
4.8
5.2
5.1
4.9
4.1

2.601
-0.449
-3.718
-6.202*
-8.331**
-9.032**
-8.740**
-7.444**
-5.771*
-2.895
-0.593
0.765
1.449

1.0
-0.2
-1.4
-2.4
-3.2
-3.4
-3.3
-2.8
-2.2
-1.1
-0.2
0.3
0.5

289.676**
266.152**
243.790**
224.549**
218.161**
216.510**
217.842**
212.852**
209.554**
207.112**
210.714**
209.734**
207.827**

7.0
6.4
5.9
5.4
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.0
4.8
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.5

0.184
0.176
0.174
0.175
0.182
0.184
0.183
0.172
0.160
0.144
0.125
0.109
0.086

480
480
480
479
478
477
476
475
474
473
472
471
470

48

Table 5. Averages of focal variables under dividend forbearance by asset size quartile
This table reports the mean values of the focal variables for our model assuming dividend forbearance. Statistics are
reported across asset-size quartiles, and separately for the 1974-2007, 2008-2009, and 2010-2013 periods. Financial
statement data are from the Compustat database for U.S. banks and daily stock returns are from CRSP.
Panel A. Pre-crisis years: 1974-2007
Stand-alone risk, IPD (bp)

Quartile 1

Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

53.5

6.2

2.3

2.9

Stand-alone risk ($MM)

0.8

0.5

0.4

6.4

Systemic risk, IPDS (bp)

1.5

-0.2

-0.2

0.0

Systemic risk ($MM)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

Equity volatility (%)

38.4

31.9

29.9

27.4

Asset volatility (%/)

5.1

3.9

3.7

3.5

Market capital (%)

9.3

11.5

11.7

12.6

Tier 1 capital (%)

12.9

12.4

11.9

10.5

Tier 2 capital (%)

2.0

1.7

1.6

2.6

Assets ($BB)

667

1435

3095

38980

429.1

178.8

171.5

255.5

Stand-alone risk ($MM)

16.4

18.0

38.3

3487.7

Systemic risk, IPDS (bp)

Panel B. Crisis years: 2008-2009
Stand-alone risk, IPD (bp)

-721.3

-429.1

-227.4

-99.6

Systemic risk ($MM)

-12.1

-41.3

-50.6

957.1

Equity volatility (%)

90.1

73.4

76.9

79.1

Asset volatility (%/)

11.5

7.2

7.7

9.9

Market capital (%)

-1.7

5.6

6.6

6.8

Tier 1 capital (%)

12.4

11.2

11.2

11.1

Tier 2 capital (%)

1.4

1.5

1.6

2.3

Assets ($BB)

468

1073

2424

79152

68.0

23.3

14.8

7.0

Panel C: Post-crisis years: 2010-2013
Stand-alone risk, IPD (bp)
Stand-alone risk ($MM)

2.0

2.4

3.5

18.5

Systemic risk, IPDS (bp)

-6.0

-1.0

0.0

0.3

Systemic risk ($MM)

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

3.8

Equity volatility (%)

53.3

43.1

39.1

32.5

Asset volatility (%/)

5.2

3.5

3.7

3.6

Market capital (%)

6.1

8.3

10.5

11.6

Tier 1 capital (%)

14.8

13.9

14.2

13.6

Tier 2 capital (%)

1.5

1.5

1.6

2.1

Assets ($BB)

557

1263

3008

111247

49

Table 6. Identity of Top-15 Banks Ranked by Stand-Alone and Systemic Risk, 1974-2013
This table reports the difference in identity of the top-15 banks ranked by stand-alone and systemic risk over the
period 1974-2013. Panel A reports the ranking of the stand-alone risk premium and panel B reports the ranking of
systemic risk.

Panel A. Top 15 Banks Ranked by Stand-Alone Risk Premium
#

Name

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

CONNECTICUT BANK&TRUST CO/NE
FLORIDA BANKS INC
CBC BANCORP INC
FIRST COML BANCORP INC
UNIVERSITY BANCORP INC
AMERICAN PACIFIC BANK -CL B
OHIO LEGACY CORP
OPTIMUMBANK HOLDINGS INC
JACKSONVILLE BANCORP INC/FL
FIRST BANCSHARES INC/MS
CARROLLTON BANCORP/MD -OLD
VALLEY FINANCIAL CORP
BSD BANCORP INC
LIBERTY BELL BANK
FIRST REGIONAL BANCORP

Assets ($MM)
267
151
104
170
48
46
186
154
437
483
415
799
399
157
122

50

Panel B. Top 15 Banks Ranked by Systemic Risk Premium
#

Name

Assets ($MM)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

AUBURN NATIONAL BANCORP
FIRST COMMUNITY CORP/SC
CAROLINA TRUST BANK
STATE STREET CORP
GLEN BURNIE BANCORP
JACKSONVILLE BANCORP INC/FL
WELLS FARGO & CO
PNC FINANCIAL SVCS GROUP INC
OLD LINE BANCSHARES INC
CAPITAL BANK CORP/NC
NORTHERN STATES FINANCIAL CP
FIRST FINANCIAL CORP/IN
TRICO BANCSHARES
BANCTRUST FINANCIAL GRP INC
PACWEST BANCORP

729
634
137
142,144
315
452
1,285,891
286,422
245
250
645
2303
1976
2088
4496

51

Table 7. Stand-alone and systemic risk premiums: Thirty largest banks by the book value
of assets
This table reports the 30 largest banks by the book value of assets (in millions of dollars) in fiscal year 2007. The
reported risk measures are for the dividend-forbearance model and state the maximum values reached during the 12
months from July 2008 to June 2009 when the commercial banks’ sectoral risk was the highest. The risk measures
are in basis points.

Assets ($billions)

Stand-alone risk
premium (bp)

Systemic risk
premium (bp)

Bank of America Corp

1,716

2,859

583

2

JPMorgan Chase & Co

1,562

821

526

3

Wells Fargo & Co

575

2,836

1,173

4

US Bancorp

238

966

208

5

Bank of New York Mellon Corp

198

1,148

520

6

Suntrust Banks Inc

180

1,254

383

7

State Street Corp

143

4,102

1,607

8

Regions Financial Corp

141

3,405

541

9

PNC Financial Services Group Inc

139

2,734

1,067

10

BB&T Corp

133

605

343

11

Fifth Third Bancorp

111

1,306

368

12

Keycorp

100

2,986

432

13

Santander Holdings USA Inc

85

6,106

513

14

Northern Trust Corp

68

512

268

15

M&T Bank Corp

65

165

-12

16

Comerica Inc

62

431

207

17

Marshall & Ilsley Corp

60

2,210

570

18

Huntington Bancshares

55

2,576

415

19

Zions Bancorporation

53

1,427

401

20

Popular Inc

44

1,008

58

21

First Horizon National Corp

37

1,787

361

22

Synovus Financial Corp

33

1,245

290

23

Colonial Bancgroup

26

5,563

311

24

Associated Banc-Corp

22

379

75

25

Bok Financial Corp

21

80

-146

26

W Holding Co Inc

18

71

23

27

Webster Financial Corp

17

966

197

28

First Bancorp

17

377

144

29
30

First Citizens Bancshares
Commerce Bankshares Inc

16
16

90
159

-86
-239

Rank

Name

1

52

Table 8. Comparison of our measures of stand-alone and systemic risk with two other measures of capital shortage
This table shows a comparison of our measures of stand-alone and systemic risk (average values for the period starting in July 2008 and ending in June 2009)
with two other measures of capital shortage for 18 of the 19 institutions that the Federal Reserve subjected to stress tests in early 2009. SCAP denotes the capital
shortfall calculated in the supervisory Capital Assessment Program conducted in February 2009, MES is the Marginal Expected Shortfall calculated by Acharya
et al. (2010) from data in periods during which stock-market returns lie below their fifth percentile, and SRISK is from Brownlees and Engle (2015).
Other measures

SCAP
($billions)

SCAP/Tier1
Capital
(%)

Acharya et
al. MES
($billions)

Brownlees
and Engle
SRISK
(%)

Value of
Stand-alone
Support
($billions)

Our measures
Stand-alone
Value of
risk premium
systemic
IPD
risk support
(bp)
($billions)

Systemic risk
premium
IDPS
(bp)

Bank of America Corp

33.9

19.6

15.1

14.14

258

1,304

65

341

Wells Fargo & Co

13.7

15.9

10.6

8.51

119

1,049

53

482

Citigroup Inc

5.5

4.6

15.0

17.50

269

1,474

35

192

Regions Financial Corp

2.5

20.7

14.8

26

2,053

4

297

Suntrust Banks Inc

2.2

12.5

12.9

13

780

4

260

Keycorp

1.8

15.5

15.4

12

1,228

3

279

Morgan Stanley Dean Witter & Co

1.8

3.8

15.2

138

2,202

5

86

Fifth Third Bancorp

1.1

9.2

14.4

18

1,657

3

262

PNC Financial Services Group Inc

0.6

2.5

10.6

21

803

7

266

American Express Co

0

0.0

9.8

4

328

-4

-389

Bank New York Inc

0

0.0

11.1

12

582

1

37

JPMorgan Chase & Co

0

0.0

10.5

74

371

45

228

US Bancorp

0

0.0

8.5

9

376

0

12

State Street Corp

0

0.0

14.8

19

1,303

6

455

BB&T Corp

0

0.0

9.6

4

319

0

33

Capital One Financial Corp

0

0.0

10.5

11

777

3

186

Goldman Sachs Group Inc
Metlife Inc

0
0

0.0
0.0

10.0
10.3

13
42

151
878

-4
6

-43
130

4.44

13.58

4.27
3.63

53

Table 9. Cross-sectional quarter-by-quarter regressions for stand-alone and systemic risk
This table reports mean coefficients of cross-sectional quarter-by-quarter regressions of stand-alone and systemic
risk at sampled US bank holding companies. Regression results are reported separately for the whole period and for
the four quarters starting in quarter 3 of 2008 and ending in quarter 2 of 2009. Results in panel A are for regressions
of stand-alone risk (IPD) and results in panel B are for regressions of systemic risk (IPDS). The risk measures are in
basis points. Size is lagged CPI-adjusted book value of assets in billions of dollars. Deposits is lagged ratio of
deposits to total assets in %. Asset volatility is standard deviation of asset returns (in %) implied by the call option
model of bank equity. Implied capital is market value of equity as the percentage of the value of assets implied by
the option model of bank equity. The reported slope coefficients, R 2, and the numbers of the observations are the
averages from quarterly cross-sectional regressions. The columns labeled “Same Sign” report the number of
coefficient estimates whose sign is the same as the reported mean coefficient. The p-values come from a
nonparametric sign test.
Q3/08 – Q2/09

Full sample
Coefficients

Average

Same sign

p-value

Average

Same sign

p-value

Panel A: Determinants of stand-alone risk (IPD)
Size
Deposits
Asset volatility
Implied capital
Average R2
Observations
Time periods

0.018
-0.114
18.774
-6.526
0.587
266
160

67
93
160
157

0.98
0.02
0.00
0.00

0.262
2.024
48.648
-9.929
0.907
356
4

2
4
4
3

0.69
0.06
0.06
0.31

0.00
0.00
0.98
0.00

0.984
-18.386
-9.043
--7.790
0.134
356
4

4
4
2
3

0.06
0.06
0.69
0.31

Panel B: Determinants of systemic risk (IPDS)
Size
Deposits
Asset volatility
Implied capital
Ave. R2
Ave. Obs.
Time periods

0.025
-0.499
-0.394
-0.069
0.195
266
160

138
103
66
106

54

Table 10. Cross-sectional quarter-by-quarter regressions for stand-alone and systemic risk:
Additional controls for size
This table reports mean coefficients of cross-sectional quarter-by-quarter regressions of stand-alone and systemic
risk at sampled US bank holding companies. Regression results are reported separately for the whole period and for
the four quarters starting in quarter 3 of 2008 and ending in quarter 2 of 2009. Results in panel A are for regressions
of stand-alone risk (IPD) and results in panel B are for regressions of systemic risk (IPDS). The risk measures are in
basis points. Size represents the lagged CPI-adjusted book value of assets in billions of dollars. Large is an indicator
set to one for the top-10 percent of banks (by book value of assets) in each calendar quarter. Very large is an
indicator set to one for the top-5 percent of banks (by book value of assets) in each calendar quarter. Deposits
represent the lagged ratio of deposits to total assets expressed as a percent. Asset volatility is the standard deviation
of asset returns (in %) implied by the call option model of bank equity. Implied capital reports the market value of
equity as a percentage of the value of assets implied by the option model of bank equity. The reported slope
coefficients, R2, and observation counts are averages from quarterly cross-sectional regressions. The columns
labeled “Same Sign” report the number of coefficient estimates whose sign is the same as the reported mean
coefficient. The p-values come from a nonparametric sign test.
Q3/08 – Q2/09

Full sample
Coefficients

Average

Same sign

Significant

Average

Same sign

Significant

0.53
1.00
1.00
0.53
0.00
0.00

11.3
70.5
0.2
2.4
48.3
-10.0
0.907
356
4

3
3
3
4
4
3

0.31
0.31
0.31
0.06
0.06
0.31

0.00
0.99
0.00
0.00
0.91
0.00

375.9
405.9
0.0
-13.4
-12.1
-8.7
0.177
356
4

4
4
2
4
3
3

0.06
0.06
0.69
0.06
0.31
0.31

Panel A: Determinants of stand-alone risk (IPD)
Large
Very large
Size
Deposits
Asset volatility
Implied capital
Average R2
Observations
Time periods

8.735
-1.609
0.004
-0.051
18.827
-6.593
0.591
266
160

80
59
51
80
160
157

Panel B: Determinants of systemic risk (IPDS)
Large
Very large
Size
Deposits
Asset volatility
Implied capital
Ave. R2
Ave. Obs.
Time periods

9.805
9.915
0.001
-0.374
-0.470
-0.092
0.207
266
160

131
63
118
101
70
107

55

