NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ROADS TO PROSPERITY OR BRIDGES TO NOWHERE? THEORY AND EVIDENCE
ON THE IMPACT OF PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT
Sylvain Leduc
Daniel Wilson
Working Paper 18042
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18042

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012

We thank Brian Lucking and Elliott Marks for superb and tireless research assistance. We are grateful
to John Fernald, Bart Hobijn, Òscar Jordà, John Williams and seminar attendees at the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, the University of Nevada, and the SEEK/CEPR Workshop on “News, Sentiment,
and Confidence in Fluctuations,” for helpful comments. We thank the many transportation officials
who improved our understanding of the institutional complexities of highway financing and spending,
especially Ken Simonson (Associated General Contractors of America), Nancy Richardson (formerly
of Iowa DOT), Jack Wells (U.S. DOT), and Alison Black and William Buechner (both of American
Road and Transportation Builders Assn.) Finally, we are grateful to the editors of the 2012 NBER
Macroeconomic Annual for excellent guidance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or the Federal Reserve System.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Sylvain Leduc and Daniel Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and Evidence on the Impact of Public
Infrastructure Investment
Sylvain Leduc and Daniel Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 18042
May 2012
JEL No. E62,H54,R11
ABSTRACT
We examine the dynamic macroeconomic effects of public infrastructure investment both theoretically
and empirically, using a novel data set we compiled on various highway spending measures. Relying
on the institutional design of federal grant distributions among states, we construct a measure of government
highway spending shocks that captures revisions in expectations about future government investment.
We find that shocks to federal highway funding has a positive effect on local GDP both on impact
and after 6 to 8 years, with the impact effect coming from shocks during (local) recessions. However,
we find no permanent effect (as of 10 years after the shock). Similar impulse responses are found in
a number of other macroeconomic variables. The transmission channel for these responses appears
to be through initial funding leading to building, over several years, of public highway capital which
then temporarily boosts private sector productivity and local demand. To help interpret these findings,
we develop an open economy New Keynesian model with productive public capital in which regions
are part of a monetary and fiscal union. We show that the presence of productive public capital in this
model can yield impulse responses with the same qualitative pattern that we find empirically.

Sylvain Leduc
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
sylvain.leduc@sf.frb.org
Daniel Wilson
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St.
Mail Stop 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105-1530
Daniel.Wilson@sf.frb.org

Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere?
Theory and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment

by Sylvain Leduc and Daniel Wilson (FRB San Francisco)

I.

Introduction

Public infrastructure investment often plays a prominent role in countercyclical fiscal
policy. In the United States during the Great Depression, programs such as the Works Progress
Administration and the Tennessee Valley Authority were key elements of the government’s
economic stimulus. In the Great Recession, government spending on infrastructure projects was
a major component of the 2009 stimulus package. Yet, infrastructure’s economic impact and
how it varies with the business cycle remain subject to significant debate. Many view this form
of government spending as little more than ‘bridges to nowhere,’ that is, spending yielding few
economic benefits with large cost overruns and a wasteful use of resources. Others view public
infrastructure investment as an effective form of government spending that can boost economic
activity not only in the long run, but over shorter horizons as well.
This paper provides both an empirical analysis, using a rich and novel new data set on
highway spending, of the dynamic macroeconomic effects of infrastructure investment and a
theoretical model to help interpret the results. We focus empirically on highway infrastructure
both because it is the largest component of public infrastructure in the United States and because
the institutional design underlying the geographic distribution of U.S. federal highway
investment helps us identify shocks to local infrastructure spending. In particular, our empirical
analysis exploits the formula-based mechanism by which nearly all federal highway funds are
apportioned to state governments. Because the state-specific factors entering the apportionment
formulas are often largely unrelated to current state economic conditions and also lagged several
years, the formula-based distribution of federal highway grants provides an exogenous source of
highway funding to states, independent of states’ own economic conditions.
The focus on federal grants to states has the advantage of capturing much more precisely
the timing with which highway spending affects economic activity. Public highway spending in
the United States is ultimately determined by state governments, which allocate a large fraction
1

of their revenues to highway construction, maintenance, and improvement.1 However, states
report highway spending using the concept of outlays and we show that outlays will often lag
considerably the movements in actual government funding obligations that give states the right
to contract out and initiate projects.2 Furthermore, there can be administrative delays between
when a state’s grants are initially announced and when the state starts incurring obligations.
Using grants to measure the timing of highway spending shocks allows one to estimate possible
economic effects stemming from agents’ foresight of future government obligations and outlays,
even before highway projects are initiated.
In addition, the design and distribution of federal highway spending helps us address
concerns related to anticipation effects that are likely to arise in the case of large infrastructure
projects. Because the U.S. Congress typically sets the total national amount of highway grants
and the formulas by which they are apportioned to states many years in advance, there is strong
reason to believe that economic agents (especially state governments and private contractors) can
anticipate long in advance, albeit imperfectly, the eventual level of grants received by a given
state in a given year. Such anticipation of future government spending has been shown by Ramey
(2011a) to pose a serious hazard in correctly identifying spending shocks.3
Using the institutional details of the mechanisms by which grants are apportioned to
states, and very detailed data on state-level apportionments and national budget authorizations,
we construct forecasts of current and future highway grants for each state and year between 1993
and 2010. These forecasts are constructed in much the same way that the Federal Highway
Administration constructed forecasts of future highway grants to states at the beginning of the
most recent multi-year appropriations act (which covered 2005-2009). From these forecasts, we
calculate the expected present discounted value of current and future highway grants. The
difference in expectations from last year to this year forms our measure of the shock to state

1

Local governments also spend a considerable amount on road spending, though the vast majority of that spending
is on minor residential roads (according to FHWA statistics) that generally are not considered part of the nation’s
highway infrastructure.
2
The theoretical implications of these bureaucratic “implementation lags” have been analyzed by Leeper et al.
(2009) and others.
3
Ramey notes that the difficulties may be especially severe with regard to highway spending:
“One should be clear that timing is not an issue only with defense spending. Consider the interstate highway
program. In early 1956, Business Week was predicting that the ‘fight over highway building will be drawn out.’ By
May 5, 1956, Business Week thought that the highway construction bill was a sure bet. It fact it passed in June 1956.
However, the multi-billion dollar program was intended to stretch out over 13 years. It is difficult to see how a VAR
could accurately reflect this program.”

2

highway spending. This shock is driven primarily by changes in incoming data on formula
factors which, as mentioned above, reflect information on those factors from a number of years
earlier (because of data collection lags).
We exploit the variation of our shock measure across states and through time to examine
its dynamic effect on different measures of economic activity by combining panel variation and
panel econometric techniques with time-series techniques. Specifically, we extend Jordà (2005)’s
direct projections approach to estimating impulse response functions to allow for state and year
fixed effects. We find that these highway spending shocks positively affect GDP at two specific
horizons. First, there is a positive and significant contemporaneous impact. This effect is
particularly noteworthy given the view by many that infrastructure spending is ill-suited to
provide short-run stimulus because of long implementation delays. Second, after this initial
impact fades, we find a larger second-round effect around six to eight years out. Yet, there
appears to be no permanent effect as GDP is back to its pre-shock level by ten years out.
The multipliers that we calculate from these IRFs are large, roughly 3 on impact and even
larger 6-8 years out. These estimates are considerably larger than those typically found in the
literature, even those similarly estimating local multipliers with respect to “windfall” transfers
from a central government. One possible reason for this is that public infrastructure spending has
a higher multiplier than the non-infrastructure spending considered in most previous studies. As
we discuss in Section IV, it is also possible that a shock to current and future highway grants
leads to increases not just to spending on federal-aid highway projects but also to highway and
state spending more broadly. Still, using state in addition to federal highway spending as a
broader measure of government outlays, we estimate a lower bound for the peak multiplier of
roughly 3.
We obtain the same impulse response pattern when we look at other macroeconomic
outcomes, though there is no evidence of an initial impact for employment, unemployment, or
wages and salaries. Also, we find some evidence of a permanent positive response of state
population to a positive highway funding shock.
Following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011a), we extend the analysis to investigate
whether highway spending shocks occurring during recessions lead to different impulse
responses than do shocks occurring in expansions. The potential empirical importance of such
nonlinearities was emphasized recently in Parker’s (2011) survey of the fiscal multiplier
3

literature. The results are somewhat imprecise, but we find that the initial impact occurs only for
shocks in recessions, while later effects are not statistically different between recessions and
expansions.
To explore the channels by which a local shock in federal highway funds leads to
increased macroeconomic activity in the short- and medium runs, we also estimate the impulse
responses of a number of state fiscal policy variables as well as the responses of particular
sectors of the economy most likely to directly benefit from improved highway infrastructure.
First, we find that actual grants, obligations, and outlays of federal-aid highway funds do in fact
increase over the first several years after a highway funding shock. State highway construction
spending also increases but the increase is more gradual with the peak response coming 6-8 years
out. Looking at particular sectors of the economy, we find that the shock has is a modest impact
effect and a particularly strong second-round effect on GDP in the Truck Transportation sector.
Retail sales also show a significant second-round increase though no initial impact.
In the second part of the paper, we use a theoretical framework to interpret our empirical
findings. In line with our state-level data set and in the spirit of the recent work by Nakamura
and Steinsson (2011), we look at the multiplier in an open economy model with productive
public capital in which “states” receive federal funds for infrastructure investment calibrated to
capture the structure of a typical highway bill in the United States. By considering an open
economy model with nominal rigidities, our approach complements the work of Leeper at al.
(2010) in a closed economy context, while by studying changes in productive public capital and
government borrowing, our paper complements that of Nakamura and Steinsson (2011).
Applying the local projection method to our simulated data, we find a pattern for the movements
in the theoretical multiplier that is qualitatively similar to the empirical one: it rises on impact,
then falls for some time, before rising once again. We show that this pattern relates to the time it
takes to build the public capital stock and to the estimated persistence of shocks to grants.
However, our baseline calibration generates a peak multiplier of roughly 2, about eight years
after the initial increase in public investment, which is smaller than the second-round effect
implied by our empirical impulse response estimates.
This paper is one of the first to analyze the dynamic macroeconomic effects of public
infrastructure investment. The sparsity of prior work likely owes to the challenges posed by the
endogeneity of public infrastructure spending to economic conditions, the partial fiscal
4

decentralization of the spending, the long implementation lags between when spending changes
are decided and when government outlays are observed, and the high degree of spending
predictability leading to likely anticipation effects.

These four features make public

infrastructure spending unique and, in particular, different from the type of government spending
often analyzed in the literature on fiscal policy, which frequently focused on the effects of
military spending (see, Ramey and Shapiro (1998), Edelberg, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (1999),
Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (2004), Fisher and Peters (2010), Ramey (2011a), Barro and
Redlick (2011), Nakamura and Steinsson (2011), among others). While defense spending is also
subject to implementation lags and anticipation effects, changes in defense spending due to
military conflicts are more likely to be exogenous to movements in economic activity than
changes in public infrastructure spending.
Because of our focus on highway spending, our paper is more in line with the work of
Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Mountford and Uhlig (2009), Fishback and Kachanovskaya
(2010), or Wilson (forthcoming) that look at the effects of nondefense spending. 4 As in the latter
two studies, several recent papers have used variations in government spending across subnational regions to identify the effects of fiscal policy.5 These studies take advantage of the fact
that large portions of federal spending are often allocated to regions for reasons unrelated to
regional economic performance or needs, a strategy that we also follow. Such variations can be
used to identify the effects of federal spending on a local economy. How these local effects relate
to the national effects of federal spending depends on, among other factors, whether there are
spillover effects to other regions and the extent to which local residents bear the tax burden of
the spending (as stressed in Ramey 2011b). We are able to explore the importance of these
factors with our theoretical model.

4

Perotti (2007) and Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Végh (2010) also apply the methodology of Blanchard and Perotti
(2002) to look at the effects of fiscal shocks in countries other than the United States.
5
In addition to those discussed below, some notable examples using U.S. regional or county level data include
Shoag (2010), Chodorow-Reich, et al. (2011), Feyrer and Sacerdote (2010), Conley and Dupor (2011), and Suarez
Serrato and Wingender (2011). Likewise, Acconcia, Corsetti, and Simonelli (2011) use variations in public
infrastructure spending across Italian provinces. Giavazzi and McMahon (2012) employ a similar approach by
looking at the effects of government spending on households’ behavior, using disaggregated household information
from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.

5

We are aware of only a few studies that explicitly investigate the overall economic effects
of public highway spending.6 Pereira (2000) examine the effects of highway spending, among
different types of public infrastructure investment, on output using a structural VAR and
aggregate U.S. data from 1956 to 1997. Using a timing restriction à la Blanchard and Perotti
(2002), he finds an aggregate multiplier of roughly 2. This approach requires the arguably
unrealistic assumption that current government spending decisions are exogenous to current
economic conditions. Moreover, Pereira doesn’t account for anticipation effects that are very
likely to occur in the case of federal highway spending, which may lead to incorrect inference.
Using U.S. county data, Chandra and Thompson (2000) attempt to trace out the dynamics of
local earnings before and after the event of a new highway completion in the county. They find
both that earnings are higher during the highway-construction period (1-5 years prior to
completion) than when the highway is completed and that earnings after completion rise steadily
over many years. This U-shaped pattern is broadly consistent with our estimated GDP impulse
response function with respect to highway spending shocks (which would occur several years
prior to a highway completion). A recent paper by Leigh and Neill (2011) estimate a static,
cross-section IV regression of local unemployment rates on local federally-funded infrastructure
spending in Australia. Because much of that spending in Australia is determined by discretionary
earmarks rather than formulas, they use political power of localities as instruments for grants
received by localities. Though one might be concerned that local political power also might
affect local economic conditions, violating the IV exclusion restriction, they find that local
highway grants substantially reduce local unemployment rates.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a
background discussion about the Federal-Aid Highway Program and details the process through
which federal highway grants are distributed among states. We also discuss the issues of timing
and forecastability of grants. In Section 3, we first provide evidence on the extent of
implementation lags for highway grants and then describe how we construct our measure of
highway grant shocks. Our empirical methodology and results are presented in Section 4. In
section 5, we present our open economy model and the theoretical multipliers. The last section
concludes.
6

Our paper is also related to the long empirical literature on the contribution of public infrastructure capital to the
productivity of the private economy (see, for instance, Aschauer (1989), Holtz-Eakin (1994), Fernald (1999), or
Morrison and Schwartz (1996)).

6

II.

Infrastructure Spending: Institutional Design

The design of the U.S. Federal-Aid Highway Program allows us to specifically address
the issues raised in the introduction. In particular, the distribution of federal highway grants
across states is subject to strict rules that reduce the concern that these distributions may be
endogenous to states' current economic conditions. These rules were also partly implemented to
ease long-term planning and thus they provide a natural way to tackle the concern that future
spending can be anticipated. Moreover, the data on federal highway funding is detailed enough
to distinguish between the provisions of IOUs by the federal government to states and actual
government outlays, which mitigates the possible problem arising from implementation lags that
obscure the timing of government spending. This section examines each of these features in turn
after first providing some background information on highway bills.
Federal funding is provided to the states mostly through a series of grant programs
collectively known as the Federal-Aid Highway Program (FAHP). Periodically, Congress enacts
multi-year legislation that authorizes spending on these programs. Since 1990, Congress has
adopted three such acts: the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) in 1991,
which covered fiscal years (FY) 1992 through 1997; the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st
Century (TEA-21) in 1998, which covered FY1998-2003; and the Safe, Accountable, Flexible,
Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU) in 2005, which
covered FY2005-2009.7 However, legislations of much shorter duration have also been adopted
to fill the gap between the more comprehensive, multi-year acts. These so-called stop-gap
funding bills typically simply extend funding for existing programs to keep them operational. For
instance, since SAFETEA-LU expired in 2009, nine (as of the time of this writing) highway bill
extensions of varying durations have been adopted to continue funding highway programs in
accordance with SAFETEA-LU’s provisions.
The Federal-Aid Highway Program is extensive and helps fund construction,
maintenance, and other outlays on a large array of public roads that go well beyond the interstate
highway system. Local roads are often considered Federal-Aid highways and eligible for federal

7

The U.S. federal fiscal year begins Oct. 1 of the prior calendar year. For instance, FY2012 runs from Oct. 1, 2011
through Sept. 30, 2012.

7

construction and improvement funds, depending on their service value and importance. For
instance, Figure 1 gives a snapshot of roads categorized as federal-aid highways in downtown
San Francisco. While it shows that a major thoroughfare like Highway 101 is included in that
category, the figure indicates that many minor roads also fall under the federal-aid highway
umbrella.
We note that the cost of construction or improvement of federal-aid highways is not fully
covered by the federal government. In most highway programs, the federal government will
reimburse a state for 80 percent of the cost of eligible projects, up to the limit set by the state’s
grant apportionment. Thus, it is important to recognize that not all highway spending on federalaid highway projects is financed by the federal government; some of it is financed by states’ own
funds, such as state tax revenues.

A. Distributing Grants to States: Apportionment Formulas
When a highway authorization bill is passed, Congress authorizes the total amount of
funding available for each highway program (highway construction, bridge replacement,
maintenance, etc.) for each fiscal year covered by the bill.8 For instance, SAFETEA-LU
authorized $244 billion for transportation spending for 2005-2009; 79 percent of that was for the
Federal-Aid Highway Program. Nearly all of FAHP funding takes the form of formula grants to
state governments: The grants for each individual highway program (Interstate Maintenance,
National Highway System, Surface Transportation Program, etc.) are distributed to the states
according to statutory apportionment formulas also enacted by Congress as part of the current
authorization act. The Interstate Maintenance program, for instance, apportioned funds under
SAFETEA-LU according to each state's share of national interstate lane-miles, its share of
vehicle-miles traveled on interstate highways, and its share of payments into the Highway Trust
Fund, with equal weights on each factor. Table 1 indicates that most programs (and all major
programs) use similar formulas. See Appendix A for a more detailed description of the grant
distribution mechanism.
8

Transportation authorization acts since the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956 have been nominally financed by the
Highway Trust Fund (HTF), which receives revenues from fuel, tire, and truck-related excise taxes. However, it is
debatable whether the HTF actually plays much of a role in ultimately determining transportation funding levels.
That is because there are instances (as in 2008) in which Congress has replenished the HTF from the general fund
when the HTF was low, and there are instances in which Congress has taken from from the HTF to add to the
general fund (see FHWA 2007). That would suggest the HTF balance at a point in time is largely irrelevant to how
much Congress authorizes for subsequent transportation spending.

8

In the majority of cases, the formulas and their associated factors have changed little over
time (i.e., over different authorization acts). However, highway legislation since 1982 also has
included a guaranteed minimum return on a state’s estimated contributions to the Highway Trust
Fund (HTF), which is nominally the financing source for highway authorizations. A state’s HTF
contributions are the revenues from the HTF’s fuel, tire, and truck-related taxes that can be
attributed to the state and are estimated by the FHWA based on the same factors used in
apportionment formulas. In 1991, the adoption of ISTEA set this minimum guaranteed return to
90 percent, which was then raised to 90.5 percent under TEA-21 in 1998 and 92 percent under
SAFETEA-LU. (See Appendix A for more detail.) A benefit of the minimum return
requirement, along with the statutory formula apportionment of individual programs, is that it
mitigates the potential role of political influence on the distribution of federal funding from year
to year. That said, highway bills contain funds earmarked for certain projects that are clearly
subject to political influence. For instance, prior to SAFETEA-LU’s final legislation, an earlier
proposal included an earmark of over $200 million for the now infamous "Bridge to Nowhere"
that was to link Ketchikan, Alaska – with a population of 8,900 – to the Island of Gravina – with
a population of 50. Though this and many other proposed earmarks were ultimately dropped
from the final legislation, $14.8 billion out of SAFETEA-LU’s $199 billion of highway
authorizations was set aside for earmarks.9 However, since earmarks are not distributed
according to formulas, we do not use them in our empirical work.
An additional aspect of the apportionment procedure that is key for our empirical strategy
is that the factors used in the formulas are lagged three years, since timely information is not
readily available to the FHWA. Although the apportionment of federal grants are partly based on
factors exogenous to economic activity (lane-miles, for instance), others, like payments into the
Highway Trust Fund, may be correlated with movements in current GDP. The use of three-year
old data for the factors in the apportionment formulas mitigates the concern that highway
spending is reacting contemporaneously to movements in activity.

B. The Forecastability of Grants
The use of formulas in allocating road funds among states has a long history, going as far
back as 1912 with the adoption of the Post Office Appropriation Act, which provided federal aid
9

See Appendix B of FHWA (2007). “Earmarks” are funded by the High-Priority Projects Program.

9

for the construction of rural postal roads. At the time, the introduction of such formulas was
largely welcomed because they made annual grants distribution more predictable and less subject
to political influence. They serve the same purpose today, as most highway programs require
long-term planning, and advance knowledge of future funding commitments helps smooth
operations from year to year. Indeed, before a new highway bill is introduced, the FHWA often
estimates what each state is likely to receive each year, using the apportionment formulas. As a
result, the Department of Transportation in each state has a good idea of the amount of money
the state should expect for each program and can plan accordingly. In the following sections, we
use these formulas to generate forecasts, as of each year from 1992 to 2010, of apportionments
for each program and for all future years. We show that our forecasts closely match those
produced by the FHWA for those years in which FHWA projections are available.

C. Implementation Lags: Apportionments, Obligations, and Outlays
Another important aspect of the Federal-Aid Highway Program is that it can entail
substantial implementation lags between funding authorization and actually spending. Unlike
budget authorizations for most government programs, transportation authorization acts do not
directly authorize outlays of federal funds. Rather, the acts give “contract authority” to the
FHWA to promise states a certain level of reimbursement (for each highway program and each
fiscal year) for eligible highway expenditures. As stated in FHWA (2007),

“It is important to understand that the FAHP is not a ‘cash up-front’ program. That is, even
though the authorized amounts are ‘distributed’ to the States, no cash is actually disbursed at
this point. Instead, States are notified that they have Federal funds available for their use
[apportionments]. Projects are approved [obligations] and work is started; then the Federal
government makes payments to the States for costs as they are incurred on projects [outlays].”
(Bracketed terms added by authors.)

Both because states have up to four years (the period of availability for most programs) to
obligate the funds they are apportioned and because outlays occur during and after the
completion of highway projects (which by their nature often can take many years), grant
apportionments will show up as outlays with varying and possibly lengthy time lags. We use the
10

distinction between apportionment announcements, obligations, and outlays to provide evidence
on the importance of timing in studying the effects of highway spending on states' economic
activity.10
To summarize, our empirical strategy will make use of the fact that (1) federal grants are
apportioned to states via formulas that use three-year-old factors; (2) by design, the amount of
federal grants states receive each year is largely forecastable; (3) highway statistics provide
information that likely better capture the timing between highway spending and economic
activity.

III.

Measuring Shocks to Highway Spending

In this section, we detail the construction of our shocks to highway spending, which use
revisions in forecasts of federal grants apportionments. Before turning to that topic, however, we
first discuss the importance of implementation lags and timing in highway infrastructure
projects, which support our use of apportionments to measure our shocks.

A. Implementation Lags and Correctly Measuring the Timing of Highway Spending
Leeper, et al (2009) and others have convincingly argued that implementation lags between
government spending authorization and government outlays can greatly distort inferences
regarding the economic impacts of government spending. This is likely to be especially true for
highway and other infrastructure spending. The bureaucratic process underlying the
implementation lag for highway spending is well detailed in FHWA (2007). The process begins
at the beginning of each fiscal year when federal grants are distributed to states according to the
formulas laid out in the current highway bill and the factors entering those formulas. Each state
then writes contracts with contractors, obligating funds up to a maximum set by current and

10

We are unaware of prior research exploiting data on funding announcements and obligations to better measure the
timing of government spending shocks, with the exception of Wilson (2011). Using as instruments formula factors
used to distributed funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009, Wilson estimated
the employment effect of ARRA funds alternately based on announcements, obligations, and outlays. He found that
the results for announcements and obligations were similar, but that the estimated effect of ARRA funding based on
outlays was much larger, likely because a low level of outlays at a given point in time actually represents a much
larger level of announcements or obligations which are the true shocks to government spending.

11

unobligated past grants.11 Work then proceeds by contractors and those contractors, along the
way and/or at the end of the project, submit bills to their state. The state essentially passes those
bills on to the federal government (FHWA) which approves them and instructs the U.S. Treasury
to transfer funds to the state which in turn sends funds to the contractor. Note that it is these final
transfers of funds by the federal and state governments that show up as “outlays” in official
government statistics and ultimately enter the calculation of a state’s GDP as part of government
spending.
There are at least two steps in this process that can introduce substantial delays between
grants and final outlays. First, as noted in the previous section, states legally have up to four
years to obligate funds from a given year of grants. Second, and more importantly, once a
contract has been written, the work itself may take several years. This, of course, is a
distinguishing characteristic of infrastructure spending. Using state panel data that we collected
from the FHWA Highway Statistics series (see the data glossary in Appendix C for details), we
can estimate precisely what these implementation lags look like. First, we estimate the dynamic
lag structure from federal highway grants (“apportionments”) received by a state to its
obligations of funds for federal-aid highway projects. Specifically, we estimate the following
distributed lag model with state and year fixed effects:
(1)
where

is obligations and

is apportionments, both per capita.

The results are shown in Table 2. The bottom line is that 70% of grant money is
obligated in the same year the grants are announced and the remaining (roughly speaking) 30%
is obligated the following year. All funds are obligated well within the four-year statutory time
frame within which states must obligate federal funds. Thus, the step from grants to obligations
introduces only modest implementation lags.
The step from obligations to outlays, however, can lead to substantial lags. This can be
seen by estimating a distributed lag panel model as above but with outlays of federal aid as the
11

At this point, the state is also implicitly obligating itself to pay for future auxiliary costs associated with
completed highway projects such as highway police services, snow removal, administrative expenses, etc.. Such
auxiliary costs show up in data on overall highway outlays but do not show up in data on obligations. For this
reason, measured obligations may understate the true level of obligations at a point in time, an issue that affects our
interpretation of the government spending multiplier we obtain based on obligations later in the paper. We discuss
this in Section IV.D.

12

dependent variable and obligations on the right-hand side.12 Both variables are again per capita.
We include current-year and up to seven years of lagged obligations to fully describe the
implementation lag process. Further lags are found to be economically and statistically
insignificant. The results are shown in the second column of Table 2. We find that a dollar of
obligations of federal-aid funds by a state takes up to six years to result in actual outlays
(reimbursements to the state) by the federal government. The results in columns (1) and (2)
suggest that the implementation lag – often referred to as the “spendout rate” – between grants
and outlays is quite long, and this is indeed confirmed when we regress FHWA outlays on
current and seven lags of grants. As shown in the third column, $1 in grants does eventually lead
to $1 in outlays (our point estimate is $0.98 and the 95% confidence interval is $0.88 to $1.09),
but the process can take up to seven years. In sum, states obligate federal grant funds over two
years and those obligations are outlayed over six years, so that the whole process from grants to
outlays can take up to seven years. That said, it should also be noted that the process is still
highly skewed toward the first two or three years that federal grants are announced, with about
75% of grant funds showing up as outlays in the first three years.
These results provide strong evidence that there are substantial implementation lags between
when highway spending amounts are authorized, and hence known with certainty to all agents in
the economy, and when final outlays occur. That is, agents have near-perfect foresight of outlays
several years in advance. Thus, one would not want to use outlays in deriving a measure of
highway spending shocks in order to estimate the dynamic effects of highway spending. For this
reason, we rely instead on information from apportionments (i.e., announced grants) in our
analysis. Unanticipated shocks to such announcements may have economic effects both in the
short-run, as agents respond now to known future increases in government spending, and in the
long-run as they lead to obligations, then actual roadwork, and finally real infrastructure capital
being put in place that can potentially enhance productivity in the economy.

B. Distinguishing Unanticipated from Anticipated Changes in Highway Grants
In this subsection, we construct a measure of highway spending shocks using data from
the FHWA on apportionments, statutory formulas, and formula factors from 1993 to 2010. In

12

The data on outlays by the FHWA to states are from the FHWA Highway Statistics for various years. See Table
FA-3, “Expenditure of Federal Funds Administered by the Federal Highway Administration During Fiscal Year.”

13

doing so, we make use of the fact that highway spending is likely to be partially forecastable
owing to the multi-year nature of the federal highway appropriations acts, which as discussed in
Section 2 typically cover a 5-6 year period. In a given year, agents know the full path of
aggregate (national) grants for each highway program for the remaining years of the current
appropriations bill and they also know the formulas by which each program’s grants are
apportioned to states. However, they do not know the future values of the factors that go into
those formulas and that will determine the distribution of grants among states. At the beginning
of each fiscal year, the latest data on formula factors are released at the same time as the year’s
apportionments are announced.13 Importantly for our empirical identification strategy, there is a
three-year data-collection lag for these factors. For instance, the number of vehicle-miles
traveled on federal-aid highways in each state in 2006 is used, along with other factors in 2006,
to apportion Surface Transportation Program grants to states in 2009. As we mentioned in
Section 2, this data collection lag helps eliminate potential reverse causality running from current
economic activity to formula factors and hence to highway grant apportionments. It also implies
that to correctly forecast future apportionments, agents need to make forecasts of the formula
factors.
The partial forecastability of future highway apportionments means that observed
movements in apportionments may not represent true shocks to expected current and future
highway spending. Therefore, we utilize the information provided in each highway
appropriations bill to forecast current and future highway spending and then measure the shock
to expectations as the difference between the current forecast and last year’s forecast. This is
similar in spirit to the approach of Ramey (2011a) and especially Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2011b). The latter paper measures shocks to government spending in OECD countries as the
year-over-year change in a one-year ahead forecasts of government spending made by the
OECD. One difference between that and what we do here is that our shock is based on a forecast
of the present discounted value of all future government (highway) spending rather than just next
year’s spending.
To construct real-time forecasts of future highway grants, we follow and extend the
methodology used by the FHWA Office of Legislation and Strategic Planning (FHWA 2005) in

13

The data on formula factors primarily come from the FHWA’s Highway Performance Monitoring System
(HPMS).

14

its report providing forecasts, as of 2005, of apportionments by state for the years of the 20052009 SAFETEA-LU highway bill. Basically, the methodology involves assuming that each
state’s current formula factors (as a share of the nation), and hence each state’s current share of
federal grants for each of the 17 FHWA apportionment programs, are constant over the forecast
horizon.14 That is, the best guess of what the relative values of formula factors will be going
forward is their current year relative values. Given apportionment shares for each program, one
can then distribute to states the known nationwide totals for each program for the remaining
years of the current legislation. One can then aggregate across programs to get a state’s total
apportionments in each of these future years.
We extend this methodology such that if one is forecasting for years beyond the current
legislation, one assumes a continuation of the use of current formulas (i.e., one’s best guess of
the formulas to be used in future legislations is the formulas currently in use) and one assumes
that nationwide apportionments by program grow at the current inflation rate from the last
authorized amount in the current legislation. Assuming constant formulas for future bills is
reasonable since, as discussed in Section 2, there’s been relatively little change in the formulas
used to apportion federal grants over the past 20 years. The details of how we construct these
forecasts are provided in Appendix B.
As a check on whether our forecast methodology is reasonable and similar to “best
practice” for entities interested in forecasting highway apportionments, we compare our forecasts
to forecasts we were able to obtain from the FHWA as of 2005. The scatterplot shown in Figure
2 compares our four-year ahead forecasts, as of 2005 (the first year of the 2005-2009 SAFETEULU appropriations bill), of 2009 highway apportionments to that done by the FHWA. The red
line is a 45° line. Not surprisingly given that we use a similar forecasting methodology, our
forecasts are very close to the FHWA’s.
How forecastable are highway grant apportionments? The answer depends on the forecast
year and the forecast horizon, and in particular, on whether one is forecasting grants within the
current highway bill or forecasting beyond the current bill. One can see this by comparing fouryear ahead forecasts to actual grants four years ahead for various years of our sample. This is
14

Actually, our assumption is slightly weaker than that. We assume that states who qualify for the minimum
apportionment share (usually 0.5%) for a given program continue to qualify, which allows for those state’s to
experience changes in relative formula factors as long as the changes are not big enough to push the state above the
minimum apportionment share.

15

done in Figure 3. The top two scatterplots are for forecast years during the interval of the first
highway bill of our sample, ISTEA, which covered 1992-1997. The middle two scatterplots
correspond to forecast years during TEA-21, which covered 1998-2003 (but was extended
through 2004). The final scatterplots show forecasts, as of 2005, of 2009 grants. Both 2005 and
2009 were within the same highway bill (SAFETEA-LU, covering 2005-2009 but extended at
least through the time of this writing). However, 2009 grants also included the large additional
amount of grants authorized by the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA).
With the exception of the 2005 forecasts, the forecasts made for years within the same bill (left
column of scatterplots) tend to miss more or less equally on each side of the 45° line, whereas
the forecasts of grants beyond the current bill tend to miss systematically above or below the
line. This reflects the inability to forecast whether the aggregate amount of grants authorized by
future bills will be greater or less than current aggregate authorizations. Similarly, the forecast as
of 2005 of 2009 grants systematically underpredicted actual 2009 grants due to the inability of a
2005 forecast to predict the large addition of highway grants authorized by the ARRA in 2009.
Using our one-year ahead to five-year ahead forecasts, we calculate the present
discounted value (PDV) of current and expected future highway grants for a given state i :
(2)
where

is the forecast as of t of apportionments (in nominal dollars) in year t+s and
. The second term on the right hand side reflects the fact that , because

highway appropriations bills cover at most 6 years (t to t+5), forecasts beyond t+5 simply
(discounted by

) growing with expected future

. We measure the nominal discount rate,

, using a 10-year trailing average of the

assume perpetual continuation of
inflation of

10-year Treasury bond rate as of the beginning of the fiscal year t (e.g., Oct. 1, 2008 is the
beginning of fiscal year t = 2009). The trailing average is meant to provide an estimate of the
long-run expected nominal interest rate. We measure expected future inflation,

, using the

median 5- or 10-year ahead inflation forecast for the first quarter of the fiscal year (fourth quarter
of prior calendar year) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).15

15

5-year ahead forecasts are available in the SPF only from 2006 onward. Prior to 2006, we use the 10-year ahead
forecast. The two forecasts are very similar in the data.

16

The difference between this year’s expectation of grants from t onward,
last year’s expectation of grants from t onward,

, and

, is then a measure of the

unanticipated shock to current and future highway grants. When both t and t-1 are covered by the
same appropriations bill, as is the case for most of the sample period, this difference primarily
will reflect shocks to incoming data on formula factors. When t and t-1 span different
appropriations bills, this difference also will reflect news in year t about the new path of
aggregate apportionments for the next 5-6 years and about any changes to apportionment
formulas. Notice that this difference can be decomposed into errors in the forecast of current
grants and revisions to forecasts of future grants:
 E
  Et  Ai , t  s 
t 1 
 Ai , t  s  
Et  PVi , t   Et 1  PVi ,t   Ai ,t  Et 1  Ai ,t    


s 
 s 1 (1  Rt ) s

s 1 (1  Rt 1 )

Error in Forecast of






Current Spending

Revisions to Forecast of Future Spending

This decomposition highlights an important difference between our shock measure and the
government spending shock measures used in some other studies, such as and Gorodnichenko
(2011b) or Clemens and Miran (2010), which are constructed from one-period ahead forecast
errors. Forecast errors potentially miss important additional news received by agents at date t
about spending more than one period ahead. For certain types of spending with long forecast
horizons, such as highway spending, revisions to forecasts of future spending are likely to be
important.
We convert these dollar-value shocks into percentage terms (to be comparable across
states) using the symmetric percentage formula such that positive and negative shocks of equal
dollar amounts are treated symmetrically:
(3)

To get a sense for what these shocks look like over time and states, in Figure 4 we plot
for a selection of states, over the time period covered by our data. We include several
states with large populations (California (CA), Texas (TX), New York (NY), Florida (FL), and
Pennsylvania (PA)), a couple of states with large areas but small populations (North Dakota
17

(ND) and South Dakota (SD)), and a couple of states with small areas and small populations
(Rhode Island (RI) and Delaware (DE)). There is considerable variation over both time and
space. As expected, there are large shocks in the first years of appropriations bills – 1998 and
2005. But there also are some large shocks in other years, such as 1996 and 2004. There are no
obvious differences in volatility relating to state size or population. For instance, Rhode Island
tends to experience large shocks but Delaware does not. Similarly, Pennsylvania displays large
shocks while New York does not.

IV.

Results – The Dynamic Effects of Highway Spending Shocks on GDP

A. Estimation Technique
Our objective in this section is to use our measure of highway spending shocks to
estimate the dynamic effects of highway spending on GDP. Our empirical methodology utilizes
the Jordà (2005) direct projections approach to estimate impulse response functions (IRFs),
extended to a panel context. This approach was also used recently by Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2011b) in their study of the dynamic effects of government spending, using
panel data on OECD countries. The basic specification is:
(4)
where

and

are the logarithms of GDP and government highway spending, respectively,

for state i in year t, and
parameter

is the government highway spending shock defined above. The

identifies the impulse response function (IRF) at horizon h. Equation (4) is

estimated separately for each horizon h. Lags of output and highway spending are included to
control for any additional forecastability or anticipation of highway apportionment changes
missed by our forecasting approach that generates
obligations to measure

. We use (log) state federal-aid highway

(though using other measures of state highway spending yield

similar results). We set p = q = 3, but find the results to be robust to alternative lag lengths,
including p = q = 0 as we show in the robustness checks below.
The inclusion of state and time fixed effects are important for identification and warrant
further discussion. The previous literature estimating the dynamic effects of government
spending generally has omitted aggregate time fixed effects. This omission likely is due to the
18

difficulty in a dynamic time series model, such as a direct projection or a vector autoregression,
of separately identifying a time trend or time fixed effects from the parameters describing the
dynamics of the model. The advantage of estimating a dynamic model with panel data is that it
allows one to control for aggregate time effects. This is potentially important when estimating
the impact of government spending as it allows one to control for other national macroeconomic
factors, particularly monetary policy and federal tax policy, that are likely to be correlated over
time (but not over states) with government spending.
Notice, however, that by “sweeping out” any potential effect of federal tax policy, we
effectively are removing any negative wealth (“Ricardian”) effects on output associated with
agents expecting increases in government spending to be financed by current and future
increases in federal taxes. In other words, to the extent that increases in state government
spending are paid for with federal transfers, this spending is “windfall-financed” rather than
“deficit-financed”; (see Clemons and Miran (forthcoming)). In reality, state government highway
spending, even on “federal-aid” highways, is part windfall-financed – because it is partially
reimbursed by federal transfers – and part deficit-financed – both because of the matching
requirements for states to receive the transfers and because even reimbursable outlays on federalaid highways necessitates additional non-reimbursable expenditures such as police services,
traffic control, snow and debris removal, future maintenance, etc. Our estimated IRFs will reflect
any wealth effects from states’ deficit financing of matching requirements and non-reimbursable
spending, but not wealth effects from the federal government’s fiscal policy.
The state fixed effects in equation (4) control for state-specific time trends. Level
differences between states in the dependent variable are already removed by the inclusion of a
lagged dependent variable on the right-hand side. This can be seen by subtracting the lagged
dependent variable from both sides,

From this equation, it is clear that

represents the average (h+1)-year growth in

for state i

over the sample. Controlling for such state-specific time trends is potentially important as states
that are growing faster than other states could continually receive higher-than-forecasted grant
shares and hence persistently positive shocks. Thus, state-specific shocks could be positively

19

correlated with state-specific trends, and omitting such trends could lead to a positive bias on the
impulse response coefficients.
One can also see from this equation that, if one were willing to assume a constant linear
annual growth rate for each state, a more efficient estimator could be achieved by imposing the
constraint that

. For instance, one could estimate the state-specific time trend,

, from the h=0 regression, which uses the maximum number of observations, and then subtract
off this estimated parameter from the dependent variable for the other horizon regressions. We
found that imposing this constraint led to only a very small narrowing of the confidence interval
around the impulse response estimates (and virtually no effect on the IRF itself). Hence, the
regressions presented below do not impose this constraint. Because

is constructed to be

exogenous and unanticipated, the equation can be estimated via Ordinary Least Squares.
However, because the equation contains lags of the dependent variable, the error term is
expected to be serially correlated. For this reason, we allow for arbitrary serial correlation by
allowing the covariance matrix to be clustered within state.
How does our methodology for estimating IRFs differ from that derived from a VAR?
Mechanically, the differences are that (1) the direct projections methodology does not require the
simultaneous estimation of the full system (e.g., a 3-variable variable consisting of GDP,
highway spending, and the grants shock) to obtain consistent estimates of the IRF of interest
(e.g., GDP), and (2) the direct projections methodology estimates the underlying forecasting
model separately for each horizon. This methodology offers a number of advantages, particularly
in our context, over the recursive-iteration methodology for obtaining impulse responses from an
estimated VAR (see Jordà (2005) for discussion). First, direct projections are more robust to
misspecification such as too few lags in the model or omitted endogenous variables from the
system. The IRF from a VAR is obtained by recursively iterating on the estimated one-period
ahead forecasting model. Thus, as Jordà puts it, this IRF “is a function of forecasts at
increasingly distant horizons, and therefore misspecification errors are compounded with the
forecast horizon.” This is a particular concern in our context given that public infrastructure
spending, by its nature, may have real effects many years into the future. By directly estimating
the impulse response at each forecast horizon separately, the direct projections approach avoids
this compounding problem.

20

Second, the confidence intervals from the direct projections IRF are based on standard
variance-covariance estimators and hence can easily accommodate clustering, heteroskedasticity,
and other deviations from the OLS VC estimator, whereas standard errors for VAR-based IRFs
must be computed using delta-method approximations or bootstrapping, which can be
problematic in small samples. Third, the direct projections approach can easily be expanded to
allow for non-linear impulse responses (for instance, allowing shocks in recessions to have
different effects than shocks in expansions, as we explore below). In order to assess the
importance of using the direct projections approach instead of a VAR, we also have estimated
the GDP impulse response from a 3-variable (GDP, highway spending, and our shock) panel
VAR. We discuss the results below.

B. Baseline Results
We estimate equation (4) using state panel data from 1990 to 2010. The shock variable is
only available for years 1993-2010, but the regressions use three lags of spending (obligations)
and GDP (or alternative dependent variables). We start by looking at the effects of our shock
measure on GDP, before turning to other macroeconomic variables.
The baseline results are shown in Table 3. Panel A of Figure 5 displays the IRF – that is,
the estimates of

– for horizons h = 0 to 10 years. The shaded band in the figure gives the 90%

confidence interval. This IRF indicates that state highway spending shocks lead to a positive and
statistically significant increase in state output on impact and one year out. The effect on output
falls and becomes negative (though not statistically significantly) over the next few years but
then increases sharply around 6-8 years out, before fading back to zero by 9-10 years out.
In Appendix Figure 1, we demonstrate the robustness of this baseline impulse response
to a number of potential concerns one might have. Specifically, we find that the results are robust
to (1) dropping lags of highway spending; (2) dropping all autoregressive terms; (3) controlling
for an index of state leading indicators (from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia) in case
the grant shock is affected by state expected future output; (4) excluding the years 1998 and 2005
in case shocks in the year a highway bill is adopted are endogenous to states’ political influence,
as states with more political and economic clout could influence the design of apportionment

21

formulas to favor their states16; (5) considering only the early part of our sample (1993-2004);
and (6) considering only the later part of our sample (1999-2010).
Panels B and C show the estimated GDP impulse response functions based on two
alternative identification strategies. Panel B shows the results if we measure the

variable

using only one-year ahead forecast errors of current grants.17 As mentioned in the previous
section, this shock measure should accurately capture the timing of actual news about
government spending but may not fully capture the quantity of that news. In particular, some
forecast errors may reflect transitory shocks to government spending while other forecast errors
may reflect more persistent shocks which would prompt agents to revise their forecasts of future
spending. The current spending forecast errors will not differentiate between these two types of
shocks. One can see in Panel B that the IRF obtained from using forecast errors has a similar
shape to the baseline IRF (Panel A) except that the peak response is smaller and occurs one year
later and the GDP response is still positive by the end of the 11-year window. This suggests that
accounting for revisions in forecasts of future spending may not be crucial for estimating shortrun effects but can be quite important for estimating longer-run effects. In addition, the IRF
based on forecast errors is estimated much less precisely.
Panel C shows the results from following the traditional structural VAR type of
identification strategy à la Blanchard and Perotti (2002) or Pereira (2000). Specifically, we
replace

with current grants in equation (4). Identification here rests on the assumption that

the unforecastable component of grants – obtained by controlling for lags of GDP and highway
spending (obligations) – can contemporaneously affect GDP but not vice-versa. In other words,
this is just the direct projections counterpart to the standard SVAR approach to estimating fiscal
policy IRFs. This approach may potentially miss the fact that grants – even conditional on past
GDP and spending – may be anticipated to some extent years in advance and hence will not
accurately reflect the timing of news. Looking at Panel C, one can see that the resulting IRF has
similar longer-run responses to our baseline IRF but shows essentially no short-run impact. It

16

We also tested this idea that political factors could affect our shocks if political influence sways the apportionment
mechanisms adoption in new highway bills by regressing on shocks in 1998 and 2005 on the same political factors
considered in Knight’s (2005) study of the flypaper effect of highway grants. Our shocks are found to be
uncorrelated with these political factors.
17
Specifically, the shock here is the symmetric percentage difference between year t grants and the forecast of those
grants as of last year:
.

22

may be that this “shock” has no short-run impact because agents previously anticipated it and
hence responded in earlier periods.
We also have explored some other alternative identification strategies (results not shown,
but available upon request). First, we estimated equation (4) above, but replacing our highway
grant shock with current federal-aid obligations and instrumenting for obligations with current
and four lags of actual grants. Similar to the SVAR-type identification discussed above,
identification here relies on the assumption that a state’s grants (relative to the nation’s) – being
driven by formula factors that are determined three years earlier and only loosely related to GDP
– are exogenous with respect to current and future GDP. Again, the drawback of this approach is
that it ignores anticipation effects. We find that the IRF from this IV estimation gives very
similar results to that based on simply using current grants as in Panel C above.
We also estimated an IRF from a 3-variable (GDP, highway spending, and our shock
measure) panel VAR with 3 lags. As in our baseline, identification rests primarily on the a priori
measurement of the unanticipated shock to current and future spending (as well as by controlling
for lags of GDP and highway spending). However, here the IRF is estimated by recursive
iteration on the estimated VAR rather than by the direct projection approach. In other words, the
identification restrictions are the same but the estimator differs (as opposed to Panel C which
shows the converse). Standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping. We find a significant initial
boost in years t and t+1, which gradually declines before picking up again around 9-10 years out.
However, GDP is still negative by the end of the 10-year horizon. In addition, the 90%
confidence band for this IRF – obtained by bootstrapping – is very large, such that only the
initial boost is significant. This pattern is broadly consistent with our baseline results though it
underscores the difficulties that VAR-based IRFs have with precisely and robustly estimating
impulse responses at longer horizons.
We now turn to estimating the impulse responses of other macroeconomic variables to
the highway grants shock. Figure 6 shows the estimate IRFs for GDP per worker, employment
(number of workers by state of employment), personal income, wages and salaries, the
unemployment rate, and population.18 The impulse responses for these first five variables have
more or less the same shape as the GDP response. The initial impact, however, is small and
18

Data on the first four of these variables comes from the BEA. We also estimated an IRF based on employment
count data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and obtained virtually identical results. Data on unemployment
was obtained from the BLS, while data on population comes from the Census Bureau.

23

insignificant for employment, unemployment, and wages and salaries. All five variables exhibit a
positive and significant response around 6-8 years followed by a return to pre-shock levels.
Interestingly, population is the only variable that appears to be permanently affected by the
highway shock. A natural interpretation of this result is that highway/road improvements enable
population growth as, for example, new housing developments are built around new or improved
roads and as new commuting options are made possible. Such a response is consistent with
Duranton and Turner’s (2011) recent finding that increases in a state’s road lane-miles cause
proportionate increases in vehicle miles traveled.

C. Transmission Mechanism
What explains these macroeconomic responses? In this subsection, we first look at the
responses of variables that could be directly affected by a highway grant shock, as opposed to
indirectly affected through general equilibrium channels, in order to begin to formulate a general
explanation of the macroeconomic effects of highway grants. We thus look at the response of
actual grants, obligations, and outlays on federal-aid highways. These are the three variables
whose relationships were analyzed in Section III. The results are shown in Figure 7. Not
surprisingly, an unanticipated shock to expectations of current and future grants is in fact
followed by actual increases in grants immediately and up to four years out. This is also
consistent with the fact that grants become increasingly difficult to forecast as the forecast
horizon goes beyond six or more years , which is the typical length of a highway bill.
Obligations also increase for the first 3-4 years after the shock and also appear to rise again eight
years out. Outlays actually fall on impact but then are higher for years t+1 to t+5 and again at
t+8.
These patterns are consistent with the notion that a shock to expected future grants leads
to initiation of actual highway projects – and hence obligations – over the next 3-4 years, which
with some lag leads to project completions and hence outlays. This interpretation is supported by
the response of state government total highway construction spending (total, not just on federalaid roads), which is also shown in Figure 7. State highway construction spending increases from
years t+1 to t+4 (though it is only statistically significant for t+1) and then rises again around t+6
to t+9. This latter increase in state highway spending could reflect improved state finances due to
higher overall economic activity. Indeed, as shown in the bottom two panels of Figure 7, state
24

government tax revenues and overall state government spending are found to be higher around 78 years after an initial highway grant shock.
Combining these results with the macroeconomic responses in Figure 6, particularly the
increase in GDP per worker 6-8 years after the shock, the results point to a possible productivity
effect of improved highway infrastructure. Under this interpretation of our results, an initial
shock to federal grants leads to highway construction activity over the following 3 to 5 years and
results in new (or improved) highway capital put in place around 6-8 years out. In turn, the new
highway capital triggers higher productivity in transportation-intensive sectors, reducing goods
prices and boosting demand. Ultimately, the increase in economic activity raises state tax
revenues and increases state government spending as a result.
To dig deeper into this interpretation of our results, we examine whether transportationintensive sectors do in fact experience a boost in activity around the time new highway capital
would be coming on-line by estimating the response of GDP in the Truck Transportation sector
to our shock measure. The results are shown in Figure 8. Consistent with the response of overall
GDP, we find a small initial response, which is followed by a very large second-round effect 5-6
years out, in line with the view that completed highway projects would directly benefit the local
truck transportation sector. Similarly, the response of retail sales shown in Figure 8 also rises
when highway project are likely completed, 6 to 7 years after a shock to federal grants.19 The
increase in retail sales likely also reflects higher overall consumption occurring in tandem with
the increase in GDP, personal income, wages and salaries, and other macroeconomic variables.

D. The GDP Multiplier
How large are our baseline GDP effects? The impulse response estimates,
the percentage change in GDP with respect to a one-unit change in

, represent

. The common practice

in the literature for converting such percentage responses into dollar multipliers is to first
normalize the GDP responses such that a one unit change in the shock represents a 1% change in
government spending. One can then multiply the resulting elasticity by the average ratio of GDP
to highway spending in the sample to obtain a multiplier. However, it is not always clear in such
19

We thank Chris Carroll and Xia Zhou for providing their state‐by‐year data on retail sales (see Zhou and Carroll
2012). [Zhou, Xia, and Christopher D. Carroll. “Dynamics of Wealth and Consumption: New and Improved
Measures for U.S. States,” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 12(2), March 2012. Unfortunately, state level data on
overall consumption (beyond extrapolations from retail sales) is not available.

25

an exercise, especially in a context like ours where there are multiple concepts of highway
spending that one might consider, which measure of spending to use. Here, we report multipliers
based on a range of alternatives. For each alternative, we report the multiplier on impact, the
peak multiplier, and the mean multiplier. If one measures highway spending using only FHWA
grants (or obligations), the multiplier on impact is about 3.4, the peak multiplier (at 6 years out)
is 7.8, and the mean multiplier is 1.7.20 These multipliers may well be unrealistically large in that
a shock to current and future grants may fail to reflect broader changes to government highway
spending. For instance, highway grants for federal-aid highways may lead to subsequent
expenditures by state and local governments on local roads, traffic control, highway police
services, etc. The extent to which federal transfers to local governments earmarked for a specific
purpose actually increase spending by regional governments on that purpose is known as the
flypaper effect.21
If one uses a broader measure of highway spending, such as state government outlays on
highway construction, the implied multipliers are smaller but still large. The impact multiplier
would be 2.7, the peak multiplier 5.9, and the mean multiplier 1.3.22 One might also consider
using an even broader measure like state government spending for all road-related activities.
Unfortunately, such data is not available.23 However, while such spending represents a larger
fraction of GDP than the other measures, we obtain a much smaller (and imprecisely estimated)
response of total road spending to the grants shock. Nonetheless, if one allows for the possibility
that a shock-induced rise in grants lead to a proportional rise in total state government road
spending, our estimated responses multiplied by the average ratio of GDP to road spending
provide a lower bound on the impact multiplier of 1.4 and the peak multiplier of 3.0. The bottom
line is that based on the most sensible measures of government highway infrastructure

20

The impact and peak impulse response coefficients are 0.0115 and 0.0259, as seen in Table 3. The mean
response from the impulse response coefficients in Table 3 is 0.0055. The cumulative percent response of grants to
a one unit change in our shock is roughly 1 and the average ratio of state GDP to grants is about 300. So the
implied impact multiplier is the estimated GDP IRF coefficient, 0.0115, times 300, which equals 3.4.
21
The recent literature on the flypaper effect of federal grants has found mixed results. Studies by Baicker (2001);
Evans & Owens (2005), Singhal (2008), and Feiveson (2011) find evidence of strong flypaper effects across a variety
of spending categories. However, Knight (2002) and Gordon (2004) find the opposite.
22
The cumulative percent response of this variable to our shock also is close to one, and the average ratio of GDP
to highway construction spending is 238.
23
In particular, data on obligations by state governments for all highway‐related activities does not exist. Data on
outlays by state governments for such activities does exist, but as we pointed out in Section II, outlays represent a
poor measure of actual roadwork and related activities.

26

investment, the GDP multiplier implied by our estimated impulse responses appear to be
considerably larger than those based on defense or overall government spending as estimated in
previous studies.

E. Extensions

1. Impact of Highway Spending Shocks in Expansions vs. Recessions
In this subsection, we report the results of a number of interesting extensions of the
baseline results. First, we explore whether the effects of government highway spending are
different depending on whether the shock occurs in an expansion or a recession. We follow the
approach of Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011b), which involves calculating the probability of
being in an expansion (vs. recession), based on a regime-switching model, and interacting that
probability with the right-hand side variables in the direct projection regressions (equation (4)).
Expansions and recessions here are local (state-specific). As in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko,
we first calculate for each state and year the deviation of real GDP growth from the state’s longrun trend (estimated from a HP filter with a high smoothing parameter of 10,000). We then take
a logistic transformation of that variable in order to map it onto the [0,1] range. The IRF of
output with respect to highway spending shocks during an expansion is given by the coefficient,
for each horizon h, on the interaction between the shock and the expansion probability.24
Conversely, the IRF during a recession is given by the coefficient, for each horizon, on the
interaction between the shock and one minus the expansion probability. Note that because the
regression controls for aggregate time fixed effects, the identifying variation for our IRFs is
states’ expansion probabilities relative to the national business cycle. Also note that the use of
the direct projections approach, as opposed to a non-linear VAR as in Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2011a), does not require an assumption that the local economy remains in the
same regime throughout the interval t to t + h.25 The direct projections approach simply
estimates the conditional mean of GDP h years after a shock that occurs in a recession (or
24

To avoid potential simultaneity bias from the fact that the expansion probability will be contemporaneously
correlated with the dependent variable (log output), we follow Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011b) in lagging
the expansion probability by one year.
25
See Ramey (2011b) for a critique of that assumption.

27

expansion). The fact that GDP typically exits recession within a year or two will not affect this
conditional mean because we control for the recession probability term separately from the
interaction of that probability with the shock. Moreover, if the shock itself helps push a local
economy out of recession, this will be reflected in the impulse response function.
The results are shown in Figure 9. The top panel shows the results for recessions; the
bottom panel shows results for expansions. Interestingly, the initial impact of highway spending
shocks are much larger when they occur in state-years experiencing a recession. The impact
elasticity in recessions is 0.028 (s.e. = 0.015), which is statistically significant at the 10% level
and about twice as large as the average impact response (as found in our baseline regressions in
Table 3). The impact elasticity in expansions, on the other hand, is slightly below zero and
statistically insignificant. After the initial shock, the output response from shocks hitting during
recessions falls and becomes statistically insignificant. For shocks hitting during expansions, the
output response grows slightly over time but remains statistically insignificant. There is a
significant increase in GDP at t + 10 for recessions and a significant decrease at t + 10 for
expansions. Overall, these results suggest that the initial positive impact of highway spending
shocks found in the baseline results is driven by the large effect on such spending in recessions,
while the second-round positive effects coming six to eight years later may be independent of the
business cycle conditions at the time of the shock.

2. The 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and the Great Recession
The 2008-2009 severe recession (and subsequent weak recovery) and the large one-time
increase in federal highway grants from the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA) suggest that the response of local economic activity to government highway spending
may have been different over this time period than the “usual” response. First, we ask whether
the effect of highway grants on local GDP was unusually large during the Great Recession. We
investigate this by extending our baseline direct projections regressions (equation (4)) by
interacting the shock with year dummies. As we only have data through 2010, we focus here on
the contemporaneous and one-year ahead responses. The estimated impulse response coefficients
by year are shown in Panel A of Table 4. We find that both the contemporaneous and the yearahead effects on GDP were significantly higher from highway shocks in 2009 than the average
effect over the 1993-2010 sample (0.012 from Table 3). We also find other years that have
28

significantly different effects than the average: highway shocks in 2000 also had large positive
effects, while shocks in 2001 and 2006 had negative effects. Notice that these effects cannot
simply be explained by national cyclical conditions because national conditions are “swept out”
by the aggregate time fixed effects. Rather, these results indicate that local GDP relative to
national GDP was impacted more by highway grant shocks in 2000, 2001, 2006, and 2009 than
in other years. This could be due, for instance, to differences in the nature or composition of
highway grants in different years.
Of course, 2009 was an atypical year not just because of the severe recession, but also
because of the extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy actions taking place. In particular, the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act enacted in February 2009 authorized a very large
one-time increase of $27.5 billion in highway grants. Because the Act was designed to provide
short-term economic stimulus, the Act stipulated that these grants had to be entirely obligated by
March 2010. Therefore, the ARRA grants typically were used by state governments for projects
involving shorter planning and construction horizons than were non-ARRA grants. It is quite
possible that such shorter-horizon projects have different effects on GDP than longer-horizon
projects.
To assess this further, we separated out the ARRA grants from the non-ARRA grants in
our construction of the expected present value of current and future grants (see equation (2)) to
obtain an ARRA grants shock and a non-ARRA grants shock. The bulk of ARRA grants were
apportioned in fiscal year 2009, but some were also apportioned in fiscal year 2010 (October
2009 through September 2010). We then extended the regression underlying Panel A by
replacing the overall shock (interacted with year dummies) with these two separate shocks
(interacted with year dummies). Of course, in years prior to 2009, the non-ARRA shock is just
the overall shock and the ARRA shock is zero. The results are shown in Panel B of Table 4. We
find that a state with 10% higher 2009 ARRA grants than the national average saw 0.33% higher
GDP in 2009 and 0.32% higher GDP in 2010. A state with 10% higher non-ARRA grants in
2009 saw 0.67% higher GDP in 2009 and 0.83% higher GDP in 2010. Both types of grants
appear to have had no contemporaneous impact in 2010. Given that the ratio of non-ARRA
grants to ARRA grants in 2009 was about 2.8, the estimated multiplier on a dollar of ARRA
grants is just slightly higher than that of non-ARRA grants. Thus, we find that the ARRA grants
did have a significant positive effect on states’ economies and that the effect of a dollar of
29

ARRA grants was not materially different from the effect of a dollar of ordinary federal highway
grants.

V.

Theory – Multipliers in a Model with Productive Public Capital
In this section we turn to assessing the impact of public infrastructure investment in a

theoretical framework with productive public capital. Our model is relatively standard and
contains many features that have proven useful in addressing the macroeconomic impact of fiscal
policy (see, Baxter and King (1993), or the more recent analysis of Leeper et al (2010) and Uhlig
(2011), using closed economy models, and Corsetti, Kuester, and Müller (2011), in the context
of a small open economy). In line with our empirical framework above and in the spirit of
Nakamura and Steinsson (2011), we conduct our analysis in a monetary union using an open
economy model, which allows us to remove the effects of aggregate shocks and monetary policy
on the local fiscal multiplier.
We consider a cashless national economy consisting of two regions,
different sizes,

and

and , of possibly

. The national government invests in public infrastructure projects in

the two regions and finances these investments by levying taxes and by borrowing. Each region
specializes in one type of tradable good, produced in a number of varieties or brands, defined
over a continuum of unit mass. Firms are monopolistic suppliers that combine private and public
capital with domestic labor to produce one brand of goods. Throughout the section, we assume
complete financial markets.
We first provide a description of the households and the behavior of the monetary and
fiscal authorities, before presenting the firms’ problem.

A. Households
The Home region is populated by a continuum of infinitely‐lived households who choose
a consumption basket,

and hours worked,

, to maximize the expected value of their lifetime

utility given by
(5)

30

where

denotes the agent’s subjective discount factor.26 Home households consume all the
representing the

different types of traded goods produced in the two regions, with
consumption of the Home region’s brand

at time , while

is the consumption of the

Foreign region’s brand . For each type of good, we assume that one brand is an imperfect
substitute for all other brands, with constant elasticity of substitution . Consumption of Home
and Foreign goods by the Home agent is defined as:
(6)
In turn, Home households’ full consumption basket is composed of the bundles of Home
and Foreign produced goods defined by the following CES aggregator
(7)
where

dictates the degree of home bias in consumption (

= 0.5 equates to no home bias)

and where the elasticity of substitution between the consumption of Home goods and the
consumption of imports is given by

The price index associated with the consumption

aggregator is given by
(8)
where

is the price sub‐index for home‐produced goods and

is the price sub‐index for

foreign produced goods, both expressed in the common national currency:
(9)
The Home households derive income from working,
, and from the state‐contingent payoffs

from renting capital to firms,

in state of nature . We assume that the profits

of Home firms are rebated to Home households in the form of dividends,

.

In line with the spirit of highway infrastructure financing in the United State, our baseline
model assumes that public infrastructure spending is financed with a consumption tax,

,.27 That

said, since 2005 every state received as much or more funding for highway programs than they
contributed in highway taxes (see GAO (2010)). This reflects the fact that more funding has been
26

For convenience, we do not index variables by households.
In practice, the revenues of the Highway Trust Fund are derived from excise taxes collected on motor fuel and
truck‐related taxes. For simplicity, we proxy those taxes with a general consumption tax.

27

31

authorized and apportioned to the states than funds in the Highway Trust Fund allowed, with the
discrepancy paid for with general revenues. For simplicity, our baseline model abstracts from
this possibility. Note, however, that our approach to calculating our theoretical multipliers
follows our empirical one above and thus removes the effects of federal fiscal policy through the
introduction of time fixed effects.
Households use their disposable income to consume, invest in domestic capital, and buy
state‐contingent assets
state of nature

which pays one unit of Home consumption goods if a particular

occurs in period

one‐period government bond,

, at price

. The households can also invest in a

which has a price

We assume that, as with aggregate consumption, aggregate private investment is a CES
composite of Home and Foreign tradable goods with identical weight and elasticity. Private
capital accumulates according to the following law of motion
(10)
where

denotes the depreciation rate. The individual flow budget constraint for the

representative agent in the Home country is therefore:

(11)

B. Fiscal and Monetary Policies
As discussed in Sections II and IV.A, there can be long implementation lags between the
time when government transportation spending is authorized and when actual outlays occur.
Following Leeper et al (2010), we capture this feature of government investment by assuming
that only a fraction of authorized funds show up as spending in a given year.
Let

denote the federal grants per capita apportioned to region H at time , which we

assume follows an AR(1) process
(12)
where

is the steady state level of region H’s apportionments and

denotes an unanticipated

shock. In turn, we denote per capita government infrastructure outlays (by all levels of

32

government, net of intergovernmental transfers) in the Home region by

and assume that it

evolves according to the following process
(13)
where

The spend out rates, i.e., the rate at which authorized funds will show up as

government outlays, is determined by

.

Because it may take time for public infrastructure projects to be completed, we introduce
a time‐to‐build component by letting government funds apportioned at time
public capital stock

only impact the

periods later:
(14)

We assume that public capital in a region is a composite good, given as a CES index of the
differentiated goods in that region, and for simplicity we assume that the public investment index
has the same form as the consumption index in (6).
(15)
so that the government’s demand for each type of differentiated good is given by
(16)
Using consumption taxes to finance government purchases, the national government’s budget
constraint is
(17)
where asterisks denote foreign variables.
Similar to Nakamura and Steinsson (2011), monetary policy is set at the national level
according to an interest‐rate rule that is a function of aggregate consumer price inflation,
aggregate output,

, and

, given by
(18)

where hatted variables denote deviations from steady state and where aggregate inflation and
aggregate output are weighted sums of respective variables in the Home and Foreign regions:
and

33

C. Firms’ Problem
Firms producing Home tradables are monopolist in producing their brand; they employ a
technology that combines domestic labor with private and public capital inputs, according to the
following Cobb‐Douglas function:
(19)
where

is public capital used in the production of good . Positive value of

the

elasticity of output with respect to public capital, imply that the production function has
increasing returns with respect to public capital, as in the analysis of Baxter and King (1993) and
Leeper et al (2010).28
We assume that there is no impediment to goods trade across regions, so that the law of
one price holds. Moreover, in setting their prices, firms take into account the fact that, in any
given period, there is a probability

that they will have to leave prices unchanged as in Calvo

(1983). When they can reset their prices (which occurs with probability

), firms act to

maximize the expected discounted sum of profits

where

is the firm’s nominal marginal cost and where the firm’s demand at time

is given

by

D. Calibration
In our baseline calibration, we parameterize the size of the Home country,

, to

to

correspond to a U.S. state in our empirical data set. We use the following preferences

and set the coefficient of relative risk aversion, , to 1 and the value of

to imply a Frisch labor

elasticity of 0.75. As an alternative, we also consider the preferences in Greenwood, Hercowitz,
28

Studying optimal taxation in a model with productive capital, Lansing (1998) assumes a production function with
constant return to scale. Moreover, we abstracts from issues related to congestion of public goods. On this
question, see the work of Glomm and Ravikumar (1994).

34

and Huffman (1998), which have been used to study the effects of fiscal policy (see, among
others, Monacelli and Perotti (2008) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2011)). We calibrate the
model to an annual frequency and set the discount factor, , to 0.96. To determine the value of
the elasticity of substitution across goods’ varieties we use a markup of 20 percent in steady
state, implying that
The extent to which regions are relatively open to trade can have an important effect on
the size of the fiscal multiplier through a "leakage" effect associated with movements in goods
between regions. Our baseline calibration follows Nakamura and Steinsson (2011), as we set
to 0.69 in light of their evidence on goods shipments across U.S. states. Moreover, we assume
that households view goods from different U.S. regions as being fairly substitutable, and set the
elasticity of substitution to 4. Since there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding this parameter value
empirically, we look at the robustness of our results to variation around this baseline calibration.
For the goods production function, we use a labor share of 70 percent. However, the
range of empirical estimates of the output elasticity of public capital,

, is very wide. In a

review of the early estimates of this elasticity for the United States, Munnell (1992) reports the
findings of 9 studies, with estimates ranging between 0.05 and 0.4. While we set

in our

baseline model to facilitate comparison with other studies (e.g., Baxter and King (1993) and
Leeper et al (2010)), we also experiment with different values given this uncertainty. In
particular, we will examine the change in the fiscal multiplier when public capital is
unproductive, i.e.,

.

We calibrate the steady state share of government purchases in output to 0.3 percent in
line with the 1993‐2010 average value across states in our dataset. We think of infrastructure
spending as being authorized for 5 years, the same duration as the SAFETEA‐LU bill covering
2005 through 2009 (inclusive), but less than the previous two bills that both lasted 6 years.
Because implementation lags make the concept of obligations more meaningful for economic
activity that that of outlays, we use the implementation lags between grants and obligations
estimated in Table 2 to calibrate the spend out rate

in equation (13). Thus, 70 percent of grants

apportionments are obligated in the current year and 30 percent the following one.
The construction of new highways takes a very long time. The General Accounting
Office reports that typical new highway construction projects take between 9 to 19 years from
planning to completion (see GAO (2002)). However, new highway construction projects
35

constitute only about 3 percent of federally funded projects. Although most of the spending in
highway bills is directed toward road improvement and maintenance instead of the construction
of new roads, the General Accounting Office nonetheless reports that most such projects
necessitate between 4 to 6 years before being completed. Based on this assessment, we assume
that the time‐to‐build process in equation (14) takes 4 years (J = 4).
The probability that firms update their prices is chosen such that prices are on average
fixed for 4 quarters. The coefficients in the interest‐rate rule are set to the following values—
and

— though monetary policy will not affect our estimates of the

local multiplier as it will be differenced out.
Finally, we set the persistence of the shocks to apportionments to 0.27, a value consistent
with regressing states’ highway grants on one lag, as well as state and time fixed effects for the
period covered by our dataset. Thus a shock essentially dies out after 4 years, which is also
consistent with the response of highway grants to our shock measure in Figure 8. Throughout
our exercises, we look at the effect of one percent shocks to government spending.

E. Findings
In this section, we examine the theoretical analog to our empirical multiplier. As in
Section IV, we apply Jordà (2005)’s direct projection method on our simulated data.
Specifically, we calculate the multiplier as a regression of the logarithm of regional output on its
first three lags and on the logarithm of shocks to regional public investment with state and time
fixed effects.29 We then compute an impulse response by stepping the dependent variable ahead
through time and running the regression keeping the independent variables the same. The
dynamic response of the multiplier is given by the series of coefficient estimates on public
investment multiplied by the ratio of output to public investment in steady state.
Figure 10 reports our theoretical estimate of the dynamic output multiplier in our
baseline model. The figure shows that the path of the multiplier follows a pattern similar to the
empirical one in Figure 6. The multiplier rises on impact, before falling back for 2 years, at
which point it increases again and peaks around 8-9 years, then starts to decline over time. We
find the peak multiplier to be slightly below 2, but the impact multiplier to be much smaller and
29

We abstracted from lags of government spending since the spending shock in our simulated data is, by
construction, exogenous with respect to lagged output or spending. As we documented above, our empirical
results are robust to removing lags of the dependent and independent variables in the regression.

36

closer to 0.3, which contrasts with the data where both the impact and the peak multipliers are
considerably larger.
The top two charts in Figure 11 indicate that this dynamic pattern of the output multiplier
is due to a combination of the persistence of the shock and the presence of a time-to-build
process of 4 years for public capital. For instance, the multiplier rises monotonically for 10 years
when we increase the persistence of the shocks from 0.27 to 0.8. Similarly, absent time-to-build,
the path of the multiplier is hump-shaped, peaking sooner as the public capital stock is available
for production earlier.
Intuitively, in our baseline calibration, the initial increase in economic activity triggered
by the rise in government spending fades away as government spending quickly declines. At that
point, new public infrastructures have yet to be completed. When the new infrastructure is in
place around year t + 4 and becomes available for production, the economy’s productivity
increases, boosting real wages, hours worked, and investment. As a result, output rises once
again.
The remaining 4 charts in Figure 11 assess the robustness of our baseline results to the
different features of our model. The middle left panel considers different values of the output
elasticity of public capital, clearly a crucial parameter in our analysis. While the movements in
the multiplier are similar with a lower value for that elasticity (

= 0.05), the peak multiplier is

roughly halved. Interestingly, our methodology correctly predicts the absence of a second
increase in output when government spending is unproductive (

= 0). Overall, we find it

reassuring that the direct projection method is able to clearly distinguish between frameworks.
The degree to which goods in the two regions are substitutable also affects the size of the
output multiplier, as indicated in the middle right panel of Figure 11. In the longer run, greater
goods substitutability leads to higher multiplier, as cheaper goods resulting from the increase
productive capacity of the economy can more easily be exported. The reverse is true initially
since government spending has yet to boost the productive capacity of the economy, and the
innovation to government spending operates like a standard demand shock in that case. As a
result, lower goods substitutability across regions boosts the multiplier, as there is less “leakage”
to the other region. The bottom left panel of Figure 11 also shows that introducing
complementarities between consumption and hours worked in households preferences push the
path of the multiplier up, but that the effect is relatively muted in our model.
37

As discussed in Section II, an important aspect of the federal-aid highway program is that
states are required to finance about 20 percent of the federal-aid highway projects. This
introduces important fiscal aspects, as nearly all states have budget balance requirements and
must therefore either increase tax revenues or cut spending to pay for the funds necessary to have
access to federal grants. This is an important issue, since changes in local fiscal policy will not
be differenced out using our approach, contrary to changes in fiscal policy at the federal level. In
the following exercise, we assume that regional governments levy local consumption taxes to
pay for financing 20 percent of the cost of federal-aid infrastructure projects, as well as their own
infrastructure spending. We also assume that the local consumption tax rate is fixed to 5 percent.
We report the results of this exercise in the bottom right panel of Figure 11. The chart
shows that introducing local fiscal policy has an important effect on the size of the multiplier,
reducing it significantly over longer horizons. This reflects the fact that to finance 20 percent of
federal infrastructure projects, local governments must decrease their own infrastructure
spending to the extent that any increase in economic activity coming from the increased
government spending is insufficient to boost government revenues enough to cover this cost.
Therefore, the contraction of local infrastructure spending partly offsets the effect of federal
spending, which accounts for the lower multiplier in the longer run. Similar issues have been
emphasized recently by Cogan and Taylor (2010) in their critique of the fiscal stimulus package
of 2009.
In closing, we note that aggregate multipliers can be quite different from the local
multipliers that our methodology is meant to measure, since they will also include effects related
to national fiscal and monetary policies. Applying the direct projections method to a population
weighted average of the two regions’ output and spending shocks, we find the aggregate
multiplier to be -0.14 on impact and 1.1 at its peak, significantly lower than our baseline results.
However, these results will necessarily depend on the particular forms that fiscal and monetary
policies are assumed to take.

VI.

Concluding Remarks

This paper analyzed the dynamic economic effects of public infrastructure investment. The
prior literature on dynamic fiscal multipliers generally has shied away from studying this type of
38

government spending because of several unique and challenging features of public infrastructure
investment. First, how much and where the public sector invests in infrastructure often is a
complicated, partially-decentralized process. In the United States and many other countries,
infrastructure investment is administered primarily by lower-level governments, though the
federal government provides much of the funding.
Second, infrastructure investment typically involves long implementation lags between
when funding decisions are made – hence when agents may begin acting on the knowledge of
forthcoming spending – and when actual government outlays show up. This feature makes the
standard measure of government spending, outlays, particularly unsuited for the purpose of
identifying shocks to government infrastructure investment.
Third, and related, in order to give agents (especially local governments and private
contractors) a sense of how much infrastructure funding will be available down the road, federal
governments often lay out the levels of nationwide funding and/or the mechanism by which that
funding is distributed geographically for several years in advance. This raises the possibility that
government infrastructure spending could have macroeconomic effects even before the exact
distribution of infrastructure funding is known, and potentially well before actual infrastructure
production begins.
Finally, a defining characteristic of government infrastructure investment is that it is at
least intended to increase the economic efficiency or productivity of the private sector.
Productivity-enhancing government spending should have different macroeconomic effects than
other types of government spending. For instance, the standard Neoclassical effect of increased
government spending leading households to increase labor supply as they recognize the burden
that spending has on the government’s budget constraint is potentially offset if agents also
recognize the positive wealth generated by the resulting productivity gains.
Given these unique features of public infrastructure investment, our paper utilized the
institutional details behind public highway spending in the United States. Many aspects of the
institutional mechanism behind how federal highway funds are distributed to U.S. states allow us
both to avoid the potential pitfalls posed by the features above and to turn them to our advantage
in providing strong identification of exogenous shocks to infrastructure spending. In particular,
federal funds are distributed to states based on strict formulas which are set many years in

39

advance and make use of formula-factor data that are several years old, making these
distributions exogenous with respect to current local economic conditions.
Furthermore, rather than simply use changes in these distributions directly as a measure of
spending shocks, we constructed forecasts of these distributions based on information available
to agents in the years prior to the distributions. We measured spending shocks as changes
between last year and this year in the expected present value of highway spending from this year
forward in a given state.
Using these shocks to estimate dynamic panel regressions following the direct projections
approach of Jorda (2005), we found that highway spending shocks positively affect GDP at two
specific horizons. There is a significant impact in the first couple of years and then a larger
second-round effect after six to eight years. Yet, we find no permanent effect, as GDP is back to
pre-shock levels after ten years. The multipliers that we calculate from these IRFs are large,
roughly 3 on impact and even larger six to eight years out. Other estimates of local fiscal
multiplier tend to be between 1 and 2. In an extension, we found that the initial impact occurs
only for shocks in recessions, while later effects are not statistically different between recessions
and expansions.
A natural hypothesis is that the direct channel by which federal highway funding to a
local area affects local economic activity is that federal highway grants lead local governments to
spend more on highways. We confirmed that, at least in our data sample, there does appear to be
a strong, equi-proportional effect of federal highway grants on state government road
construction spending.
In the final part of the paper, we used a theoretical framework to interpret our empirical
findings. We looked at the multiplier in an open economy model with productive public capital
in which states receive federal funds for infrastructure investment calibrated to capture the
institutional framework of highway funding in the United States. Applying the local projection
method to our simulated data, we found that the impulse response of output to a shock in public
infrastructure spending follows a very similar pattern to that we estimated empirically. However,
magnitude of the multipliers coming out of our simulated data are smaller than those implied by
our empirical impulse responses. One possible reason, suggested by our empirical finding that
the impact multiplier only occurs for shocks during a recession, is that our model abstracts from
important nonlinearities that cause cycle-dependent heterogeneity in the multiplier. Developing
40

non-linear general equilibrium models capable of yielding such cycle-dependent multipliers is
clearly a critical area for future research.
References
Acconcia, A., G. Corsetti, and S. Simonelli (2011). “Mafia and Public Spending: Evidence on the Fiscal
Multiplier from a Quasi-Experiment,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8305.
Aschauer, David (1989). “Is Public Expenditure Productive?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 23, pp.
177-200.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Y. Gorodnichenko (2011a). “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy,"
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2011b). “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion,”
NBER Working Paper #17447.
Barro, R.J., and C.J. Redlick (2011). “Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases and Taxes,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), pp. 51-102.
Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King (1993). “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 83, pp. 315–334.
Blanchard, O., and R. Perotti (2002). “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of
Changes in Government Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), pp. 1329-1368.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and J. Fisher (2004). “Fiscal Shocks and their Consequences,” Journal of
Economic Theory 115, pp. 89-117.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983). “Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 12(3), pp. 383-398
Chandra, A. and E. Thompson, (2000). “Does Public Infrastructure Affect Economic Activity? Evidence
from the Rural Interstate Highway System,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 30, pp.
457-490.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui Woolston (forthcoming).
“Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Cogan, John F., and John B. Taylor (2010). “What the Government Purchases Multiplier Actually
Multiplied in the 2009 Stimulus Package,” NBER Working Paper 16505.
Conley, Timothy G., and William Dupor (2011). “The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act:
Public Sector Jobs Saved, Private Sector Jobs Forestalled,” mimeo, Ohio State University.
41

Corsetti, G., K. Kuester, and G. Muller (2011). “Floats, Pegs and the Transmission of Fiscal Policy,”
CEPR Working Paper No.8180.
Edelberg, W., M. Eichenbaum, and J.D. Fisher (1999). “Understanding the Effects of a Shock to
Government Purchases,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 166-206.
Fernald, John (1999). “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and
Productivity,” American Economic Review, June 1999, 619-638.
Feyrer, James, and Bruce Sacerdote (2011). “Did the Stimulus Stimulate? Real Time Estimates of the
Effects of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” NBER Working Paper No. 16759.
Fishback, P., and V. Kachanovskaya (2010). “In Search of the Multiplier for Federal Spending in the
States During the New Deal,” NBER Working Paper No.16561.
Fisher, J.D.M., and R. Peters (2010). “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government Spending Shocks,”
Economic Journal, 120(544), 414-436.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Michael McMahon (2012). “The Household Effects of Government
Spending,” Mimeo, University of Warwick.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988). “Investment, Capacity Utilization and the
Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), pp. 402-417.
Holtz-Eakin, D., (1994). “Public-sector Capital and the Productivity Puzzle,” Review of Economic and
Statistics 76(1), 12–21.
Ilzetzki, E., E. Mendoza, and C. Végh (2010). “How Big (Small?) are Fiscal Multipliers?,” NBER
Working Paper No. 16479.
Jordà, Oscar (2005). “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 95(1), pp. 161-182.
Knight, Brian (2002). “Endogenous Federal Grants and Crowd-out of State Government Spending:
Theory and Evidence from the Federal Highway Program.” American Economic Review, Vol.
92(1), pp. 71-92.
Leeper, Eric M., Todd B. Walker, Shu Chun Susan Yang (2009), “Fiscal Foresight and Information
Flows,” NBER Working Paper 14630.
Leeper, Eric M., Todd B. Walker, Shu Chun Susan Yang (2010), “Government Investment and Fiscal
Stimulus,” Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 1000-1012.

42

Leigh, Andrew, and Christine Neil (2011), “Can national infrastructure spending reduce local
unemployment? Evidence from an Australian roads program,” Economics Letters 113, pp. 150153.
Lutz, Byron (2010). “Taxation with Representation: Intergovernmental Grants in a Plebiscite
Democracy.” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 92(2), pp. 316-332.
Monacelli, T., and R. Perotti (2008), “Fiscal Policy, Wealth Effects, and Markups," NBER Working
Paper No. 14584.
Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2009). “What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?,” Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 24(6), pp. 960-992.
Morrison, Catherine J., and Amy Ellen Schwartz (1996). “State Infrastructure and Productive
Performance,” American Economic Review, 86(5), pp. 1095-1111.
Munnell, Alicia (1992). “Infrastructure Investment and Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives (Fall), pp. 189-198.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson (2011). “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from U.S.
Regions,” unpublished manuscript, Columbia University.
Parker, J. A. (2011). “On Measuring the Effects of Fiscal Policy in Recessions.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 49(3), 703-718.
Pereira, Alfredo R. (2000). “Is All Public Capital Created Equal?,” Review of Economics and Statistics
82(3), 513-518.
Perotti, R. (2004). “Public Investment: Another (different) Look,” mimeo, Università Bocconi.
Perotti, R. (2007). “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal Policy,” NBER Working Paper
No. 13143.
Ramey, V.A. (2011a). “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in the Timing,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126(1), 1-50.
Ramey, V.A. (2011b). “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?” Journal of Economic
Literature, 49(3), 673-685.
Ramey, V.A., and M.D. Shapiro (1998). “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects of Government
Spending,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 48(1), 145-194.
Shoag, D. (2010). “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multiplier from State
Pension Plan Returns,” Working Paper, Harvard University.

43

Suarez Serrato, Juan C., and Phillippe Wingender (2010). “Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers,”
unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley.
Stock, J.H.; Wright, J.H.; and Yogo, M. (2002). “A survey of weak instruments and weak identification
in generalized method of moments” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 20(4): pp.
518.
Uhlig, H., (2010). “Some Fiscal Calculus,” The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
100(2), 30–34.
Wilson, D. J. (2011). “Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.

44

Appendix A
Apportionment Mechanism for FHWA Grants

Sources:
FHWA (2005), “Analysis of the Conference Report to H.R.3 as filed on 7/28/05
(RTA-000-1664A).”
URL as of 11/3/2011: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/safetealu/fundtables.htm

FHWA (1999), “Financing Federal-Aid Highways”, Publication No. FHWA-PL-99-015.
FHWA (2007), “Financing Federal-Aid Highways”, Publication No. FHWA-PL-07-017.
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (1992), “Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency
Act of 1991 – Summary”

TEA-21, FY1998-2003 (continued through 2004 via continuing resolutions)

Step 1:
Each individual FHWA program’s national budget authorization is provisionally apportioned to
states based on formula factors, conditional on a minimum apportionment share of 0.5%:


  z1pi z 2pi 
 

Api  Ap min  f p  1 , 2 ,...  ,0.005 
  z p z p 
 


(1)

for each program p and state i. z denotes formula factors (e.g., highway lane-miles). “Primes” on
variables indicate that they are provisional, not final, values.

Step 2:
Calculate provisional total FHWA apportionment for each state:

Ai   Api

(2)

p

45

Step 3:
Apply “Minimum Guarantee” constraint, which ensures that each state receives a minimum
return, R, on its contribution to the Highway Trust Fund (HTF):

Ai  max  Ai, RH i  ,

(3)

where Hi is state i’s contribution to the HTF. R is 90.5% during all TEA-21 years. Amounts
required to satisfy the minimum-guarantee

 Ai  Ai

come out of a separate Congressional

appropriation. That is, it does NOT lower the apportionments determined by steps 1 and 2 for
other states. This amount is called the Minimum Guarantee apportionment and is reported in
Tables FA-4 on the FHWA Highway Statistics website.

SAFETEA-LU, FY2005-2009 (continued through FY2011 via continuing resolutions)

Steps 1 and 2 are the same as under TEA-21. In SAFETEA-LU, the Minimum Guarantee
program (Step 3) is replaced with the “Equity Bonus” program. The Equity Bonus program also
imposes a minimum guaranteed return, R, on contributions to the HTF (though now R varies by
year: R=90.5% in 2005-6, 91.5% in 2007, and 92% in 2008-9), but also imposes two additional
constraints. First, for states satisfying certain criteria, the state must receive a total FHWA
apportionment share at least as great as its average share over the TEA-21 period. Second, for all
states, the state must receive at least a specified percentage of its average annual apportionment
(Ti) under TEA-21. This percentage (M) is 117% in 2005, 118% in 2006, 119% in 2007, 120%
in 2008, and 121% in 2009.
The effect of these added constraints is to replace equation (3) with the following:

T


Ai  max  Ai, RH i , i AiDi , MTi  ,
T



(5)

where D is a dummy variable indicating whether the state is one of the selected states mentioned
above.
The Ai  Ai amount is called the Equity Bonus apportionment and is reported in Table
FA-4 on the FHWA Highway Statistics website. Note, however, that for years 2007 onward
46

(only), the apportionments for the STP, NHS, IM, Bridge, CMAQ, and HSIP programs in Table
FA-4 include the amounts those programs received out of the equity bonus and the equity bonus
apportionment in Table FA-4 excludes the amounts distributed to those core programs.

ISTEA, FY1992-1997
Steps 1 and 2 are the same as under TEA-21. But in ISTEA, the Minimum Guarantee program
was more complicated. In addition to getting a minimum guaranteed return, R = 90.5%, on
contributions to the HTF, states whose return on contributions to the HTF was below 100%
(“donor” states) received an additional bonus.

47

Appendix B
Constructing Real-time Forecasts of Expected Future Highway Funding

Our objective is to forecast, as of the beginning of a given year t, the present value of
current and future federal highway grants for each state, using only real-time information
available at the beginning of t. At the beginning of year t, agents have the following information:
(1) year t apportionments (grants) in each state i for each FHWA program p (along with the
formula factors that determine these apportionments), (2) the path of nationwide apportionment
authorizations for the remaining years of the current highway authorization legislation (which
typically cover a 5-6 year period), and (3) the formulas used to distribute each program’s grants
to states for the remainder of the current legislation. What agents do not know is the future
values of the formula factors that determine the distribution of grants for the remaining years of
the current legislation, nor do they know (1)-(3) above for years beyond the current legislation.
To construct real-time forecasts of future highway grants, we follow and extend the
methodology used by the FHWA Office of Legislation and Strategic Planning (FHWA 2005) in
its report providing forecasts, as of 2005, of apportionments by state for the years of the 20052009 SAFETEA-LU highway bill. Basically, the methodology involves assuming that a state’s
current formula factors (as a share of the nation), and hence the state’s current share of federal
grants for each of the 17 FHWA apportionment programs, are constant over the forecast horizon.
(As detailed below, we treat the one-time extra apportionments from the 2009 American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act as a separate program.) That is, the best guess of what the
relative values of formula factors will be going forward is their current year relative values.
Given apportionment shares for each program, one can then distribute to states the known
nationwide totals for each program for the remaining years of the current legislation. One can
then aggregate across programs to get a state’s total apportionments in each of these future years.
We extend this methodology such that if one is forecasting for years beyond the current
legislation, one assumes a continuation of the use of current formulas (i.e., one’s best guess of
the formulas to be used in future legislation is the formulas currently in use) and one assumes
that nationwide apportionments by program grow with inflation from the last authorized amount
in the current legislation.

48

More formally, we construct real-time forecasts of future highway grants by state using
the following three-step procedure:
1. Let Ai , p ,t  s  i , p , t  s Ap ,t  s denote state i’s apportionments for program p in year t+s, where Ap , t  s
is nationwide apportionments for program p and i , p , t  s is state i’s share of those
apportionments. Calculate the forecast Et  Ai , p , t  s  for all p and for s ≥ 0 by assuming that

i , p ,t  s  i , p ,t and using the known authorized levels of Ap ,t  s for year t+s within the current
highway legislation. (Note that, for s = 0, Et  Ai , p , t   Ai , p , t .) For any year t+s beyond the last
year of the current legislation, t+j, assume Ap , t  s  Ap , t  j 1   e 

s j

, where  e is expected future

inflation. We assume  e  0.03 .

In 2009 (and only in 2009), there was a special one-time additional amount of apportionments
authorized by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). We treat the ARRA as
simply another program (p = ARRA). The ARRA was passed on Feb. 10, 2009 and immediately
authorized the FHWA to apportion $27.5 billion in formula grants to states (i.e., AARRA,2009 
$27.5 Billion).30 The apportionment formula was:

i , ARRA,2009  0.5  i , STP ,2009  0.5  i , FHWA,2008 .
That is, each state’s share of the $27.5 billion in grants was to be distributed 50% based on the
apportionment formula used by the FHWA to distribute grants for the Surface Transportation
Program (STP) in 2009 and 50% based on the distribution of total FHWA grants in 2008. Thus,
Et  Ai , ARRA, t  s   0
E2009  Ai , ARRA,2009  s   0

 t  2009,  s,
 s  0,

E2009  Ai , ARRA,2009    0.5i , STP ,2009  0.5i , FHWA,2008  AARRA,2009 .

30

States were required to obligate all ARRA funds by March 2, 2010.

49

2. Sum across programs within state for each forecast horizon:

Et  Ai ,t  s    Et  Ai , p ,t  s  .
p

3. Calculate the present value of current and expected future highway grants:
,
where

is the forecast as of t of apportionments (in nominal dollars) in year t+s and
. The second term on the right hand side reflects the fact that , because

highway appropriations bills cover at most 6 years (t to t+5), forecasts beyond t+5 simply
(discounted by

) growing with expected future

. We measure the nominal discount rate,

, using a 10-year trailing average of the

assume perpetual continuation of
inflation of

10-year Treasury bond rate as of the beginning of the fiscal year t (e.g., Oct. 1, 2008 is the
beginning of fiscal year t = 2009). The trailing average is meant to provide an estimate of the
long-run expected nominal interest rate. We measure expected future inflation,

, using the

median 5- or 10-year ahead inflation forecast for the first quarter of the fiscal year (fourth quarter
of prior calendar year) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).31

Dealing with the Equity-Bonus/Minimum-Guarantee Apportionments

One complication for implementing the above is that the equity-bonus/minimumguarantee apportionments are treated differently in the FHWA data tables in years prior to 2007
than they are for 2007 onward. Prior to 2007, apportionments for all programs in the FHWA
highway statistics (Table FA-4) do not include any added amounts distributed to those programs
from the pool of funds Congress authorizes to satisfy the equity-bonus/minimum-guarantee
constraints discussed in Appendix X. For 2007 onward, however, the reported apportionments
for the “core programs” (STP, NHS, IM, Bridge, CMAQ, and HSIP) include the amounts
distributed from the equity-bonus/minimum-guarantee pool. Therefore, apportionments by
31

5‐year ahead forecasts are available in the SPF only from 2006 onward. Prior to 2006, we use the 10‐year ahead
forecast. The two forecasts are very similar in the data.

50

program, Ai , p ,t , from the raw FHWA data are not comparable before and after 2007. We handle
this by distributing, for years prior to 2007, part of the equity-bonus/minimum-guarantee
nationwide authorization to each of these core programs in proportion to their share of total
FHWA authorizations for that year. This extra amount is added to the reported Ai , p,t to get the
true Ai , p,t that we use in the steps above.

Data

Data on actual apportionments by program, state, and year ( Ai , p ,t ), which also are used to
construct apportionment shares ( i , p ,t ), were obtained from FHWA Highway Statistics, Table
FA-4 (various years). Data on nationwide authorizations by program and year ( Ap ,t  s ) for each
of the three highway authorization legislations during our sample period were obtained from
FHWA (1992), FHWA (1999), and FHWA (2007).

51

Appendix C. Data Glossary

Format: variable_name – Data description. (Source)

BEA_employment – Total annual employment from the BEA’s National Income and Product

Accounts. (Haver Analytics/Bureau of Economic Analysis)
capoutlays_total – State highway agency total capital outlays, in millions of dollars. These data

are obtained from the Office of Highway Policy Information’s annual Highway Statistic Series
publications. (Federal Highway Administration)
capoutlays_fedaid– State highway agency capital outlays on federal-aid highways, in millions

of dollars. These data are obtained from the Office of Highway Policy Information’s annual
Highway Statistic Series publications. (Federal Highway Administration)
F_S – State government expenditures on construction of regular and toll highways, in millions of

dollars. This variable is one of the components of Shighway_gross. (US Census Annual Survey
of State & Local Government Finances)
FHWA_oblig – Total federal funds obligated by the Federal Highway Administration to state

governments, in millions of dollars. These data are obtained from the Office of Highway Policy
Information’s annual Highway Statistic Series publications, Table FA-4B, various years. Note
that obligations due to grants from the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
ARE included in these reported totals. (Federal Highway Administration)
FHWA_apport – Federal Funds apportioned by the Federal Highway Administration to state

governments, in millions of dollars. These data are obtained from the Office of Highway Policy
Information’s annual Highway Statistic Series publications, Table FA-4, various years. Because
these data do NOT include the additional grants in 2009 from the ARRA, we add the ARRA
apportionments to the 2009 total. We obtained state-level ARRA apportionments (as well as
outlays) for fiscal year 2009 from the DOT’s Financial and Activity Report as of Oct. 9, 2009
(which covers data through the end of fiscal year 2009) for TAFS code 69-0504, which
corresponds to Highway Funding. (Federal Highway Administration and DOT)
FHWA_outlays – Total outlays (expenditures) of federal funds by the Federal Highway

Administration to state governments, in millions of dollars. These data are obtained from the
Office of Highway Policy Information’s annual Highway Statistic Series publications, Table FA52

3, various years. Because the totals in Table FA-3 do NOT include the additional outlays in 2009
from the ARRA, we add the ARRA outlays to the 2009 total. We obtained state-level ARRA
outlays for fiscal year 2009 from the DOT’s Financial and Activity Report as of Oct. 9, 2009
(which covers data through the end of fiscal year 2009) for TAFS code 69-0504, which
corresponds to Highway Funding. (Federal Highway Administration and DOT)
LNAGRA – Total nonfarm employment. The annual employment figure is the 12-month mean

of monthly data over the calendar year. (Haver Analytics/BLS Establishment Survey)
population – Annual resident population (Haver Analytics/ US Census Bureau)
RealGSP_TO – Real gross domestic product by state, in millions of chained 2005 dollars.

(Haver Analytics/Bureau of Economic Analysis)
Shighway_gross – State government highway expenditures, in millions of dollars. This data

series is constructed from the Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of State & Local Government
Finances (SLGF). It is the sum, for regular and toll highways, of state government expenditures
on state government expenditures on current operations; construction capital outlays; other
capital outlays; and transfers to local governments for roads. (US Census Bureau)
totaldisbursements – Total state and local government disbursements for highways, in millions

of dollars. These data are obtained from the Office of Highway Policy Information’s annual
Highway Statistic Series publications, Table SF-2, various years. Total disbursements are the
sum of capital outlays; maintenance; administration, research and planning; highway law
enforcement and safety; interest payments on highway bonds; bond retirement; and transfers to
local governments for roads. (Federal Highway Administration)
YPH – Real annual personal income, in millions of chained 2005 dollars. (Haver

Analytics/Bureau of Economic Analysis)

53

Table 1
Apportionment Formulas for Largest FHWA Programs, as of 2008

PROGRAM
Interstate Maintenance (IM)

FACTORS
Interstate System lane miles
Vehicle miles traveled on the Interstate System
Annual contributions to the Highway Account of the Highway Trust Fund
attributable to commercial vehicles

WEIGHT
33.33%
33.33%
33.33%

MINIMUM
APPORTIONMENT
1/2 percent of Interstate Maintenance
and National Highway System
apportionments combined

SHARE OF
TOTAL FUNDS
18.2%

National Highway System (NHS)

Lane miles on principal arterial routes (excluding the Interstate System)
Vehicle miles traveled on principal arterial routes (excluding the Interstate System)
Diesel fuel used on highways
Total lane miles on principal arterials divided by the State's total
population

25%
35%
30%
10%

1/2 percent of Interstate Maintenance
and National Highway System
apportionments combined

22.1%

Surface Transportation Program (STP)

Total lane miles of Federal-aid highways
Total vehicle miles traveled on Federal-aid highways
Estimated tax payments attributable to highway users paid into the Highway
Account of the Highway Trust Fund

25%
40%
35%

1/2 percent

23.3%

Bridge Replacement
and Rehabilitation Program (BRR)
Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality
Improvement Program (CMAQ)

Relative share of total cost to repair or replace deficient bridges

100%

1/4 percent (10 percent maximum)

14.8%

Weighted nonattainment and maintenance area population

100%

1/2 percent

6.1%

Recreational Trails Program (RT)

Equal shares to each eligible State
Nonhighway recreational fuel use during the preceding year

50%
50%

None

0.2%

Metropolitan Planning (MP)
Highway Safety Improvement Program (HSIP)

Urbanized area population*
Total lane miles of Federal-aid highways
Total vehicle miles traveled on Federal-aid highways
Number of fatalities on the National Highway system

1/2 percent
1/2 percent

0.8%
3.9%

* Usually places of 50,000 or more persons. Definition contained in 23 U.S.S. 101(a)
Note: Main programs only. Share of total funds will not sum to 100%

100%
33.33%
33.33%
33.33%

Table 2
The Implementation Lags of Highway Spending
FHWA Obligations
β/SE

FHWA Outlays
β/SE

FHWA Outlays
β/SE

-

FHWA Grants, Lagged 5 years

0.700
(0.106)
0.345
(0.133)
-0.037
(0.101)
-0.020
(0.038)
-0.016
(0.036)
-

FHWA Grants, Lagged 6 years

-

-

FHWA Grants, Lagged 7 years

-

-

FHWA Obligations

-

0.122
(0.064)
0.526
(0.081)
0.108
(0.062)
0.044
(0.023)
0.058
(0.022)
0.053
(0.016)
0.063
(0.015)
0.021
(0.015)
-

FHWA Obligations, Lagged 1 year

-

FHWA Obligations, Lagged 2 years

-

FHWA Obligations, Lagged 3 years

-

FHWA Obligations, Lagged 4 years

-

FHWA Obligations, Lagged 5 years

-

FHWA Obligations, Lagged 6 years

-

FHWA Obligations, Lagged 7 years

-

FHWA Grants
FHWA Grants, Lagged 1 year
FHWA Grants, Lagged 2 years
FHWA Grants, Lagged 3 years
FHWA Grants, Lagged 4 years

-

Year fixed effects

Yes

0.231
(0.019)
0.208
(0.032)
0.112
(0.021)
0.119
(0.031)
0.143
(0.030)
0.070
(0.030)
-0.007
(0.030)
0.030
(0.028)
Yes

State fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Cumulative Effect

0.973
(0.064)

0.906
(0.033)

0.996
(0.042)

784
0.386

735
0.764

735
0.693

N
R2

Notes: Bold indicates significance at 10 percent level. All variables are per-capita.
Sample covers years 1993 - 2008 and all 50 states except Alaska.

Yes

Table 3
Response of GDP to Highway Grant Shock
Dependent Shock Variable
Variable
β/SE

GDPt−1
β/SE

GDPt−2
β/SE

GDPt−3
β/SE

Obligationst−1
β/SE

Obligationst−2
β/SE

Obligationst−3
β/SE

GDPt

1.044
(0.043)
1.092
(0.077)
0.861
(0.115)
0.661
(0.112)
0.451
(0.124)
0.396
(0.121)
0.297
(0.112)
0.345
(0.130)
0.223
(0.127)
0.150
(0.115)
0.105
(0.141)

0.001
(0.079)
-0.199
(0.076)
-0.145
(0.092)
-0.125
(0.076)
0.037
(0.078)
-0.009
(0.104)
0.092
(0.086)
-0.152
(0.072)
-0.097
(0.103)
-0.074
(0.076)
-0.100
(0.153)

-0.152
(0.056)
-0.112
(0.087)
-0.055
(0.093)
0.018
(0.111)
-0.032
(0.101)
-0.009
(0.095)
-0.089
(0.104)
0.063
(0.093)
0.100
(0.088)
0.106
(0.088)
0.130
(0.098)

-0.003
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.011)
-0.007
(0.008)
-0.005
(0.009)
-0.007
(0.012)
0.006
(0.013)
0.016
(0.016)
0.007
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.016)
-0.009
(0.018)
0.001
(0.018)

-0.003
(0.004)
-0.008
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.012)
0.000
(0.014)
-0.010
(0.013)
-0.007
(0.014)
-0.008
(0.016)
0.002
(0.014)
0.001
(0.015)

-0.002
(0.006)
0.001
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.013)
0.005
(0.016)
0.007
(0.017)
-0.006
(0.016)
-0.004
(0.016)
-0.003
(0.017)
0.004
(0.017)
0.002
(0.015)
0.004
(0.015)

GDPt+1
GDPt+2
GDPt+3
GDPt+4
GDPt+5
GDPt+6
GDPt+7
GDPt+8
GDPt+9
GDPt+10

0.012
(0.005)
0.014
(0.008)
-0.008
(0.008)
-0.015
(0.010)
-0.007
(0.009)
0.008
(0.008)
0.026
(0.009)
0.024
(0.008)
0.011
(0.005)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.005
(0.006)

Notes: Bold indicates significance at 10 percent level. All regressions include state and year fixed effects.
Sample covers years 1993 - 2010 and all 50 states except Alaska. Variables are in logs.

N
882
833
784
735
686
637
588
539
490
441
392

Table 4
GDP Impulse Response, By Year
Panel A. Total Highway Grant Shock
Year

Contemporaneous
β /SE

One-Year Ahead
β /SE

1993

.014
(.019)
.000
(.053)
.009
(.019)
.011
(.013)
-.050
(.035)
.012
(.012)
-.055
(.012)
.146
(.073)
-.221
(.107)
-.057
(.086)
-.009
(.034)
.041
(.096)
.011
(.019)
-.077
(.039)
.035
(.040)
-.040
(.072)
.110
(.028)
-.007
(.063)

.002
(.027)
.055
(.075)
.005
(.027)
.022
(.019)
-.048
(.049)
.023
(.017)
.003
(.076)
.233
(.102)
-.213
(.151)
-.125
(.121)
-.041
(.048)
.129
(.135)
-.001
(.027)
-.104
(.056)
.045
(.057)
-.162
(.101)
.122
(.040)
-

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Panel B. ARRA Grant Shock vs. non-ARRA Grant Shock
Year
2009 ARRA
2009 Non-ARRA
2010 ARRA
2010 Non-ARRA

Contemporaneous
β /SE

One-Year Ahead
β /SE

.033
(.006)
.067
(.029)
-.004
(.004)
-.016
(.063)

.032
(.009)
.083
(.041)
-

Notes: Bold indicates significance at 10 percent level. All variables are per-capita.

Figure 1

Federal-Aid Highways

Non Federal-Aid Highways

Our 2009 Forecast as of 2005

4000

Figure 2

2000

3000

TX

CA

FL

GA

PA
NY

0

1000

OH
NCMI
IL
VA
NJ
IN
TN
MO
AL
WI
AZ
SC
KY
CT
MA
MD
LA
OK
WA
AR
AK
CO
MS
MT
WV
OR MN
KS
IA
IDNM
UT
SD
WY
NV
NE
ND
NH
HI
RI
ME
DE
VT
DC

0

1000

2000

3000

FHWA 2009 Forecast as of 2005

4000

Figure 3
Actual Grants p.c. vs 4-year-ahead Forecasts
Across - Bill
WY

400

250

Within - Bill

MT

300

Grants p.c. in 2001

150

MT

CT

HI DE
ID

VT

NM

DC
RI WV
IDNM DE
AR NE
AL
MS
OK
KY
KS
GA
MO
SC
HICT
ME
INIA
NH
TN
PA
WI
TX
VANV
LA
OR
UT
AZ
MINC
NJ
MD
OH
FLCO
MN
WA
MA
CA IL
NY

100

150

200

250

Our Forecast as of 1992

WY

400

50

100

150

200

Our Forecast as of 1997

250

500

50

SD

0

WV
RI
NE
KS AR
NH
IA ME
OR
OK
MS
INMO
KY
ALTN
GA
NV
UT
WI
SC
NJ
WA
NC
NY
VA
ILCO
PA
MN
OH
LA
MD
TX AZ
CAMIFL

100

VT
MA

ND

200

ND
SD
DC

100
50

ISTEA
(1992 - 1997)

Grants p.c. in 1996

200

WY

Grants p.c. in 2007

Grants p.c. in 2002

MT

300

ND

200

VT

RI
DEWV
NM ID

100

100

AR
NE
MS
ALCT
OKKY
KS
GA
HISC
ME
MO
IA
NH
TN
PA
IN
TX
WI
LAVA
NC
NV
AZ
OR
UT
OHMI
MD
NJ
CO
MN
WA
FL
MA
IL
NY
CA

200

300

400

800

Our Forecast as of 1998

ND
MT

400
200

SD

DC
VT
RI
NM
OK
MS
IA
AL
AR
NE DE
IN
LA NH
KY
ME KS
MO
SC
TN
CT
GA
WI
MN UT HI PA
TX
MI NC
AZ
OR
VA
MDNJ
ILCO
CA
WA
NV OHFL
MA
NY

WV
ID

0

SAFETEA-LU
(2005 - 2009)

Grants p.c. in 2009

600

WY

100

200

300

Our Forecast as of 2005

400

MT

SD
DC

200

DC

0

ND

300

SD

100

TEA - 21
(1998 - 2003)

400

WY

VT

WV
AR
AL
OK
MS
NE
INMO
KY
SC
GA
CT
KS
TX
TN
IA
PA
LA
VA
WI
NH
AZ
HI
OH
NC ME
NJ
MN
OR
MI
MD
FL
COUT
NV
WA
ILMA
CA
NY

100

ID RI
NM
DE

200

300

Our Forecast as of 2003

400

Figure 4
Unanticipated Change in Expected Present Value of Highway Grants
Panel A

-40

-20

Percent Change
0
20

40

60

Highway Grant Shock

1990

1995

2000
Year

2005

2010

2005

2010

Panel B

-20

Percent Change
0
20
40
60

80

Forecast Error

1990

1995

2000
Year
CA
FL
NY
SD
RI

TX
PA
ND
DE

Figure 5

Panel A: Impulse Response of State GDP to Highway Grant Shock

-.04

-.02

0

.02

.04

GDP

0

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

Panel B: Shock Based on Forecast Errors

-.04

-.02

0

.02

.04

GDP

0

2

4

h

6

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

Panel C: Shock Based on Actual Grants

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

GDP

0

2

4

h

6

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

Notes: Each point is coefficient on shock from regressing GDPt+h on GDPt−1 ...GDPt−3 , obligationst−1 ...obligationst−3 ,
and shockt .
GDP measured in logs.
Regressions control for state and year fixed effects.

Figure 6

Employment, BEA

-.01

-.02

0

-.01

.01

0

.02

.01

.03

.02

GDP per Worker

0

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

0

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

8

10

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

-.02

-.04

-.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

Wages and Salaries

.04

Personal Income

0

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

0

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

Population

-.01

-.15

-.1

-.005

-.05

0

0

.005

.05

.1

.01

Unemployment Rate

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

YEARS (h)

6

Figure 7

-.2

0

-.1

.1

0

.2

.1

.3

.2

.3

FHWA Obligations

.4

FHWA Grants

0

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

0

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

-.2

-.2

-.1

0

0

.1

.2

.2

.4

State Govt Hway Construction Spending

.3

FHWA Outlays

0

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

0

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

-.04

-.04

-.02

-.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

State Govt Spending

.06

State Govt Tax Revenues

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

YEARS (h)

6

Figure 8

Retail Sales

-.1

-.1

-.05

0

0

.1

.05

.2

.1

.3

.15

GDP, Truck Transportation

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4
YEARS (h)

6

8

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

Figure 9

Panel A

-.1

-.05

0

.05

GDP during expansions

0

2

4

YEARS (h)

6

8

10

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.
Panel B

-.2

-.1

0

.1

GDP during recessions

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

h

6

Figure 10
Responses to a Home Increase in Public Spending

Baseline Local Multiplier
2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6
Years

7

8

9

10

11

-0.5

Figure 11
Theoretical Multipliers

7

2.5

shock persistence=0.8

6

No time
to build

2

5
1.5

4
3

1

Baseline

2

Baseline

0.5

1

No persistence

0
-1

1

2

3

4

5

6
Years

7

8

9

0

10

11

Baseline

2

2

3

4

5

6
7
Years

8

9

10

11

Elasticity=6

2

1.5

Baseline

1.5
α

1

.

5

1

0.5

Elasticity=2

0.5
α

0

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Years

0
8

9

10

11

-0.5

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Years

8

9

10

11

2.5

2.5
GHH
preferences

2

2
Baseline

1.5

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Baseline

1.5

1

-0.5

1

2.5

2.5

-0.5

-0.5

11

-0.5

Local
fiscal policy

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Appendix Figure 1
Robustness Checks
No lags of highway spending

-.04

-.02

-.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

No lags

0

2

4

h

6

8

10

0

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

2

4

YEARS(h)

6

8

10

8

10

8

10

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

Exclude 1998 & 2005

-.04

-.02

-.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

Include Leading Indicators

0

2

4

h

6

8

10

0

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

2

4

h

6

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

1999-2010 sample

-.1

-.02

-.05

0

0

.05

.02

.1

.04

.15

1993-2004 sample

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

h

6

8

10

0

2

Shaded area is 90% C.I.

4

h

6

