                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ON FISCAL ILLUSION AND RICARDIAN EQUIVALENCE IN LOCAL PUBLIC
                                 FINANCE

                                          H. Spencer Banzhaf
                                           Wallace E. Oates

                                         Working Paper 18040
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18040


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




We are grateful for some very helpful comments to Rachana Bhatt, Jan Brueckner, Eric Brunner, Roberto
Dell'Allano, Dennis Epple, Robert Inman, Fabio Padovano, and Robert Schwab. We especially thank
the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy for generous financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by H. Spencer Banzhaf and Wallace E. Oates. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
On Fiscal Illusion and Ricardian Equivalence in Local Public Finance
H. Spencer Banzhaf and Wallace E. Oates
NBER Working Paper No. 18040
May 2012
JEL No. H3,H4,H7,Q2,R2,R5

                                              ABSTRACT

We re-evaluate two forms of fiscal illusion in local public finance: debt illusion and renter illusion.
 The Ricardian Equivalence Theorem for local governments suggests the form of finance of a public
program (tax or debt finance) has no effects on substantive outcomes. For the local case, this results
from the capitalization of local fiscal differentials into property values. We show that this version
of the model is quite restrictive. In particular, in the U.S, context, where state and local interest is
exempt from federal taxation, rational behavior may be inconsistent with Ricardian equivalence if
local governments can borrow on more favorable terms than individuals. We also suggest a new test
for renter illusion (or the renter effect). In particular, whether or not renters are more likely to support
public investments in general, the renter effect suggests that renters are more likely to support them
when financed with property taxes than with sales taxes. Using data from hundreds of open space
referenda in the U.S. using a variety of finance mechanisms, we find evidence that households do prefer
debt financing to tax financing, but find no evidence of the renter effect.


H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302
and NBER
hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu

Wallace E. Oates
Dept. of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
oates@econ.umd.edu
               On Fiscal Illusion and Ricardian Equivalence in Local Public Finance
                               H. Spencer Banzhaf and Wallace E. Oates



Economists have suggested various reasons why voters may suffer from a fiscal illusion, in

which they fail to recognize the true cost of public services (Buchanan 1967, Dell'Anno and

Mourao 2012, Dollery and Worthington 1996, Oates 1988, 2005, Turnbull 1998, Wagner 1976).

Important examples include debt illusion, in which residents myopically view debt more

favorably than current taxes, and renter illusion, in which renters erroneously believe they do not

bear the burden of the property tax.

        Economists have sometimes puzzled over the notion that households would prefer debt to

current taxes, since the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem suggests outcomes are independent of

whether or not a public program is financed by current taxes or by bond issues. In his seminal

paper, Robert Barro (1974) developed the argument in an intergenerational framework in which

altruistic individuals offset the effects of debt finance on future generations through an increase

in their saving to augment their bequests by a sum sufficient to pay the increase in future taxes

needed to redeem the bonds. Thus, the intertemporal consumption and savings profiles of

individuals are, in Barro's world, independent of the choice between tax and bond finance.

        Barro’s treatment of Ricardian equivalence has been addressed primarily in the setting of

national government finance.1 A similar equivalence between tax and bond finance has also


1
  In this setting, two elements of Barro's formulation deserve attention. First, the model requires altruistic
behavior: the utility of future generations enters directly into the utility functions of the current
generation. Second, the current generation must be fully aware of the magnitude of the current public
deficit and its implications for the well-being of later generations. These are obviously strong
assumptions, and they have been the source of considerable skepticism in the literature concerning the
empirical relevance of the theorem. For two excellent treatments of the Ricardian equivalence
proposition, see Andrew Abel (1987) and John Seater (1993). Empirical studies of Ricardian equivalence
have produced mixed results. See, for example, Briotti (2005).
been hypothesized for local public finance. In fact, the local version of the hypothesis actually

predates Barro's (1974) paper. The rationale for this equivalence is quite different in the local

context than in the national one. Here the equivalence of tax and debt finance has its source in

the normal operations of local land markets, which capitalize fiscal differentials into local

property values. As first suggested by George Daly (1969) and proved formally by Nobuo Akai

(1994), the equivalence arises inasmuch as the present discounted value of a proposed program is

the same under either form of finance. For example, should a community select debt finance

instead of current taxation, the present discounted value of the debt would be exactly capitalized

into reduced current property values. Local residents thus pay for the program either through

current taxes or an equivalent reduction in the market value of their property.2 Note that this

equivalence does not depend (as in the Barro framework) on altruistic bequests between

overlapping generations; the equivalence of tax and bond finance in a local context results

simply from standard utility maximization in a model with mobile and fiscally aware consumers

in a multi-period setting.

        Guided by this model, economists have tended to assert that residents should be

indifferent between bond-financed and tax-financed investments in the local sector, or that if

they are not it must be because of an irrational "debt illusion." Though we find the local version

of Ricardian equivalence, with adjustments through land markets, more compelling than the

national version, nevertheless there is a good reason why Ricardian equivalence might not hold

in local public finance. In particular, when the model allows for the realistic possibility that

municipal governments have better access to credit markets than individuals, individuals may

prefer to use local government financing as a way to access lower interest rates. The consequent

2
 See also Oates (1972, pp. 153-161) for an early discussion of the theory of debt finance in a local
context.


                                                                                                       2
non-equivalence results from perfectly rational behavior and is fully consistent with the

neoclassical economic model.

        A related issue in the local finance literature is the pervasive finding in many empirical

studies that communities with more renters appear to support higher levels of public expenditure

(see Dollery and Worthington 1996 and Blom-Hansen 2005 for reviews of this literature).

Drawing on these studies, Oates (2005) estimates the magnitude of this "renter effect." The

estimate suggests that if all residents in the U.S. were homeowners, local public budgets would

typically be around ten percent less than existing levels of expenditure.

        One possible reason for this finding is that debt illusion may have a first cousin known as

"renter illusion" (Oates 1988). The contention here is that since landlords have the legal liability

for the payment of property taxes on their housing units, renters (who never see a tax bill) simply

assume that they don’t pay local property taxes. But just as we argue in this paper that

preference for public debt may have a rational basis, so too may the renter effect. For example,

renters may have a lower tax share because of smaller housing consumption (Martinez-Vazquez

1983). Moreover, if excessive spending gets negatively capitalized into land values which

translate into lower rents, the burden actually may indeed fall on land owners rather than renters

(Martinez-Vazquez and Sjoquist 1988, Epple and Romer 1991). In this second case, there may

still be a renter effect, but one based on real, rather than illusory, grounds. Because of this

ambiguity, in the remainder of the paper we will refer to a "renter effect" rather than to "renter

illusion."

        This paper contributes to the literature on fiscal illusion in three ways. First, we extend

the standard model of Ricardian equivalence in local public finance to allow for differing access

to credit markets for local governments than for individuals. The model suggests that preference




                                                                                                      3
for local debt over current taxes may be perfectly rational.

       Next, we test the hypothesis that voters prefer debt financing with an empirical analysis

of voting patterns across hundreds of local referenda for open space protection in the United

States. Such referenda provide an appealing test of the relevant hypotheses, since households

reveal their preferences directly in an incentive-compatible context, rather than indirectly

through elected officials. We find that households are more likely to support such referenda

when they are financed through debt rather than through taxes, consistent with our hypothesis.

       Finally, we test for a renter effect in these data. In fact, we find if anything the opposite:

communities with a higher share of renters are less likely to support expenditures for open space.

In the particular context of open space, this may be because homeowners have an incentive to

restrict the supply of land, driving up housing values. This "homevoter" effect (Fischel 2001)

may offset the renter effect. However, the renter effect applies only to expenditures financed

with property taxes and perhaps to bonds that would be paid off with future property taxes. It

should not apply to sales taxes. Our data, which includes otherwise similar open space referenda

differing in the finance mechanisms, provides a unique opportunity to test whether communities

with more renters are differentially more likely to support property tax and/or bond referenda

relative to sales tax referenda. In fact, we find no such relationship. Our results thus do no

support the existence of a renter effect.

       The United States, incidentally, is an appealing case for this study in part because of the

sheer magnitude of the state and local public sector. Not only is the extent of fiscal

decentralization relatively high in the United States, but state and local governments carry out

the great bulk of infrastructure investment (with the local share the larger of the two); they

finance these capital projects primarily by the issue of long-term bonds. The stock of




                                                                                                        4
outstanding state and local debt is huge: $2.4 trillion in 2007. This is far and away the largest

sub-national debt market in the world (Wallis 2000).

1. A Simple Model of Local Ricardian Equivalence3

In the typical proof of equivalence theorems, the strategy is a simple one: show that the budget

constraints of the relevant decision-makers are identical under the regimes to be shown

equivalent (see e.g. Akai 1994). This is what we shall do here.

        Consider a setting in which there are two identical communities, A and B, which (to

motivate our later empirical results) are located on an urban fringe. Each community contains

houses of the same fixed and identical size, and each provides the same level of local public

services at the same price to residents. Time is measured in discrete periods (years). Households

have exogenous incomes in each period, yt, and costless mobility among communities. Since

individuals are indifferent between communities, it follows that in equilibrium the price of a

house must be the same in A and B. Without loss of generality, we normalize the initial price of

a house in either community to P0 = 0.4

        Now suppose that communities A and B have a surprise opportunity to purchase a public

good such as parkland or open space, which will enhance the quality of life of their residents and

differentiate the communities from the rest of the urban fringe. For now, we take the quantity of

open space to be fixed at size K. We denote the per-capita size, K/n, as k and normalize the units

3
 We are grateful to Robert Schwab for his help on modeling Ricardian equivalence in the context of local
public finance. After constructing this model, we learned that Nobuo Akai (1994) had previously
provided a formal proof of Ricardian equivalence in a model of local finance. However, he does not point
out the non-equivalence under different financing constraints, the contribution of the following section.
4
 Note that because house sizes are fixed, we can think of these prices as "admission tickets" to a
community. In such a model, capitalization of debt (or other community differences) manifests itself in
differentials in ticket prices as in Oates and Schwab (1996). This model is more restrictive than it need
be. We could, for example, construct a model in the Hamilton-Tiebout spirit in which we have
households sorting themselves among communities with differing amounts of housing and public
services. However, the model we use here is sufficient for our purposes.


                                                                                                            5
of open space such that pk = 1.5 But there is a basic difference between the two communities.

Community A has the opportunity to purchase this open space using "equity financing" through

the immediate payment of a one-time tax on its residents. In contrast, Community B must rely

on debt finance in the form of an issue of perpetuity bonds (with payments made at the end of

each period), which will entail a stream of future tax payments for the residents of B.

        In subsequent periods, communities A and B remain identical in every respect except that

residents of community B must pay current taxes of kr to finance their "open space" debt, while

the residents of A are free and clear of any payments for the benefits they enjoy from the open

space. With costless mobility of households, it is clear that in future periods, if PA=PB, there will

be excess demand for residences in Community A. To equalize utility across the two

communities, prices will adjust until

                         1
(1)     PA' = PB' + kr     = PB' + k.
                         r

The present value of the per-capita debt is thus fully capitalized into housing prices.

Capitalization results simply from costless mobility: house prices must adjust so that new

entrants are indifferent between the two communities.

        We now make k (the amount of open space) a variable, such that the residents of each

community must choose how much open space to purchase. To establish Ricardian equivalence

in our model, we must show that the residents of A (using equity finance) will select exactly the

same quantity of open space, k, as residents of B (using debt finance). We must show, in short,

that the choice of the amount of open space (or, more generally, the level of local public

services) is invariant with respect to the form of finance.

5
 We could obviously use K to denote any form of local infrastructure that yields a stream of public
services in the future. We are calling K "open space" simply to put the model in the spirit of our
empirical study.


                                                                                                      6
       There are two possibilities. Households either plan to remain in their current community

of residence or move. Consider first those households who choose to stay forever in their

community and hence do not sell their houses. The utility maximization problem for such

households in community B is

                                                                          1
(2)    max{k, ct} Σtu(ct,k)(1+r)-t s.t. Σtyt(1+r)-t = Σtct(1+r)-t + kr      ,
                                                                          r

whereas, for households in A, we have

(3)    max{k, ct} Σtu(ct,k)(1+r)-t s.t. Σtyt(1+r)-t = Σtct(1+r)-t + k.

These are clearly identical problems inasmuch as the last terms in (2) and (3) are equal by virtue

of the present value calculation. Households who continue to live in A and B will thus prefer

exactly the same level of k.

       Consider next current residents of A and B who plan to move out in the next period, back

to the urban fringe. For those living in B, we have the maximization problem

                                                                            r       P
(4)    max{k, ct} Σtu(ct,k)(1+r)-t s.t. Σtyt(1+r)-t = Σtct(1+r)-t + k             B .
                                                                         (1  r ) (1  r )

On the right hand side of the budget constraint is the present value of the stream of consumption,

one period of payment on open space capital (made before moving and discounted back one

period) and the capitalized value of selling the property in the community (also discounted back

one period).

       In Community A, we have

                                                                             PA
(5)    max{k, ct} Σtu(ct,k)(1+r)-t s.t. Σtyt(1+r)-t = Σtct(1+r)-t + k              .
                                                                           (1  r )

Substituting equation (1) into (5), we obtain

                                                                          ( PB  k )
(6)    max{k, ct} Σtu(ct,k)(1+r)-t s.t. Σtyt(1+r)-t = Σtct(1+r)-t + k -              ,
                                                                            (1  r )


                                                                                                   7
or

                                                                           r       P
(7)    max{k, ct} Σtu(ct,k)(1+r)-t s.t. Σtyt(1+r)-t = Σtct(1+r)-t + k            B .
                                                                        (1  r ) (1  r )

Equation (7) is the same as equation (4) so that we again find that residents of A and B will

choose the same level of k.

       Thus, we have full Ricardian equivalence in this model: levels of open space purchases

(or, more generally, levels of local public services), private consumption, and the resulting utility

levels are the same under tax and debt finance.

2. An Extension of the Model: The Case of Different Rates of Interest

A crucial assumption in the local version of Ricardian Equivalence derived in the previous

section is that individuals can borrow and lend at the same rate as the government. There is good

reason to question this assumption. In fact, interest rates on municipal debt are generally well

below consumer rates on credit cards and automobile loans.

       Municipalities may be able to borrow more cheaply than individuals for two reasons.

First, lenders may believe that loans to governments are less risky than loans to individuals and

hence may charge higher rates of interest to households than to the public sector. Such a

perception may in turn arise for any of at least three reasons. First, like national governments,

local governments have the power of taxation, so within limits they always have a ready source

of revenue to access. Second, higher governments (states or the Federal Government) may bail

out bankrupt local governments, honoring their debt. Third, governments may simply be more

responsible than individuals.

       In addition to the question of such risk premiums on individual consumer debt relative to

municipal debt, there is a second reason municipalities may borrow at lower interest rates. In the

U.S. interest income on state and local bonds is exempt from the federal income tax, whereas


                                                                                                    8
consumer debt is not. As a result, state and local governments are typically able to borrow at

rates several percentage points below private-sector rates.6 Mortgage debt is an important

exception in the US, a point we return to below, but for now we note that the fact that households

regularly borrow at higher rates indicates housing debt is at best an imperfect tool for smoothing

income shocks and that they must use higher cost instruments at the margin.

        In such a setting, borrowers may have a powerful reason for preferring local debt finance

to tax finance. Equity financing through current taxation to finance local infrastructure ("open

space" purchases in our application) may require private borrowing to smooth consumption over

time. If local government can borrow at a lower rate than individuals, it is no longer the case

that households will necessarily be indifferent between tax and debt finance. Substituting

borrowing through public sector debt issues for individual borrowing allows households to

smooth their consumption over time on more favorable terms.7

        Mathematically, the key difference between this case and the simple model of Ricardian

Equivalence is that equation (1) must be adjusted to differentiate the two rates of borrowing.

Denote rm as the rate at which the municipality can borrow and ri as the rate at which individuals

can borrow. Assuming the individual is a borrower, ri is also his rate of time preference (by the

first order condition for his inter-temporal asset allocation problem). Then (1) must be modified


6
  One might argue that if households have such an arbitrage opportunity through their local governments,
the local public sector would expand until rates are equilibrated. While such a factor is an intriguing
source of pressure for larger governments, there are two important factors mitigating it. First, we are
arguing only that, conditional on new government expenditure, households may prefer to finance it with
debt than with immediate taxes. It does not follow that households prefer more government expenditures
at the margin. Second, many states limit local debt issues, preventing debt from expanding in this way.
In any case, lower rates on municipal debt are an empirical regularity.
7
 This result, proved below, parallels the famous results of Modigliani and Miller (1958). The
Modigliani-Miller theorem states that, in a world without taxes, firms should be indifferent to equity and
debt financing, a result echoed in the Ricardian equivalence theorem for government. However, when
debt receives favorable tax treatment, firms will prefer debt financing (Modigliani and Miller 1958, Miller
1977).


                                                                                                         9
to

                            rm
(1')   PA' = PB' + k           .
                            ri

Note that if rm < ri, the value of PA relative to PB is not so high in this case. Debt financing is

more attractive.

       Figure 1 illustrates the point. The consumer begins at point A, along a kinked budget

constraint with higher rates for borrowing than for lending, and on the borrowing portion of the

constraint. A purchase of open space paid for with a current period tax would move him to

point B, shifted left by the amount k. The consumer will adjust his consumption to point C,

smoothing out the shock. If, however, the community can borrow at a lower rate rm, it can do the

smoothing for the individual on more favorable terms. Thus, the consumer can be at point D, on

a higher indifference curve.

       We illustrate the importance of this insight with some numerical simulations. Consider

overlapping generations of households who live for three periods. Each household has utility

that is additively separable in time periods, with Cobb-Douglas preferences for open space and

consumption in each period. Households vote for a quantity of open space in period 1. In period

3, they "retire" to the urban fringe, cashing out the value of their house. Thus, households

maximize

                                               ln(c 2 )  (1   ) ln(k )             ln(c3 )
(8)    u = αln(c1) + (1-α)ln(k) +                                                 +
                                                          (1  ri )                   (1  ri ) 2

subject to

         3
                 yt               P            3
                                                     ct                           rm             rm
        
        t 1 (1  ri )
                       t 1
                            
                              (1  ri ) 2
                                              (1  r )
                                              t 1
                                                           t 1
                                                                   k e  kb
                                                                               (1  ri )
                                                                                          kb
                                                                                              (1  ri ) 2
                                                                                                          ,
(9)                                                   i



where ke is the amount of open space financed with equity and kb is the amount financed with



                                                                                                              10
bonds (k = ke + kb). The budget constraint shows that the present value of the stream of

exogenous income plus the realized capital gain on the house (discounted back two periods) must

equal the present value of the stream of consumption, immediate tax payments for any open

space purchased with "equity," and the present value of two tax payments for debt-financed open

space.

         In our simulation, we set α=0.9, yt=100, ri=0.10, and rm=0.05. The first two rows of

Table 1 report the results. The first row is a city allowed to choose either bond or tax financing.

Residents clearly prefer bond financing, voting for 163 units of kb and achieving a utility value of

15.7. The second row summarizes the same model, but with the constraint that households are

only allowed to finance with current taxes. Residents now are on a lower indifference curve,

with a utility of 15.6, and acquire less open space, at 93 units. We see also that the value of

housing is higher, since future generations buy into a community that has no debt obligations.

Thus, future generations will not have to pay the debt, but they do have to pay a higher price to

join the community.

         To illustrate the importance of the different rates of borrowing, we re-run these two

models with households who can privately borrow at the municipal level of 5%. Rows three and

four of the Table 1 illustrate this case. Levels of utility are now higher than previously, because

the households can borrow privately on more favorable terms, which has a wealth effect.8

Nevertheless, the important point is that households now are indeed indifferent between debt and

equity financing, since they can always negate the community’s decision in private markets.

Their indifference is indicated by the fact that they can split their financing in any way; row three

illustrates an example of a 50/50 debt/equity split. In row four, households are constrained to use

8
  Alternatively, we could think of households with the same constraints, but with income pushed forward
to the initial periods so that they are on the saving portion of the kinked budget constraint.


                                                                                                     11
taxes, but they are no worse off, acquiring the same level of open space and achieving the same

utility. Thus, the existence of Ricardian equivalence in local public finance is not a foregone

conclusion. Its validity depends on households’ debt positions and access to credit markets.

3. An Application to Land Conservation

We turn next to an empirical study of local preferences for the form of finance. We look to see if

households do indeed prefer debt financing by directly observing their voting behavior in local

referenda, comparing the support in the ballot box for initiatives financed with debt in

comparison to tax-financed initiatives. Additionally, we test whether communities with more

renters are more or less likely to support such investments, and whether the effect of renters

differs by the type of finance mechanism. The hypothesis of a renter effect would be consistent

with renters being more likely to support those investments financed with property taxes and

perhaps debt, but not those financed with sales taxes.

        Our application is to a major type of local public investment in the United States: open-

space conservation. Over the period 1998 to 2006, 1,550 referenda for the conservation of open

space appeared on state, county, and municipal ballots in the United States, with more than $29

billion approved for such purchases in 2006 alone. These measures address a wide range of

conservation objectives: the preservation of wetlands, meadows and woodlands; the conservation

of agricultural land; and the establishment of new recreational areas.

        Our basic data on the referenda themselves come from the large "Land Vote" data set,

assembled by the Land Trust Alliance and the Trust for Public Lands. 9 These data encompass

all known U.S. open-space referenda from 1998 to 2006 and include information not only on

9
  Other peer-reviewed studies have used these data in the context of studying conservation policies. See
Banzhaf et al. (2010), Kotchen and Powers (2006), Nelson et al. (2007), and Sundberg (2006). These
studies also find that bond-financed initiatives gather more support than tax-financed initiatives, but this
finding is not a focus of the studies.


                                                                                                           12
jurisdictions and outcomes, but on the financing mechanism as well. The data include local

referenda that are financed by bonds, property taxes, and sales taxes, and are reported separately

for counties and municipalities. Table 2 provides summary statistics on the finance mechanisms

of the referenda by jurisdiction type. The raw data are consistent with the notion that people

prefer bond financing: on average, debt-financed referenda garner 65% support, compared to

57% for property-tax referenda and 58% for sales-tax referenda, both differences from debt

being statistically significant.

        To control for other characteristics of the jurisdictions voting on the referenda, we have

extended this data base through the collection of U.S. Census data on community demographics,

USDA data on county-level land uses and agricultural values, and data on county-level

Presidential voting (purchased from USElectionAtlas.org). Finally, we obtained data on

outstanding debt, interest payments, and per-capita tax revenues for all counties from the Tax

Foundation and the U.S. Census of Governments. Such variables may influence a jurisdiction's

support of new expenditures as well as its relative preference for bond or tax financing.

Unfortunately, similar data were not available for U.S. municipalities. Finally, we make use of

an index, created by Geon and Turnbull (2006), of the extent to which jurisdictions in a state are

granted "home rule," authorizing greater freedom to pass laws and ordinances (in contrast to

"Dillon's rule," which restricts such authority). Table 3 provides summary statistics of these

data.

        To examine household preferences for methods of local finance, we regress the log-odds

ratio (i.e. ln(pctyes/pctno)) of the vote in each referendum on these variables. The regressions

are of the following form:

(10)    ln(pctyes/pctno)rjt = α + βB*BONDrjt + βST*SALESTAXrjt + Dj'δ + Fj'φ + Dj'ηB*BONDrjt




                                                                                                     13
                              + Dj'ηST*SALESTAXrjt + Fj'θ*BONDrjt + μt + εjt,

where r indexes referendum, j indexes jurisdiction, and t indexes year. BONDrjt is a dummy

variable for whether referendum r uses bond financing, and similarly SALESTAXrjt is a dummy

variable for whether it uses a sales tax; the property tax is the omitted category. Dj is a vector of

demographic characteristics in community j, including most saliently the proportion of renters.

Fj is a vector, available for the county-level models, of financial and political characteristics

(such as tax and debt levels), which might affect preferences for debt. μt is a vector of year-

specific effects, and εjt is a random error term.

       Table 4 presents the results of these regressions. Models 1A-4A are for county-level

referenda, and Models 1B-3B are for municipality-level referenda. Models 1A and 1B are the

most parsimonious specifications; they estimate the level effects for the finance mechanisms (β)

and for homeownership and other demographics (δ), but not the interaction effects. Models 2A

and 2B add interactions between the finance mechanisms and homeownership (η). Models 3A

and 3B control for additional community characteristics that might affect the preference for debt

financing, including age, income, and education, by interacting them with BONDrjt. Finally,

Model 4A also controls for the vector of fiscal and political variables (F), as both level effects

and interactions with BONDrjt. F includes pre-existing debt and tax levels, the Geon-Turnbull

index of home rule, and an indicator for communities that have previously authorized a tax

stream to finance future open space purchases, which they might then borrow against by issuing

a revenue bond. Because the tax and interest data were unavailable for the municipalities, there

is no corresponding Model 4B. (Including only the controls for revenue bonds and the index of

home rule in the municipality model has little effect on the results.)




                                                                                                     14
Is there a debt effect?

       The model of fiscal federalism presented in Section 2 suggests that households may

prefer debt to tax financing. Thus, the most straightforward hypothesis to test is whether bonds

have a positive effect on referenda outcomes. As noted previously, the raw data indicate that this

may be the case, with bond-financed referenda achieving a 65% average yes vote and tax

referenda obtaining only 57% support on average, or a difference of about 8 percentage points.

These results continue to hold when controlling for other factors using multivariate regression.

       As the interaction terms in some of these models make the hypotheses of interest difficult

to derive from the regression coefficients, Table 5 reports our main hypothesis tests. Panel A

shows the results of a test that bonds are more likely to garner support relative to the other

finance mechanisms. Bonds are clearly preferred to property taxes. For the "average

community" (with all characteristics held at their mean values), a bond referendum gathers 5-7

additional percentage points in support over a property tax referendum in the county models and

about 10 percentage points in the municipality models, an effect that is statistically significant in

all models. Similarly, bonds appear to be preferred to sales taxes. For the average community, a

bond referendum gathers 8-10 additional percentage points in support over a sales tax

referendum in the county models and 2-4 percentage points in the municipality models. The

effect is statistically significant for the county models and the most parsimonious municipality

model (1B).

       These results are robust to other statistical approaches. For example, we considered

weighting the observations in the regressions by the propensity score, or probability (based on

observable characteristics) that a referendum would use bond financing (Imbens 2004). This

approach makes the bond and finance samples more comparable in terms of their observed




                                                                                                   15
characteristics, while controlling for remaining differences with linear regression. The results

are very similar using this approach. Additionally, we considered a matching approach, in which

each bond-financed referendum is compared to a set of tax-financed referenda with similar

propensity scores, and vice versa. We considered matching to the nearest neighbor, four nearest

neighbors, and matching based on local linear regression (Heckman et al. 1997). The results

continue to be quite similar to those reported in Table 5, with average treatment effects on the

order of 9 to 10 percentage points higher approval for bond referenda over property tax referenda

as well as over sales taxes in the county models (and all statistically significant), but smaller and

sometimes insignificant effects relative to sales taxes in the municipality models. These results

are available upon request.

       Finally, we also considered the potential for selection bias in these referenda. Intuitively,

the set of jurisdictions holding referenda may not be a representative sample of all jurisdictions.

In fact, though, previous studies in the conservation literature have found little evidence of bias

caused by the sample selection of those jurisdictions holding these referenda (Banzhaf et al.

2010, Kotchen and Powers 2006, and Nelson et al. 2007) or transportation referenda (Dixit et al.

2010). But in addition to this form of selection, we might also be concerned about the selection

on the choice of finance mechanism. For example, if communities that are more likely to choose

bonds for finance are also more likely to support referenda, for unobserved reasons, the above

estimation strategy would be biased. Similarly, if communities where bond financing is likely to

be particularly successful are the ones that choose bond financing for their referenda, our results

would be inapplicable to the larger sample.

       We considered both Heckman-type selection models and instrumental variables

regressions to control for such selection effects, using various financial and policy variables as




                                                                                                     16
additional regressors that affect the probability of holding a bond referendum but not the

probability of supporting the referenda. In particular, we re-estimated the outcome equation in

Model 1, controlling for selection by using as exclusion restrictions: per capita interest

payments, per capita tax payments, and state-level rules on whether local governments are

required to seek citizen approval for bond and/or tax financing.10 We found no evidence of

selection bias and continue to recover similar effects for bond financing. Again, these results are

available upon request.11 We conclude that the debt effect is substantial and robust, with

households preferring debt to up-front taxes. This result is consistent with similar findings in

Banzhaf et al. (2010), Dixit et al. (2010), and Kotchen and Powers (2006).

Is there a "Renter Effect?"

          The most straightforward way to test for a renter effect is to evaluate the effect of the

proportion of a community's population owning their homes on the support for a referendum.

This approach is by far the most common in previous work (see e.g. Dollery and Worthington

1996 for a review). Unfortunately, this approach may confound the causal effect of owning or

renting per se with unobserved differences between renters and owners in tastes, wealth, or

demographics. Moreover, in our particular application to open space, there is an alternative

possibility. Open-space referenda not only provide amenities in a variety of forms, but they also

typically restrict the amount of land available for development, thereby restricting the local

supply of land (Fischel 2001). In this way, they may result in an increase in the value of existing

local residences. Thus, we may have here an offsetting "homeowner effect," applicable

specifically to programs that preserve open space. Any of these unobservable factors may be

10
     These data were collected from Krane, Rigos, and Hill (2001).
11
   In other work with these data exploring the planning process of conservation organizations, we have
also considered selection on the joint decision of whether to hold a referendum and, if so, which type of
financing mechanisms, again finding little evidence of selection effects. See Banzhaf et al. (2010).


                                                                                                        17
confounded with estimates of the renter effect expressed as a level of support.

       Panel B of Table 5 shows the results of the standard hypothesis tests related to the renter

effect. The effect is most straightforward in Models 1A and 1B. In Model 1A, we find that

increasing the share of renters by 10 percentage points actually decreases the yes vote in the

average county by about 5 percentage points. The effect is smaller in the municipality model,

with an effect of one 1 percentage points on the yes vote and with a p-value of only 0.14. This is

a striking finding in view of the extensive empirical literature that has found a pervasive and

positive renter effect for nearly all kinds of local public expenditure programs. Our sense, as

mentioned earlier, is that this result most likely reflects the predominance of a kind of

"homeowner effect" for programs that preserve local open space. Such programs enhance the

value of local homes by restricting the supply of local land (and perhaps also by improving local

environmental quality). The strong support of homeowners for these programs thus is not

surprising.

       Nevertheless, because our data include a variety of finance mechanisms, we have a

unique opportunity to test the renter effect in a new and cleaner way. In particular, the renter

effect should manifest itself for property-tax financed programs or bond-financed programs, but

not for programs financed by sales taxes. Renters would presumably realize that they must share

the burden of financing local programs supported through sales taxes (in contrast to those using

property-tax finance or bond finance where the bonds will ultimately be redeemed with revenues

from property taxation). On the other hand, the homeowner effect is based in the restriction of

land supply and applies equally to referenda financed with any mechanism.

       Consequently, we can test for whether the effect of increasing the proportion of renters in

a community is smaller for sales taxes than other finance mechanisms. With this test, any




                                                                                                   18
differences between renters and owners in their general preferences for conservation—whether

driven by taste differences, wealth differences, or a strategic desire to restrict land supply—

cancel out in the comparison, as those differences would be constant across finance mechanisms.

In this way, the renter effect can be identified by comparing differential effects across finance

mechanisms, rather than merely through level effects.

          The second through fourth rows of Panel B show the effect of more renters in a

community, by finance mechanism. If there is a renter effect, we would expect the smallest

effect for sales taxes. The final two rows of Panel B directly test this hypothesis, first comparing

the effect of renters in sales tax-financed referenda relative to debt-financed referenda, then

comparing the effect in sales tax referenda relative to property-tax-financed referenda. The

effect is sometimes smaller and sometimes greater for sales taxes, but there is no consistent

pattern and in no model can we reject the hypothesis that the effect of renters is homogeneous

across finance mechanisms. These results are clearly inconsistent with the presence of a renter

effect.

4. Discussion and Conclusion

As noted previously, our finding that households prefer borrowing to up-front payment for large

public investments is consistent with either of two explanations. The traditional interpretation of

such empirical findings is that households suffer from a form of fiscal illusion. And such an

interpretation is not unreasonable. Even if purchasers of homes have a good sense of the levels

of public services and property taxes, the outstanding debt of a local government is not

information of a kind that is normally available to potential buyers. This could easily result in a

kind of debt illusion such that local debt issues do not get (fully) capitalized into local property

values (Oates 1988) and Ricardian equivalence fails to hold.




                                                                                                    19
        Our model offers a second possible interpretation. It demonstrates that capitalization is

only a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for Ricardian equivalence. Even if households

are aware of future fiscal liabilities and even if these liabilities are fully capitalized into local

property values, residents may still prefer bond to tax finance because state and local

governments are able to borrow at lower rates of interest than can private individuals. State and

local debt finance effectively allows residents to access the lower rates available through their

governments.

        Indeed, our theoretical model also predicts that, even if their present value is lower than

the cost of up-front-equity financing, future public debt liabilities still would be fully capitalized

into the value of the residents’ property. (Note for example that in Table 1, housing values are

lower in line 1 than line 2 and lower in line 3 than 4.) By the same token, Martinez-Vazquez and

Sjoquist (1988) have argued that the so-called renter illusion may not be an illusion at all, if

excess public spending is capitalized into lower land values. These capitalization results,

however, depend critically on a strong information assumption: residents of a community (and

potential residents as well) must have full knowledge of the outstanding debt of the jurisdiction.

        Our theoretical and empirical results are closely connected to a large literature which has

found that a variety of local amenities and fiscal attributes are capitalized into property values.

For example, Chay and Greenstone (2005) and Smith and Huang (1995) find that air pollution is

capitalized into housing prices. The list could be extended on and on to include the quality of

schools, crime rates, and other environmental and fiscal attributes. Indeed, as William Fischel

(2001) has put it, "Everything seems to be capitalized" (p. 45).

        However, as we noted earlier, the capitalization of outstanding local public debt is

especially challenging. Local residents are likely to have a good sense of the levels of local




                                                                                                        20
services and their property tax liabilities, but knowledge of levels of outstanding local debt and

the associated future tax liabilities is much more problematic. This has given rise to a small

literature on the so-called "debt illusion hypothesis," the proposition that individuals are not

aware of the future tax liabilities associated with existing local public debt (Oates 1988, pp. 76-

7). If these future tax liabilities are not capitalized into housing values, it would suggest that our

more direct evidence of households' preference for debt financing may result from such fiscal

illusion. On the other hand, if debt is capitalized into housing values, as occurs in the

simulations of our theoretical model in Section 2, then our findings are more likely due to

governments' more favorable access to credit markets, a violation of one of the key premises of

the Ricardian equivalence model.

       In fact, there is an interesting (if small) empirical literature looking at the capitalization of

local public debt. In one recent study, Stadelmann and Eichenberger (2010) compare property

values across local jurisdictions in Switzerland. They find that areas with greater public debt

have lower land values, suggesting capitalization. One challenge with such work is that it is

difficult to disentangle debt with unobserved public goods that may have been purchased with

such debt.

       To our knowledge, four other papers have attempted to address this issue by focusing on

exogenous sources of variation in debt. Palmon and Smith (1998) focus on the differences in the

interest rates that prevailed at the time that otherwise very similar neighborhoods in Houston, TX

invested in new water and sewer infrastructure. These liabilities are a particularly attractive form

of local debt for this purpose, inasmuch as there are no corresponding benefits that accrue simply

from the different interest rates. Palmon and Smith find striking evidence of the capitalization of

higher tax payments.




                                                                                                     21
        Similarly, two papers have considered the underfunded liability (UFL) of municipal

pensions. UFL of pensions generates a future tax liability with no compensating benefits; it thus

gives us a clean test of the capitalization hypothesis.12 Epple and Schipper (1981) undertook the

first of these studies. Using a sample of jurisdictions in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area, they

find evidence of capitalization of the unfunded liabilities. There are, however, some tricky

issues involved in getting good measures of the actual level of unfunded liabilities; in particular,

the actuarial assumptions can vary so that it is often difficult to determine the precise level of

these pension obligations. In light of this, we should probably regard the Epple-Schipper results

as indicating the presence of some, but not necessarily full, capitalization.

        In a second study, Leeds (1985) has examined the capitalization of UFLs into property

values in a sample of 67 cities in the Chicago SMSA. Leeds uses, as his measure of UFL, the

ratio of the payments by the pension fund to the assets held in the fund, a measure that gets

around some of the problems inherent in the Epple-Schipper variable. Leeds can find no

evidence of any capitalization of UFLs into local property values and suggests that UFLs

represent a form of "hidden taxation" that is politically motivated.13

        In the most recent of these studies, Robert MacKay (2011) presents some intriguing

evidence from an event study in San Diego. In 2004, a public announcement indicated that

rising levels of unfunded pension liabilities in the San Diego City Employees' Retirement System

12
  There is also an interesting literature on the rationale for underfunding. The underfunding of public
pensions can have a legitimate economic rationale or simply be the result of politically motivated actions
to shift largely hidden liabilities to future periods. On this, see, for example, Mumy (1978), Inman
(1982), and Leeds (1985). Whatever the reason for underfunding of pensions, as Inman showed some
time ago, the extent of such underfunding in the state and local sector in the U.S. is quite large.
13
   Using an alternative approach, Robert Inman (1982) looks to public employee labor markets for
evidence on the impact of UFL’s. Rather than testing for capitalization into local property values, Inman
examines the impact of UFLs on public-sector wages; the idea here is that without capitalization, current
taxpayers can pass the costs of large labor contracts on to future taxpayers via underfunding of pension
liabilities. Inman finds some evidence in support of such behavior.


                                                                                                        22
were much higher than had been previously indicated. MacKay investigates housing prices in

San Diego City relative to housing prices in nearby communities over the three-year period

following this announcement. MacKay tentatively finds that the news of this underfunding of

pensions led a differential fall in housing prices within San Diego City of 3.5 to 4.5 percent. The

Mackay study is interesting, not only in terms of its finding of the capitalization of the

outstanding local debt, but also because of the role of information in this outcome. It was the

announcement of this unrecognized debt that appears to have initiated the capitalization,

although further research may be needed to pin down the timing of this effect. This calls

attention to one of the conditions for Ricardian Equivalence: full knowledge among residents

(potential or existing) of the levels of outstanding debt, at least in the short-term.

        At any rate, the empirical findings we present here (both our own and others) indicate a

pervasive preference at the local level for debt over tax financing. In addition, based on the other

papers we have summarized here, there seems to be fairly widespread evidence of the

capitalization of local debt. Of the studies we have been able to find, four out of five find

capitalization of outstanding debt. Only Leeds' study several decades ago found no evidence of

capitalization. If capitalization is the norm, then the preference for local debt over tax finance

does not have its source in debt illusion. Instead, one interpretation of these results (as suggested

by our extended model) is that local residents prefer debt finance because it gives them access to

lower interest rates than they can obtain privately. Indeed, because of favorable tax treatment,

interest rates on municipal bonds, as we have noted, are typically several percentage points




                                                                                                     23
below private market rates. Debt finance enables local residents to take advantage of these lower

rates.14

           In conclusion, we want to call attention to a further, more pragmatic argument against

Ricardian equivalence that is based on fiscal institutions and general practices, at least in the

United States. A fairly general principle in U.S. local finance (in some cases actually imbedded

in the law) is that (1) Current expenditures are financed by current tax revenues, and (2) Capital

expenditures are financed by debt issues. The basic rationale for the latter condition is that since

capital projects typically involve large current expenditures which produce a lengthy stream of

future services, it makes sense to spread out the payment for these services in line with the

stream of benefits. This saves current residents from making a large current expenditure for

which they might have to issue their own private debt. From this more pragmatic perspective,

debt finance serves the purpose of smoothing out tax liabilities over time. It may well be that,

for this reason, local electorates prefer bond finance to current taxation for capital projects.




14
  These findings, incidentally, do not represent an empirical rejection of the Ricardian
Equivalence Theorem. One of the assumptions of the Theorem is that private individuals and
government have equal access to credit markets at the same rates of interest. This assumption is
clearly violated in the case of local public finance in the United States so that the failure to find
Ricardian Equivalence can be traced to the absence of a key condition. This finding is thus fully
consistent with rational behavior and the standard neoclassical model.


                                                                                                    24
References

Abel, Andrew B. 1987. "Ricardian Equivalence Theorem." In The New Palgrave: A Dictionary
       of Economics, J.Eatwell, et al., eds. London: MacMillan, 174-179.

Akai, Nobuo. 1994. "Ricardian Equivalence for Local Government Bonds: Budget Constraint
       Approach." Economics Letters 44: 191-195.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Wallace E. Oates, and James Sanchirico. 2010. "Selection and Design of
      Local Referenda for Land Conservation," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
      29: 769-98.

Barro, Robert J. 1974. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political Economy 82:
       1095-1117.

Blom-Hansen, Jens. 2005. "Renter Illusion: Fact or Fiction?" Urban Studies 42: 127-40.

Briotti, Maria Gabriella. 2005. "Economic Reactions to Public Finance Consolidation: A Survey
         of the Literature." European Central Bank, Occasional Paper Series No. 38 (October).

Buchanan, James M. 1967. The Fiscal Illusion. Public Finance in Democratic Process: Fiscal
      Institutions and Individual Choice. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina press.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. "Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from
       the Housing Market." Journal of Political Economy 113(2): 376-424.

Daly, George G. 1969. "The Burden of the Debt and Future Generations in Local Finance."
       Southern Economic Journal 36: 44-51.

Dell'Anno, Roberto, and Paulo Mourao. 2012. "Fiscal Illusion around the World: An Analysis
       Using the Structural Equation Approach." Public Finance Review 40: 270-99.

Dixit, Vinayak, Elisabet E. Rutstrom, Michael Seph Mard, and Ryan O. Zielske. 2010. "Transit
        Referenda and Funding Options: Bonds versus Taxes." Transportation Research Record
        2143: 44-47.

Dollery, Brian E., and Andrew C. Worthington. 1996. "The Empirical Analysis of Fiscal
       Illusion." Journal of Economic Surveys 10: 261-97.

Dubin, Jeffrey A., and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. "An Econometric Analysis of Residential
       Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption." Econometrica 52: 345-362.

Epple, Dennis, and Thomas Romer. 1991. "Mobility and Redistribution." Journal of Political
       Economy 99: 828-58.

Epple, Dennis, and Katherine Schipper. 1981. "Municipal Pension Funding: A Theory and Some



                                                                                              25
       Evidence," Public Choice 37: 141-178.

Epple, Dennis, and Chester Spatt. 1986. "State Restrictions on Local Debt: Their Role in
       Preventing Default." Journal of Public Economics 29(2): 199-221.

Fischel, William A. 2001. The Homevoter Hypothesis: How Home Values Influence Local
       Government Taxation, School Finance, and Land-Use Policies. Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press.

Geon, G., & Turnbull, G. K. (2006). Local Government Internal Structure, External Constraints,
      and the Median Voter. Public Choice 129, 487-506.

Heckman, James J., Hidehiko Ichimura, and Petra Todd. 1997. Matching as an Econometric
     Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Program. Review of
     Economic Studies 64: 605-654.


Hoper, Kim, and Ernest Cook. 2004. Conservation Finance Handbook: How Communities are
       Paying for Parks and Land Conservation. San Francisco: The Trust for Public Lands.

Imbens, Guido W. 2004. "Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Under
      Exogeneity: A Review." Review of Economics and Statistics 86: 4-29.

Inman, Robert P. 1982. "Public Employee Pensions and the Local Labor Budget." Journal of
       Public Economics 19: 49-71.

Kotchen, Matthew J., and Shawn M. Powers. 2006. "Explaining the Appearance and Success of
      Voter Referenda for Open-Space Conservation." Journal of Environmental Economics
      and Management 52: 373-390.

Krane, Dale, Platon N. Rigos, and Melvin B. Hill, Jr. 2001. Home Rule in America: A Fifty-
       State Handbook. Washington, DC: CQ Press.

Leeds, Michael. 1985. "Property Values and Pension Underfunding in the Local Public Sector."
       Journal of Urban Economics 18: 34-46.

Mackay, Robert C. 2011. "The Effect of Unfunded Pension Liabilities on Local Housing
      Prices." Mimeo. University of California, San Diego.

Martinez-Vazquez, Jorge. 1983. "Renters' Illusion or Savvy?" Public Finance Quarterly 11:
       237-47.

Martinez-Vazquez, Jorge, and David L. Sjoquist. 1988. "Property Tax Financing, Renting, and
       the Level of Local Expenditure." Southern Economic Journal 55: 424-431.



                                                                                             26
Miller, Merton H. 1977. "Debt and Taxes." Journal of Finance 32: 261-75.

Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller. 1958. "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance
      and the Theory of Investment." American Economic Review 48: 261-97.

Nelson, Erik, Uwasu, Michinori, and Stephen Polasky. 2007. "Voting on Open Space: What
       explains the appearance and support of municipal-level open space conservation
       referenda in the United States." Ecological Economics 62: 580-593.

Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Oates, Wallace E. 1988. "On the Nature and Measurement of Fiscal Illusion." In Taxation and
       Fiscal Federalism: Essays in Honour of Russell Mathews, G. Brennan et al., eds.
       Sydney, Australia: Australian National University Press, 65-82.

Oates, Wallace E. 2005. "Property Taxation and Local Public Spending: The Renter Effect."
       Journal of Urban Economics 57: 419-431.

Oates, Wallace E., and Robert M. Schwab. 1996. "The Theory of Regulatory Federalism: The
       Case of Environmental Management." In The Economics of Environmental Regulation,
       ed. by Wallace E. Oates. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 319-31.

Palmon, Oded, and Barton A. Smith. 1998. "New Evidence on Property Tax Capitalization."
      Journal of Political Economy 106: 1099-1111.

Seater, John J. 1993. "Ricardian Equivalence." Journal of Economic Literature 31: 142-190.

Smith, V. Kerry, and Ju-Chin Huang. 1995. "Can Markets Value Air Quality? A Meta Analysis
       of Hedonic Property Value Studies." Journal of Political Economy 103: 209-27.

Stadelmann, David, and Reiner Eichenberger. 2010. "Debt Capitalization: Ricardian
       Equivalence without Altruism?" Available at
       http://perso.unifr.ch/david.stadelmann/workingpapers/CapDebt_100108.pdf.

Turnbull, Geoffrey K. 1998. "The Overspending and Flypaper Effects of Fiscal Illusion: Theory
      and Empirical Evidence." Journal of Urban Economics 44: 1-26.

Wagner, Richard E. 1976. "Revenue Structure, Fiscal Illusion, and Budgetary Choice." Public
      Choice 25: 45-61.

Wallis, John Joseph. 2000. "American Government Finance in the Long Run: 1790 to 1990."
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 14: 61-82.




                                                                                              27
Figure 1. Utility Maximization for Borrowers with Lower Public Interest Rates




                                                                                28
Table 1. Endogenous Open Space Purchases under different financing opportunities

    Interest       Public Finance   Realized      Choice        Choice       Housing
     Rates            Options        utility       of ke         of kb        Price
     rm < ri      Bond or tax        15.708            0       163.398      1003.40
     rm < ri      Tax only           15.584       93.435            --      1088.22
     rm = ri      Bond or tax        15.931       94.667        94.667       796.91
     rm = ri      Tax only           15.931      189.333            --       927.28




                                                                                      29
Table 2. Percent Voting Yes by Finance Mechanism and Jurisdiction

                                    Jurisdiction
                           County     Municipal     Total
         Bond              65.2%        64.6%       64.8%
                           N=108        N=372       N=480
     Property Tax          57.1%        56.8%       56.9%
                           N=84         N=600       N=684
       Sales Tax           60.5%        55.6%       57.7%
                           N=44         N=60        N=104
         Total             60.2%       59.9%        59.9%
                           N=252       N=1016       1,268




                                                                    30
Table 3. Demographic, Land Use, Elections, and Finance Data (Mean Values)
Variable                                        Counties              Municipalities
Demographic Data                        Mean          Std. Dev.     Mean       Std. Dev.
Proportion Renter-occupied               0.29              0.09      0.23        0.14
Median House Value (1000s $)           151.87         64.84        215.10      108.65
Median Household Income (1000s $)       50.89         11.83         66.12       21.45
Proportion Households in Poverty         0.31           0.17         0.06        0.05
Proportion no H.S. Degree                0.15              0.06      0.17        0.06
Proportion Bachelor's Degree             0.31           0.11         0.39        0.15
Proportion population White              0.81              0.12      0.89        0.10
Proportion population >65                0.12              0.06      0.13        0.06
Proportion population <18                0.25              0.03      0.25        0.05
Land use Data
Pct Pop Urbanizd Area                    0.79              0.23      0.80        0.31
Square Miles                           984.94       1571.80         33.98       57.49
Density (Pop / sq mi)                  844.10       1435.86       1495.97    1671.19
Value of Farmland (1000$/acre)           4.26              6.71      8.24       12.39
Change proportion farmland 97-02        -0.14              0.47     -0.10        0.33
Proportion land in Farming               0.31           0.23         0.11        0.57
Political variables
Proportion Vote Bush 2000                0.50              0.11      0.43        0.10
Geon-Turnbull Index                      2.84              1.04      1.53        1.27
Finance variables
Per-capita interest payments            44.84          55.45         N/A         N/A
Per-capita taxes                       455.63        426.82          N/A         N/A
Tax info unavailable (0/1)               0.05               --       N/A         N/A
Int. info unavailable (0/1)              0.02               --       N/A         N/A




                                                                                        31
Table 4. Regression Results of Log-Odds of Voter Approval of Referenda
                                                         County Models                                  Municipality Models
                                         Model 1A     Model 2A    Model 3A     Model 4A     Model 1B        Model 2B        Model 3B
Bond                                     0.27627***    0.09162     -0.19587       0.06957   0.42148***      0.61281***    0.70701***
                                           (0.085)     (0.700)      (0.816)       (0.813)     (0.046)         (0.223)       (0.271)
Bond x Proportion Renting Home                        -0.25399     -1.77773      -1.49168                    0.24271       0.72552*
                                                       (0.973)      (1.236)       (1.354)                     (0.281)       (0.404)
Bond x Income                                                     -0.02061**   -0.02361**                                   0.00565
                                                                    (0.009)       (0.011)                                   (0.004)
Bond x Proportion above 65                                         -0.57256      -1.62737                                  -0.34021
                                                                    (1.474)       (1.615)                                   (0.660)
Bond x Proportion with Bachelor Degree                             0.97679       0.79118                                   -0.12748
                                                                    (0.902)       (0.878)                                   (0.372)
Bond x Prior Tax Referendum                                                       0.14276
                                                                                  (0.181)
Bond x Per Capita Interest Payments                                            0.004215**
                                                                                 (0.0017)
Bond X Per Capita Taxes                                                        -0.00061**
                                                                                  (0.000)
Bond X Geon-Turnbull Index                                                       0.11261
                                                                                  (0.070)
Sales Tax                                -0.12616     -0.52693    -0.39329       0.18166    0.24690**        0.19677        0.18015
                                          (0.115)      (0.865)     (0.870)        (0.844)    (0.110)          (0.457)        (0.458)
Sales Tax x Proportion Renting Home                   -0.56501    -0.38155        0.39386                    -0.12944      -0.18113
                                                       (1.233)     (1.234)        (1.198)                     (0.682)        (0.677)
Proportion Renting Home                  -2.19648**   -1.92909    -1.25582       -1.65980    -0.37867       -0.48143*     -0.60643**
                                           (1.108)     (1.254)     (1.307)        (1.332)     (0.257)         (0.278)        (0.297)
Median House Value ($1000s)               -0.00081    -0.00081    -0.00142      -0.00247*    -0.00012        -0.00010      -0.00011
                                           (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)
Median Household Income ($1000s)          -0.00591    -0.00673     0.00591        0.01327    -0.00218        -0.00241      -0.00372
                                           (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.013)        (0.013)     (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)
Proportion in Poverty                     -0.31380    -0.28110    -0.27536      -0.75141*   -38.45588       -47.90711     -39.49300
                                           (0.325)     (0.330)     (0.327)        (0.424)    (64.488)        (68.562)       (68.273)
Proportion No High School Degree           0.18513     0.11317     0.18110        0.29417    -0.03698        -0.08744      -0.03564
                                           (1.294)     (1.347)     (1.323)        (1.372)     (0.778)         (0.778)        (0.789)
Proportion Bachelor Degree               1.67036**    1.68497**    1.28109       1.51247*   0.82303**       0.80831**      0.85026**
                                           (0.762)     (0.780)     (0.901)        (0.887)     (0.320)         (0.321)        (0.333)
                                                                                                                             Cont'd




                                                                                                                                   32
Table 4 Cont'd
Proportion White                          -0.52903     -0.55970      -0.52996      -0.42371    -0.80245***   -0.80663***   -0.80537***
                                           (0.407)      (0.420)       (0.435)       (0.444)        (0.254)       (0.254)       (0.253)
Proportion Age > 65                       -2.02424     -1.97846      -1.64179      -0.81554        0.08359       0.07919       0.20181
                                           (1.661)      (1.641)       (1.774)       (1.766)        (0.478)       (0.479)       (0.539)
Proportion Age < 18                      -4.89390**   -4.69392**    -4.67607**    -4.91692**     -1.34874*     -1.33166*     -1.25153*
                                           (2.182)      (2.199)       (2.261)       (2.231)        (0.735)       (0.732)       (0.738)
Proportion Living in Urbanized Area      0.58750**     0.58491**     0.53359**     0.60726**      -0.01892      -0.01602      -0.02277
                                           (0.240)      (0.239)       (0.245)       (0.264)        (0.065)       (0.066)       (0.066)
Land Area (sq mi)                         0.00004**    0.00004**     0.00004**      0.00003       0.00020        0.00019       0.00014
                                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Pop Density                                0.00006      0.00006       0.00009       0.00005     -0.00003**    -0.00003**    -0.00003**
                                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Value of Farmland ($1000s)                 0.00382      0.00371       0.00289       0.00063       0.00076        0.00089       0.00062
                                           (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
∆ Proportion farmland                    0.17004**    0.17098**     0.19103***    0.18950***       0.02467       0.02962       0.01240
                                           (0.071)      (0.071)       (0.071)       (0.068)        (0.062)       (0.063)       (0.064)
Proportion area farmland                   0.10373      0.09730       0.10103       0.17046       -0.01737      -0.01739      -0.01913
                                           (0.200)      (0.202)       (0.206)       (0.209)        (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.020)
Proportion Voting Bush in 2000             0.20050      0.21459       0.15140       0.01083     0.47067**     0.48148**     0.49490**
                                           (0.423)      (0.421)       (0.430)       (0.479)        (0.231)       (0.230)       (0.232)
Geon-Turnbull Index of Home Rule          0.05989*     0.06003*      0.06389*       0.02386       -0.00990      -0.00949      -0.00401
                                           (0.035)      (0.036)       (0.036)       (0.060)        (0.022)       (0.022)       (0.023)
Prior Referendum                           0.00610      0.00771       0.03329       0.00030       0.06891*      0.06885*     0.07331**
                                           (0.059)      (0.059)       (0.061)       (0.064)        (0.036)       (0.036)       (0.036)
Prior tax referendum                      0.22022**    0.21693**      0.16638       0.16888        0.09017       0.09092       0.08927
                                           (0.099)      (0.100)       (0.102)       (0.107)        (0.071)       (0.071)       (0.071)
Per capita Interest Payments                                                       -0.00108
                                                                                    (0.001)
Per capita Tax Payments                                                            0.00054**
                                                                                    (0.000)
Dummy for per capita interest missing                                               0.02371
                                                                                    (0.208)
Dummy for per capita taxes missing                                                 0.74333*
                                                                                    (0.383)
N                                           242          242           242            242         1,000        1,000         1,000
R2                                          0.41         0.41          0.43           0.48         0.25         0.25          0.25
Standard Errors in parentheses. ***Significant at 1% Level; ** 5% level, *10% level.
Quadratic function of latitude and longitude and year-specific dummy variables included, but omitted from table.


                                                                                                                                     33
Table 5. Hypothesis Tests
Hypothesis                  Parameter            Model 1A Model 2A             Model 3A   Model 4A     Model 1B     Model 2B      Model 3B
Panel A. Preference for bonds
Are bonds preferred to      Coefficient          0.276***      0.271***        0.242***   0.2216**     0.421***     0.426***      0.430***
property taxes?             SE                   0.085         0.084           0.086      0.089        0.046        0.046         0.046
     ഥ
βB+ࡰ'ηB+ࡲ'θB ഥ              pct points at mean   6.69          6.57            5.86       5.36         9.77         9.89          9.97
Are bonds preferred to      Coefficient          0.402***      0.399***        0.366***   0.318***     0.175*       0.130         0.110
sales taxes?                SE                   0.090         0.090           0.092      0.096        0.104        0.140         0.141
βB – βST + ࡰ  ഥ '(ηB-ηST) + pct points at mean   9.82          9.75            8.93       7.75         3.91         2.89          2.45
ഥ
ࡲ'θB
Panel B. Are communities with more renters more likely to support referenda?
—in general                 Coefficient          -2.196**                                              -0.379†
δpctrent                    SE                   1.108             N/A            N/A        N/A       0.257            N/A          N/A
                            pct points at mean   -5.35                                                 -0.92
—with sales taxes           Coefficient                        -2.494*         -1.637     -1.266       N/A          -0.611        -0.788
δpctrent+ηpctrent           SE                       N/A       1.387           1.455      1.404                     0.720         0.738
                            pct points at mean                 -6.06           -3.995     -3.09                     -1.48         -1.91
—with bonds                 Coefficient                        -2.183*         -3.034**   -3.151**     N/A          -0.239        0.119
δpctrent+ηpctrent           SE                       N/A       1.142           1.216      1.260                     0.310         0.363
                            pct points at mean                 -5.32           -7.306     -7.55                     -0.58         0.29
—with property taxes        Coefficient                        -1.929†         -1.256     -1.660       N/A          -0.481*       -0.606**
δpctrent                    SE                       N/A       1.254           1.307      1.332                     0.278         0.297
                            pct points at mean                 -4.71           -3.074     -4.04                     -1.17         -1.47
—Effect for sales taxes     Coefficient                        -0.311          1.396      1.886        N/A          -0.372        -0.907
minus effect for bonds      SE                       N/A       0.972           1.257      1.441                     0.667         0.759
                            pct points at mean                 -0.74           3.31       4.46                      -0.90         -2.20
—Effect for sales taxes     Coefficient                        -0.565          -0.382     0.394        N/A          -0.129        -0.181
minus effect for property SE                         N/A       1.233           1.234      1.198                     0.682         0.677
taxes                       pct points at mean                 -1.35           -0.92      0.95                      -0.31         -0.44
Each cell shows first, the coefficient from the hypothesis test, second the robust standard error of the test, and third the predicted effect
on the support for the referenda, in percentage points, from switching the finance mechanism (Panel A) or from increasing the share of
renters by 10 percentage points (Panel B).
***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%; †Significant at 15%.




                                                                                                                                           34
