                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       CASH FOR COOLERS

                                           Lucas W. Davis
                                             Alan Fuchs
                                            Paul J. Gertler

                                        Working Paper 18044
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18044


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2012




We are thankful to Judson Boomhower for excellent research assistance and to Catie Hausman, Paul
Joskow, Catherine Wolfram and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, the California Energy Commission,
and the 2012 POWER Conference for comments that substantially improved the paper. This research
was supported in part under a research contract from the California Energy Commission to the Energy
Institute at Haas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) or the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). These data were provided to the University of California Energy Institute (UCEI)
pursuant to the terms and restrictions of a Non-Disclosure Agreement signed May 3, 2011 with Mexican
Federal Electricity Commission (CFE). As part of the agreement UCEI has agreed to share their results
with CFE and to carefully consider any comments received. Of course to ensure objectivity, UCEI
retains the exclusive right to determine how these comments are incorporated into their findings. Neither
UCEI nor the authors have received any financial compensation from the CFE.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Lucas W. Davis, Alan Fuchs, and Paul J. Gertler. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Cash for Coolers
Lucas W. Davis, Alan Fuchs, and Paul J. Gertler
NBER Working Paper No. 18044
May 2012
JEL No. D12,H23,Q40,Q54

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper examines a large-scale appliance replacement program in Mexico that since 2009 has helped
1.5 million households replace their old refrigerators and air-conditioners with energy-efficient models.
Using household-level electric billing records from the population of Mexican residential customers
we find that refrigerator replacement reduces electricity consumption by an average of 11 kilowatt
hours per month, about a 7% decrease. We find that air conditioning replacement, in contrast, increases
electricity consumption by an average of 6 kilowatt hours per month, with larger increases during
the summer. To put these results in context we present a simple conceptual framework in which energy-efficient
durable goods cost less to operate, so households use them more. This behavioral response, sometimes
called the “rebound” effect, is important for air-conditioners, but not important for refrigerators.


Lucas W. Davis                                        Paul J. Gertler
Haas School of Business                               Haas School of Business
University of California                              545 Student Services Building
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                               University of California, Berkeley
and NBER                                              Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu                              gertler@haas.berkeley.edu

Alan Fuchs
United Nations Development Programme
304 East 45th Street, FF-1272
New York, New York 10017
alan.fuchs@undp.org
1.         Introduction

         Supporters of energy-efficiency policies argue that they represent a “win-win”,
helping participants reduce energy expenditures while also reducing carbon dioxide
emissions and other negative externalities associated with energy use.1 Skeptics of
energy-efficiency policies question the magnitude of the potential reductions in
consumption and argue that there are important economic costs to energy-efficiency
programs that tend to be overlooked.2 These claims are difficult to evaluate, however,
because there is a surprisingly small amount of direct empirical evidence.

         The lack of large-scale analyses of energy-efficiency programs is surprising given
the immense policy importance of these questions. Electric utilities in the United States,
for example, spent $22 billion dollars on energy-efficiency programs between 1994 and
2010, leading to a reported total savings of more than 1 million gigawatt hours of
electricity.3 Every major piece of U.S. federal energy legislation since the Energy Policy
and Conservation Act of 1975 has included a substantial energy-efficiency component.
Most recently, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 provides $17
billion for energy-efficiency programs.4

         Moreover, many low and middle-income countries are now adopting energy-
efficiency policies. In part, this reflects a widely-held view that there is an abundant
supply of low-cost, high-return investments in energy-efficiency, particularly in
developing countries (Johnson, et. al, 2009; McKinsey and Company, 2009b). Over the
next several decades most of the growth in global energy demand is expected to come
from the developing world. Between 2010 and 2035, energy consumption in non-OECD
countries is expected to increase 85%, compared to only 18% in OECD countries.5
Meeting this increased demand for energy will be a substantial challenge, so
understanding the potential role of energy-efficiency is extremely important.

1 McKinsey and Company (2009a), for example, argues that energy-efficiency investments are a “vast, low-

cost energy resource” that could reduce energy expenditures by billions of dollars per year.
2   For a recent survey see Alcott and Greenstone (2012).
3   U.S. DOE (1994-2011). Expenditures reported in year 2010 dollars.
4 See http://www1.eere.energy.gov/recovery/ for a breakdown of energy-efficiency related projects
funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
5 U.S. DOE (2011a), Table 1. Wolfram, Shelef, and Gertler (2012) argue that energy consumption in non-

OECD countries may increase even faster.

                                                        1
         In this paper we examine a large-scale national appliance replacement program in
Mexico. Since 2009, “Cash for Coolers” (hereafter, “C4C”) has helped 1.5 million
households replace their old refrigerators and air conditioners. To participate in the
program a household’s old appliance must be at least 10 years old and the household
must agree to purchase an energy-efficient appliance of the same type. These old
appliances are permanently destroyed, making the program similar to “Cash for
Clunkers” and other vehicle retirement programs.

         The objective of this paper is to quantify the overall impact of C4C on electricity
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. To guide the empirical analysis we use a
conceptual framework that emphasizes that energy demand is derived from demand for
household services produced using durable goods. More energy-efficient durable goods
have lower energy costs of producing those services and hence households will tend to
use them more. The more price elastic the demand for service, the smaller the energy
savings. Hence, the cost-effectiveness of durable good replacement programs like C4C
depends not only on the number of households that are induced to replace, but also on
the price elasticity of the demand for the underlying services.

         We find that refrigerator replacement reduces electricity consumption by an
average of 11 kilowatt hours per month, about a 7% decrease. This is considerably less
than what was predicted ex ante by the World Bank and McKinsey based on engineering
models that ignore behavioral responses.6 The World Bank study, for example, predicted
savings for refrigerators that were about four times larger than our estimates. While
electricity savings from refrigerator replacement is smaller than was predicted, we find
that air-conditioning replacement actually increases electricity consumption. The
magnitude varies substantially across months, with near zero changes during the winter
and 20+ kilowatt hour increases per month in the summer.

         We discuss and present ancillary empirical evidence supporting several possible
explanations. One important explanation for the differences between our results and the
ex ante estimates is changes in appliance utilization. This is important for air-
conditioners, but not important for refrigerators. In addition, we discuss how increases


6   See Johnson, et. al (2009) and McKinsey and Company (2009b).

                                                     2
in appliance size and appliance features (e.g. through-the-door ice) worked to
substantially offset the potential reductions in electricity consumption. Finally, we argue
that many of the old appliances were probably not working or not working well at the
point of replacement.

         This paper helps address an urgent need for credible empirical work in this area.
Allcott and Greenstone (2012) argues that, “much of the evidence on the energy cost
savings from energy-efficiency comes from engineering analyses or observational
studies that can suffer from a set of well-known biases.”7 In fact, the primary source of
data on energy-efficiency programs in the United States comes from self-reported
measures of energy savings from utilities. Economists have long argued that these
measures of energy savings are overstated (Joskow and Marron, 1992), yet reporting
practices have changed little over time.

         A key feature of our analysis is the use of high-quality microdata. For this analysis
we were granted access to the census of household-level electric billing records for the
population of residential electricity customers in Mexico. There is some precedent for
econometric analysis of electric billing data, but this has mostly been in the context of
measuring the responsiveness of demand to changes in prices or weather.8 Moreover,
most previous analyses have been of a much smaller scale, for example, using data from
a single electric utility. The sheer number of households in our analysis allow us to
estimate effects precisely even with highly non-parametric specifications.

         The fact that our analysis is based on a large-scale national program gives our
results an unusually high degree of external validity. Program evaluation, particularly
with energy-efficiency policies, is typically based on small-scale interventions
implemented, for example, in one particular location or by one particular utility. In these
settings a key question is how well do parameter estimates generalize across sites.
Moreover, utilities that choose to participate in these programs tend to be considerably



7 Allcott and Greenstone (2012) go on to say, “We believe that there is great potential for a new body of

credible empirical work in this area, both because the questions are so important and because there are
significant unexploited opportunities for randomized control trials and quasi-experimental designs that
have advanced knowledge in other domains.”
8   See, for example, Engle, Granger, Rice, and Weiss (1986), Reiss and White (2008), and Ito (2011).

                                                         3
different from the population of utilities, raising important issues of selection bias.9 With
C4C, we have a program that was available in all Mexican states so our results are
nationally-representative.

       Our study is among the first to examine energy-efficiency policy in a developing
country.10 To understand energy demand in developing countries it is critical to focus on
refrigerators and other appliances. Table 1 shows that in a large group of developing
countries, almost 1/3rd of households have refrigerators while only 5% have vehicles. As
incomes increase and families emerge from poverty, they first acquire refrigerators and
other household appliances, and it is not until income reaches substantially higher levels
that households acquire vehicles (Wolfram, Shelef, and Gertler, 2012). In the near future,
we can expect very large number of households to purchase household electric
appliances.

       The format of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes a conceptual framework
that helps motivate the empirical analyses which follow. Section 3 provides background
information about the electricity market in Mexico and the C4C program. Sections 4 and
5 describe the data and empirical strategy and present the main results. Section 6
evaluates cost-effectiveness, calculating the implied cost of the program per unit of
energy savings. Section 7 concludes.



2.       A Conceptual Framework

2.1      Program Design

      Before turning to C4C it is valuable to briefly lay out a general framework for
evaluating appliance replacement programs. When policymakers think about these

9 Recent work by Allcott and Mullainathan (2011) provides evidence on the limitations of external validity.
Examining 14 nearly-identical energy conservation field experiments in different cities across the United
States, they show that estimated effects vary by 240 percent, an amount which is both statistically and
economically significant. Moreover, they find strong evidence of selection bias, that electric utilities that
choose to participate in these experiments are considerably different from the population of utilities.
10 The small existing literature on energy-efficiency is focused mostly on the United States. See, for example,

Dubin, Miedema, and Chandran (1986), Metcalf and Hasset (1999) and Davis (2008). There is also a related
literature which uses utility-level data to evaluate energy-efficiency programs, again mostly in the United
States (Joskow and Marron, 1992; Loughran and Kulick, 2004; Auffhammer, Blumstein, and Fowlie, 2008;
and Arimura, Li, Newell, and Palmer, 2011). Much of what is known about energy-efficiency in developing
countries comes from studies based on highly-aggregated data (see, e.g., Zhou, Levine, and Price, 2010).

                                                      4
programs, they typically have in mind a tradeoff between program costs and energy
savings and/or environment benefits. Let            denote the subsidy amount per household,
      denote the number of participating households, ∆         denote the savings in energy
consumption per replacement, and let          denote external costs per unit of consumption.
Thus the net benefits from an appliance replacement program can be expressed as:

                                          ∆               .

        Program effectiveness depends on two key behavioral parameters: (i) program
participation, and (ii) energy savings per replacement. This first parameter is the
number of households the subsidy induces to replace their appliances who otherwise
would not have. While we can observe the number of replacements for a given subsidy,
it is difficult to empirically separate households who were truly induced to replace their
appliances by the program from inframarginal households who would have replaced
anyway. Joskow and Marron (1991) call these households “free riders”. Typically even
more difficult to measure is this second parameter (∆ . Accordingly, this is where we
focus most of our attention in the empirical analysis.

        The characterization of the government’s objective function above illustrates an
important tradeoff in program design. Higher subsidies attract more participants,
        ⁄       0, but only increase net benefits if      ∆     . That is, if the value of the
avoided external costs per household exceeds the value of the subsidy. This puts a limit
on how large of a subsidy should be used. A program that attracts a large amount of
participation is of little use if the avoided external costs do not exceed the value of the
subsidy. And, even a program that performs well per participant will be of limited value
if it cannot be scaled up to a large number of participants.



2.2         How Appliance Replacement Programs Affect Household Energy Use

        To evaluate the change in energy consumption per replacement (∆          we turn to a
household production model following Hausman (1979), Dubin and McFadden (1984),
and Baker, Blundell and Micklewright (1989). In these models, demand for energy is
derived from demand for household services that are produced in the home according
to a household production technology. Durable goods play a central role, determining

                                                5
the parameters of the household production technology and thus the price of different
household services.

       Households are assumed to choose the durable good portfolio that yields the
highest level of utility,

                                     ∈ ,…,
                                                θ       ,…,       θ   ,

where     is a conditional indirect utility function and θ is a vector of characteristics for
durable good portfolio . Portfolios differ in terms of characteristics θ and rental prices
 . Appliance replacement programs like C4C affects portfolio choices by changing the
rental price   of particular durable good portfolios.

        The decision of which portfolio to purchase is made taking into account that
whatever portfolio is purchased; it will be operated at the optimal level of utilization,

                                      θ         ,             ,

                                                        |θ



As in the original household production problem described by Becker (1965), this
formalizes the relationship between market inputs and services produced within the
home. Household utility is defined over household services                and a composite good
with a price normalized to one. The production function for               is denoted   and depends
on inputs . While in general there could be an entire vector of inputs, in the simplest
case there is a single input, energy. The parameters of the household production
technology depend on θ , the characteristics of the household’s durable goods. These
characteristics could include, for example, the energy-efficiency of the household’s
refrigerator. Households evaluate expenditure on inputs based on the utility derived
from     and the disutility of foregone consumption of composite good                  . The budget
constraint depends on a vector of input prices , household income y, and on , the per-
period rental cost net of any available subsidy.11


11 These models typically assume that there are no borrowing constraints so households can spread the

capital costs of durable good investments over many years. Gertler, Shelef, Wolfram, and Fuchs (2011)
consider analytically and empirically how borrowing constraints can affect residential energy demand.

                                                    6
       If the production technology exhibits constant returns and there is no joint
production, then the marginal cost of producing household services                        does not depend
on the level of production.12 This is a significant analytical improvement because the
household’s problem may be treated as a classic demand problem,

                                           θ                 ,       ,

                                               |θ

where        |θ    is the marginal cost of producing                 . In this reformulation of the problem
marginal cost plays the traditional role of a price and the problem can be solved as usual
by equating the marginal rate of substitution with the price ratio. Under these
conditions, the solution to the household’s conditional utility-maximization problem is
described by demand functions for household services ( ) and the composite good (                              ,
as well as a conditional demand function for energy,

                                                         ,           θ .

Conditional on the characteristics of the household production technology (θ                               this
function describes how demand for energy demands on input prices and net income.



2.3      The Rebound Effect

       The decrease in energy consumption in response to the adoption of an energy-
efficient durable good can now be expressed,

                        ∆            ,              |θ                   ,      |θ

where θ         and θ          denote the characteristics of old and new durable goods,
respectively. Ignoring income effects which are likely to be small, there are two primary


Another important complication that comes up in our context is nonlinear input prices. As we explain later,
electricity is sold using increasing block rates. This nonlinearity tends to amplify the behavioral responses to
energy-efficiency policy by moving households to lower marginal rates.
12 In the presence of nonconstant returns to scale, marginal cost depends on the level of production and the

feasible set is no longer a straight line. As a result, even if preferences are strictly convex, there may be
multiple solutions and the demand function need not be continuous in price (Pollak and Wachter, 1975).
Joint production occurs when the cost of producing a particular household service depends on the level of
production of another service. With residential energy cost dependencies could arise in several ways. For
example, the amount of electricity used by a refrigerator depends on ambient temperature, and thus the
level of production of air-conditioning. In the empirical analyses we can test for this directly.

                                                                 7
mechanisms by which a change in energy-efficiency affects energy consumption. First,
an increase in energy-efficiency decreases the amount of energy used per unit of
household services. For a fixed level of demand for household services an increase in
energy-efficiency results in a proportional decrease in energy consumption. Second, an
increase in energy-efficiency decreases the price of household services produced with
that durable good. Energy-efficient durable goods cost less to operate so households
may use them more. This second mechanism is indirect but not necessarily smaller in
magnitude than the first mechanism. Which effect is larger depends on the price
elasticity of demand for the underlying household service,                   .

         Sometimes called the “rebound” effect, this idea that improvements in energy-
efficiency may lead to increased utilization goes back at least 150 years.13 Most of what
has been written on the topic, however, has been based on introspection rather than
empirical evidence. Some have argued that this behavioral response is so large that
high-efficiency durable goods increase energy consumption, implicitly claiming that the
price elasticity of utilization exceeds one.14 Others have argued that utilization
elasticities are considerably smaller.15 Our view is that the magnitude depends crucially
on the particular end-use in question, depending on several different factors.

         First, a key determinant of the price elasticity of utilization is the availability of
substitutes. Demand for services with few substitutes is likely to be inelastic.
Refrigeration is a good example. A household can switch entirely to non-perishable food
but this requires a drastic change in diet and likely an increase in total food
expenditures. For other household services there are more available substitutes. Take
air-conditioning, for example. In the production of “thermal comfort” there are many
possible substitutes. A household can use an electric fan, use more or differently natural


13 This idea is usually attributed to Jevons (1865) who argued that advances in the energy-efficiency of steam

engines contributed to a 10-fold increase in British coal consumption between 1830 and 1863. Economists
have long argued that the price elasticity of utilization is important to take into account when evaluating the
cost-effectiveness of energy-efficiency standards. See, for example, Khazzoom (1980), Hartman (1981), and
Hausman and Joskow (1982).
14   See, for example, Inhaber (1997), Strassel (2001), and Owen (2010).
15See, for example, Schipper and Grubb (2000). Davis (2008) finds a price elasticity near zero for clothes
washing using quasi-experimental data from a field trial, and argues that there are a large and growing
number of residential services that are time-intensive and thus likely to be relatively inelastic with respect to
energy costs.

                                                         8
ventilation, shut curtains during the day, spend more time outdoors or at work, or wear
different clothing.

      Second, for some household services there simply is not much of an intensive
margin. Again consider refrigeration and air-conditioning as examples. Most
households leave their refrigerators plugged in 24 hours a day so there is little scope in
the short-run to adjust utilization in response to a change in energy-efficiency. In
contrast a household can easily adjust the level of utilization of air-conditioning.
Households can adjust the settings on an air-conditioning unit, or turn it on and off,
trading off the cost of operation versus thermal comfort.

      Third, the price elasticity depends on the overall level of utilization. Consider air-
conditioning as an example. Above a certain income level, a household is going to
choose to maintain the ideal level of thermal comfort at all hours of the day regardless of
energy costs and the price elasticity of utilization for these households is very low. At
lower income levels, however, households choose to operate their air-conditioners only
on particularly hot days, or during particular hours of the day. Improvements in energy-
efficiency will lead these households to increase their utilization, potentially by a
substantial amount.



3      C4C

3.1    Context and Program Rationale

      The Mexican Federal Electricity Commission (Comisión Federal de Electricidad, or
“CFE”) is the exclusive supplier of electricity within Mexico. CFE is responsible for
almost all of the electricity generation in Mexico, as well as all electricity transmission
and distribution. Over 98% of Mexican households have electricity. Electricity service is
highly reliable, with total service interruptions per household averaging just over one
hour per year (CFE 2011, Table 5.14).

      Residential customers are billed every two months. If a customer fails to pay their
bill eventually electricity service to the home is terminated until the complete balance
has been paid. The standard residential tariff in Mexico is an increasing block rate with


                                             9
no monthly fixed fee and three tiers (basic, intermediate, and high). The rates for the
second and third tiers are approximately two and four times the rate in the first tier. The
rates for the different tiers vary over time but are the same nationally for all
households.16 In addition, for households with consistently high levels of electricity
consumption there is an alternative schedule which replaces the increasing block rates
with a flat charge per kilowatt hour similar to the third tier rate.17

       Residential electricity consumption is subsidized by the Mexican Federal
government. Prices on the first tier tend to be very low by international standards. As of
August 2011, customers on the first-tier (tariff 1), paid 0.73 Pesos (5.7 U.S. cents) per
kilowatt hour. The second and third tiers are considerably more expensive, 1.21 Pesos
(9.6 cents) and 2.56 Pesos (20.2 cents) per kilowatt hour, respectively. As a point of
comparison, the average price paid by residential customers in the United States is 11.5
cents.18 The Mexican Energy Ministry estimates that residential customers face a price
that is, on average, about half the average cost of providing power.19

       Electricity consumption per capita is low but increasing rapidly. Average per
capita electricity consumption for Mexico is 1,900 kilowatt hours annually, compared to



16 Consumption thresholds for these different blocks vary across households based on the average summer

temperature where the household lives and the month of the year. There are seven different residential
tariffs (1, 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, 1E, and 1F). Each has different baselines for the three tiers based on average
summer temperature. Customers subject to tariff 1 (mean summer temperature below 25 degrees
Centigrade) face the same thresholds all year. All other households (1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, 1E, and 1F) have higher
baselines during the six hottest months of the year. Moreover, which six months receive this higher baseline
varies across geographic area. Geographic areas with higher temperatures have higher baselines.
17The alternative schedule (Tarifa Doméstica de Alto Consumo) is designed to eliminate the government
subsidy entirely for these households with a fixed rate approximately equal to the third-tier rate.
Households are automatically switched into this alternative rate schedule if their average monthly
consumption over the previous twelve months exceeds a threshold. This threshold varies across regions
within Mexico. For example, in 2011 the minimum threshold for the alternative schedule was 250 kilowatt
hour per month for region 1, and 2,500 kilowatt hour per month in region 1F. This change to the alternative
schedule is not permanent and if a household’s average consumption over the previous 12 months drops
again below the threshold the household is automatically switched back to the regular schedule.
18U.S. DOE (2011b), Table 7.4 “Average Retail Price of Electricity to Ultimate Customers by End-Use
Sector”. This is for 2009, the most recent year for which data is available.
19SENER (2008), Tables 50 and 51, report that for 2007 the average residential price was 0.998, compared to
an average supply cost of 2.189 (both in pesos per kilowatt hour). Using the average exchange rate during
2007 from Banco de Mexico (10.93 pesos per dollar), and the Consumer Price Index from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics this is 9.6 cents and 21.1 cents, respectively, in year 2010 dollars. Part of this reflects line
losses, particularly on the low voltage distribution lines used to deliver electricity. In personal
correspondence CFE has explained that these losses average approximately 23%, so to provide 100 kilowatt
hours CFE must generate about 130.

                                                       10
13,600 for the United States.20 Over the next several decades, electricity generation in
Mexico is forecast to increase 3.2% per year, almost quadruple the rate forecast for the
United States.21 This is pretty typical for developing countries. Electricity demand in
non-OECD countries is forecast to increase by 3.3% annually over the same period,
compared to 1.2% annually for OECD countries.

         Growth in residential appliances is one of the major drivers of this increase in
demand. Figure 1 plots ownership rates for televisions, refrigerators, and vehicles by
income level in Mexico. As incomes increase households first acquire televisions, then
refrigerators and other appliances, and it is not until income reaches substantially higher
levels that households acquire vehicles. Again, this is typical of developing countries
and policymakers worldwide are making appliance energy-efficiency a major point of
emphasis (Gertler, Shelef, Wolfram and Fuchs, 2011). For example, development of
energy-efficient appliances is one of the major initiatives of the Clean Energy Ministerial, a
partnership of 20+ major economies, aimed at promoting clean energy.22

         Meeting this increased energy demand will require an immense investment in
generation and transmission infrastructure. The Mexican Energy Ministry has calculated
that $100 billion dollars will need to be invested in new generation and transmission
infrastructure between 2010 and 2025.23 The C4C program is viewed by policymakers as
one of the ways to potentially reduce these looming capital expenditures. Part of the
broader goal of our analysis is to consider whether energy-efficiency programs like C4C
could serve as a substitute for these capital-intensive investments.

         Much of the promise of C4C is based on ex ante engineering analyses that estimate
that replacements should lead to substantial decreases in electricity consumption. In
independent studies of available energy-related investments in Mexico both the World
Bank and McKinsey concluded that replacing residential refrigerators and air-


20Electricity consumption per capita comes from World Bank, World Development Indicators for 2008.
Mexican per capita consumption is similar to Brazil (2,200) and somewhat lower than Argentina (2,800).
These measures are total electricity consumption divided by population and thus include residential,
commercial, and industrial electricity consumption.
21   U.S. DOE (2011a), p. 91.
22See http://www.cleanenergyministerial.org/ and http://superefficient.org/ for details.
23 See SENER “Prospectiva del Sector Eléctrico: 2010-2025”, published 2010, p.22. Dollar amounts are
reported in U.S. 2010 dollars using the average exchange rate for that year (12.645 pesos per dollar).

                                                 11
conditioners would be extremely cost-effective.24 In fact, both reports found a negative
net cost for these investments. That is, these were found to be investments that would
pay for themselves even without accounting for carbon dioxide emissions or other
externalities. At the heart of these predictions are optimistic predictions about the
amount of electricity saved per replacement. The World Bank report, for example,
considers an intervention essentially identical to C4C, in which refrigerators 10 years or
older are replaced with refrigerators meeting current standards. The World Bank
predicted that these refrigerator replacements would save 482 kilowatt hours per year,
with larger savings for very old refrigerators. We will revisit these predictions below,
contrasting them with the results from our empirical analysis.



3.2      Program Details

       Launched in March 2009, the objective of the C4C program is to reduce electricity
consumption and thereby reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Unlike Cash for Clunkers, the
program has never been viewed as an economic stimulus program.25 The program is
administered by the Mexican Energy Ministry (Secretaría de Energía, or “SENER”) which
oversees the broader energy sector in Mexico and carries out medium and long-term
market analyses.26

       This is nationwide program. Subsidies are available for both refrigerators and air
conditioners, but 90%+ of the replacements to date have been refrigerators. To

24 See Johnson, et. al (2009), Figure 2 and McKinsey and Company (2009b), Exhibit 4. This McKinsey report
is focused on Mexico, but is otherwise similar to McKinsey and Company (2009a) that is focused on the
United States. These reports are the latest in a long series of engineering studies going back at least to Meier,
Wright, and Rosenfeld (1983) that conclude that there is a large amount of energy that can be conserved at
negative net cost. That is, that there are energy-efficiency investments that would pay for themselves, even
before incorporating potential external benefits.
25 Dozens of similar programs have been recently implemented in the United States, albeit at a much smaller

scale. Most U.S. programs emphasize rebates for new energy-efficient appliances with no requirement that
the old appliance be permanently destroyed. U.S. Department of Energy Secretary Steven Chu has made
residential appliances one of the major areas of emphasis, “Appliances consume a huge amount of our
electricity, so there’s enormous potential to both save energy and save families money every month.” This
statement was part of a press release on July 14, 2009 announcing $300 million in funding explicitly targeted
for residential appliances. This funding was awarded to states and primarily took the form of rebate
programs.
26 The official name of the program is Programa de Sustitución de Equipos Electrodomésticos para el Ahorro de

Energía. Mexican President Felipe Calderon speaks frequently about the program and in April 2011 attended
a ceremonial awarding of the 1,000,000th refrigerator. See El Economista, “Calderón Entrega Refrigerador Un
Millón”, April 11, 2011.

                                                       12
participate in the program a household must have a refrigerator or air conditioner that is
at least 10 years old and agree to purchase a new appliance of the same type. The old
appliances are supposed to be working at the time of replacement. This is enforced by
the participating retailer who takes away the old appliance at the same time the new
appliance is delivered. Households are eligible to replace only one appliance of each
type. And, the new appliances must meet certain size requirements.27 Participants must
purchase new appliances that exceed Mexican energy-efficiency standards by at least
5%. Mexican energy-efficiency standards for refrigerators and air-conditioners are
identical to U.S. standards. For refrigerators, the relevant standard was established in
2002.28 For air-conditioners the relevant standard was established in 2008.29

       The program provides both direct cash payments and subsidized financing. The
direct cash payments come in two different amounts, approximately corresponding to
$140 and $80 dollars (see Appendix Table 1). To qualify for the more generous subsidy a
household needs to have a fairly low level of mean electricity consumption. Households
with medium levels of electricity consumption were eligible for the smaller subsidy, and
households with high levels of electricity consumption were eligible for subsidized


27Refrigerators must be between 9 and 13 cubic feet, and can have a maximum size no more than 2 cubic
feet larger than the refrigerator which is replaced. Air conditioners are subject to similar requirements, both
for the size of the new units and for the maximum size difference between the new and old units. In
addition to these eligibility requirements there are several others. The individual requesting the subsidy
must have their name on the electricity bill, have a public registered ID number (CURP), be 18 years old or
older, be in good standing with the electricity company (i.e. no balance), and not be an employee of the
electricity company or other affiliated governmental body. For air-conditioners participants additionally
must reside in relatively hot parts of the country, corresponding to electricity tariffs 1C, 1D, 1E, or 1F.
28 Mexico’s first refrigerator standards were implemented in 1994 (NOM-072-SCFI-1994) with minimum

efficiency requirements identical to U.S. standards for most refrigerator classes. These standards, including
the exact testing methodology and size classifications were based closely on U.S. standards first introduced
in 1990 (42 U.S.C. 6295) and updated in 1993 (54 FR 47916). Mexican refrigerator standards were updated in
1997 (NOM-015-ENER-1997) after which minimum efficiency standards were essentially identical in both
countries for all refrigerator classes. The Mexican 2002 standard (NOM-015-ENER-2002) is identical to
updated U.S. standards implemented in 2001 (62 FR 32102). New U.S. standards for refrigerators will take
effect in 2014 (76 FR 179).
29 Mexico’s energy-efficiency standards for air-conditioners were first implemented in 1995 (NOM-073-SCFI-
1994) then updated in 2001 (NOM-021-ENER/SCFI/ECOL-2000). These standards are identical to U.S.
standards implemented in 1990 and 2000 (10 CFR 430). The 2008 Mexican standard (NOM-021-ENER-2008)
is identical to the 2001 standard except for updated testing procedures and other minor refinements. More
stringent standards for room air-conditioners became effective in the United States in August 2011. The air-
conditioners replaced under C4C are either room air-conditioners or ductless “mini-split” air-conditioners
which use an outside compressor connected to an indoor unit. These systems are similar to central air-
conditioners in that they use both indoor and outdoor units, but do not use ductwork. Central air-
conditioning is relatively uncommon in Mexico and not part of C4C.

                                                      13
financing only. This structure was implemented out of distributional concerns in an
attempt to target the program to lower-income households. Mean electricity
consumption is calculated over the previous year. For refrigerator replacements mean
consumption is calculated over non-summer months only. For air conditioners mean
consumption is calculated over summer months.

      Subsidized financing is subject to eligibility requirements that are similar to those
in place for the direct cash payments. The financing comes in the form of a one-time
credit that is paid back over a 4-year period. The loans are offered at a preferential
interest rate that is below typical rates for consumer loans in Mexico. Households need
not have a credit history in order to quality for these loans, though if a household does
have a credit history it can be disqualified for having a poor credit history. The
maximum credit amount available to a participating household depends on the
household’s mean electricity consumption, with higher maximum amounts available to
households with higher levels of consumption.

      Households can accept the cash subsidy, the subsidized financing, or both. In
practice, all households choose to accept the cash subsidy, but many households decide
not to use the subsidized financing. In addition to these two incentives, most
participants are eligible for an additional subsidy (approximately $30 dollars) that is
used to pay for the transport and disposal of the old appliance. The retired appliances
are transported to recycling facilities and disassembled.30 Stores are reimbursed for the
subsidy about one month after the file is completed, which includes verified receipt of
the old appliance at one of the recycling facilities.



3.3      Program Take-up

      By February 2012, C4C had provided subsidies for 1.5 million refrigerator
replacements. This is a large number of participants compared to most energy-efficiency
programs. It is important, however, to compare this to the number of eligible


30 At these Centros de Acopio y Destrucción the appliances are disassembled according to environmental
standards established by SENER. Facility operators are trained, in particular, in the safe disposal of CFCs,
and a record is maintained of recovered refrigerants. Andrade (2010) provides a detailed description of the
recycling facilities and their environmental performance to date.

                                                    14
households. At the beginning of the program there were approximately 23 million
refrigerators owned nationwide, of which 10 million (43%) were more than 10 years
old.31 As of February 2012, therefore, about 15% of all eligible households had
participated in the program.

      Empirically it appears that C4C has had a substantial impact on refrigerator sales.
During 2009, 2010, and 2011 there were 6.8 million refrigerators sold in Mexico.32 Based
on the available data from pre-C4C we would have predicted 5.4 million sales. This
yields a difference of 1.4 million refrigerators, similar to the total number of refrigerators
replaced through C4C.33 This back-of-the-envelope calculation is based on a linear
extrapolation of pre-2008 sales reported by Arroyo-Cabañas, et al. (2009) and does not
control for macroeconomic conditions. If anything, however, one would have expected
the recession post-2008 to decrease sales relative to the trend.

      Some of the households who have participated in C4C should nevertheless be
viewed as “free riders” i.e. households who would have replaced their appliances even
in the absence of the subsidy. It is worth emphasizing, however, that even in these cases
one should expect the program to have an impact on energy consumption. Mexico has
well-functioning secondary markets for appliances, and the saturation level for
refrigerators and air-conditioners is well below 100%. Had they not been used in the
program, many of these appliances would have otherwise been resold in secondary
markets.34 Permanently destroying the appliances removes them from the stock,


31 See Arroyo-Cabañas, et al. (2009), Table 3. As of 2007, there were 23 million refrigerators owned

nationwide. Of these, 57% were less than 10 years old, compared to 28% between 11 and 20 years old, and
15% more than 20 years old.
32 This number comes from personal correspondence with the Mexican National Association of Electric

Materials (Cámara Nacional de Materiales Eléctricos, CANAME). Based on their own internal analysis of
national-level sales data, CANAME concludes that C4C has generated through March 2012 a total of 900,000
additional refrigerator sales and 160,000 additional sales of air-conditioners (both about 60% of total C4C
replacements).
33 This increase in sales also suggests that the economic incidence of the subsidy is largely on households.

This makes sense given the structure of the market. Supply of appliances is highly-competitive in Mexico
with 10+ companies involved in manufacturing refrigerators and air-conditioners, and a similar number of
large national retailers. Multinational appliance companies like GE, LG, Samsung, and Daewoo have a
significant presence in Mexico and the global manufacturing capacity to quickly ramp up production in
response to increases in demand.
34 In a closely related market Davis and Kahn (2010) document that vehicle retirement rates in Mexico are

substantially lower than in the United States. For example, the mean annual retirement rate for 10-30 year
old vehicles is 12.2% in the United States compared to only 3.8% for Mexico. This likely reflects several
different factors including differences in income levels and thus demand for quality, energy subsidies, and

                                                    15
preventing them from using additional electricity regardless of whether they would
have stayed with their primary owner.

      Ancillary evidence from the Mexican Census implies that about half of refrigerator
sales in Mexico are replacement purchases, while the other half are purchases by first-
time buyers. Households in the Census are asked whether or not they own a refrigerator
and other household appliances (see Table 2). In the Census between 2000 and 2005, the
total number of households with refrigerators increased by 4.1 million. During this same
period 7.3 million new refrigerators were sold. The Mexican National Income and
Expenditure Survey ("ENIGH") also asks households about appliance ownership and in
ENIGH between 2000 and 2008, the total number of households with refrigerators
increased by 5.2 million (see Appendix Table 3), compared to 12.1 sales of new
refrigerators. In an economic model of scrappage, households replace durable goods
when repair costs exceed the economic value of the good (Hahn, 1995). Older
refrigerators use more electricity so operating costs are an important factor, on top of
repair costs, for households deciding whether or not to replace an existing refrigerator.



4       Data and Empirical Framework

4.1     Data Description

      The central dataset used in the analysis is a two-year panel dataset of household-
level bimonthly electricity billing records.35 These data describe bimonthly electricity
consumption and expenditure for all Mexican residential customers from May 2009
through April 2011. Each record includes the customer account number, county and
state of residence, climate zone, tariff type, and other information. For confidentiality
reasons these data were provided without customer names. The complete set of billing
records includes data from 26,278,397 households. We dropped 15,262 households



differences in repair costs.
35 These data were provided to the University of California Energy Institute (UCEI) pursuant to the terms

and restrictions of a Non-Disclosure Agreement signed May 3, 2011 with Mexican Federal Electricity
Commission (CFE). As part of the agreement UCEI has agreed to share their results with CFE and to
carefully consider any comments received. Of course to ensure objectivity, UCEI retains the exclusive right
to determine how these comments are incorporated into their findings. Neither UCEI nor the authors have
received any financial compensation from the CFE.

                                                    16
(<0.001%) for whom the records are improperly formatted and 1,113 households for
whom no state was indicated. We also drop 491,788 observations (1.9%) with zero
reported usage in every month of the panel.

      In Mexico residential electricity is billed every two months using overlapping
billing cycles. We assign billing cycles to calendar months based on the month in which
the cycle ends. We then normalize consumption to reflect monthly consumption by
dividing by the number of months in the billing cycle. The average number of months
per billing cycle is 1.98 months, with 93% of all cycles representing two months. An
additional 5% of all cycles represent one month, with the remaining 2% representing 3+
months. These irregular billing periods arise for a variety of reasons. For example, some
households in extremely rural areas have their meters read less than six times per year.

      Equally important for the analysis is a second dataset which describes C4C
participants. These data were provided by SENER and describe all participants in the
program between March 2009 and June 2011, a total of 1,162,775 participants. We
dropped 51,823 participants (4.5%) for whom no installation date for the new appliance
was recorded. We merged the remaining data with the billing records using customer
account numbers. We were able to match 86% percent of C4C participants with identical
account numbers in the billing records. Each record in the program data includes the
exact date in which the appliance was replaced, whether the appliance replaced was a
refrigerator or an air-conditioner, the amount of direct cash subsidy and credit received
by the participant, the reported age of the appliance that was replaced, and other
program information. We drop 93 households (<.0001% of participants) who replaced
more than one air-conditioner, leaving us with 957,080 total treatment households.



4.2    Empirical Strategy

      The main empirical challenge in analyses of energy-efficiency has been the lack of
high-quality microdata. Utilities are often reluctant to share billing data of the form used
in this analysis and analyses with more aggregate data struggle to credibly distinguish
the impact of policies from other determinants of energy consumption that are changing



                                            17
over time. Thus a significant part of the contribution of this analysis is simply bringing
the relevant data to bear.

      This section describes the estimating equation used for our baseline estimates of
the effect of refrigerator and air-conditioner replacement on household electricity
consumption. The basic approach is difference-in-differences. In the preferred
specification, impacts are measured by comparing electricity consumption before and
after appliance replacement using as a comparison group households living in the same
county. The sheer size of our dataset and immense number of treatment and control
households allows us to estimate effects precisely while using highly non-parametric
specifications.

      Our empirical approach is described by the following regression equation,

                  1                                1                                   ,                 .

where the dependent variable              is electricity consumption by household i in month t
measured in kilowatt hours. In the baseline specification we include all available
observations from May 2009 through April 2011. Billing is bimonthly so for each
household      we     have    about     12   observations.      The     covariates     of   interest    are
1                            and 1                               , indicator variables equal to one
for C4C participants after they have replaced their refrigerator or air-conditioner.
Parameters        and        measure the mean change in electricity consumption associated
with appliance replacement, corresponding to ∆ in the conceptual framework.

      Most of the estimates that we report include household by month-of-year fixed
effects,   ,    . That is, for each household we include 12 separate fixed effects, one for
each calendar month (e.g, January, February, etc).36 This controls not only for time-
invariant household characteristics such as the number of household members and size
of the home, but also household-specific seasonal variation in electricity demand. For
example, these fixed effects capture the fact that some households have air-conditioning



36In the billing data we observe both the housing unit and the household. Consequently, we can observe
when a new household moves into an existing housing unit. In the empirical analysis we treat each
household / housing unit pair as a separate “household”. With household by month-of-year fixed effects we
are identifying the effects of C4C using only households who remain in a housing unit for at least one year.

                                                    18
and some do not, and that demand for air-conditioning varies differentially across the
year for different households.

     The estimates that we report also include month-of-sample fixed effects         . This
controls for year-to-year differences in weather as well as for population-wide trends in
electricity consumption, for example, driven by increased saturation of durable goods
throughout this period for reasons that have nothing to do with C4C. Many
specifications, in addition, include month-of-sample by county fixed effects. This richer
specification controls for county-specific variation in year-to-year weather, as well as
differential population-wide trends across counties. Finally, the error term      captures
unobserved differences in consumption across months. In all results we cluster standard
errors at the county level to allow for arbitrary serial correlation and correlation across
households within counties.

     Most specifications include a group of control households that we matched to the
treatment households using account numbers. The way account numbers are structured
they identify not only the state and county where the household lives, but also the
specific route used by meter readers. For each C4C participant, we select the account
corresponding to the closest consecutive non-participating housing unit. In many cases
this is the household living immediately next door. In some cases a non-participating
household is selected as the control for more than one treatment household. These
matched households are a better comparison group than had we used the entire set of
non-participating households because of their close physical proximity to the treatment
households (see Figure 2). Weather is a major determinant of electricity consumption so
this matching ensures, for example, that the distribution of counties of residence among
the control households is the same at the distribution among treatment households.
Because our preferred specifications include month-of-sample by county fixed effects,
identification comes from within-county, within-month comparisons between treatment
and control households.

     We also report estimates from regressions that are estimated using only
households that participated in C4C. In these specifications we simply drop all control
households and the effects of C4C are identified using within-household changes in
electricity consumption. We continue to include month-of-sample by county fixed effects

                                            19
to control for time effects. This is possible because households replaced their appliances
at different times during the sample period.



5       Main Results

5.1     Graphical Results

      This subsection presents graphical results intended to motivate the regression
analyses that follow. We begin in this section with refrigerators rather than air-
conditioners because they make up 90% of all appliance replacements, and because
refrigerators lend themselves well to the “event study” analysis performed here.
Whereas refrigerator electricity consumption is approximately constant across months of
the year, air-conditioning usage has a strong seasonal pattern which is better examined
in a regression context.

      Figure 3 describes graphically the effect of refrigerator replacement on household
electricity consumption. The x-axis is the time in months before and after refrigerator
replacement, normalized so that the month prior to replacement is equal to zero. The
figure plots estimated coefficients and 95th percentile confidence intervals corresponding
to the effect of appliance replacement by month, controlling for household and county
by month-of-sample fixed effects. In particular, we plot the estimates of       from the
following regression,


                                    1              ,



where     denotes the event month defined so that =0 for the exact month in which the
refrigerator is delivered, =-12 for one twelve months before replacement, =12 for
twelve months after replacement, and so on. The coefficients are measured relative to
the excluded category ( =-1). Both sets of fixed effects play an important role here.
Without the county by month-of-sample fixed effects (        ), for example, the effect of
replacement is confounded with seasonal effects as well as slow-moving population-
wide changes in residential electricity consumption.

      During the months leading up to replacement electricity consumption is almost

                                           20
perfectly flat, suggesting that the fixed effects are adequately controlling for seasonal
effects and underlying trends. Beginning with replacement electricity consumption falls
sharply by approximately 10 kilowatt hours per month. Consumption then continues to
fall very gradually over the following year. We attribute the fact that the decrease
appears to take a couple of months to the fact that the underlying billing cycles upon
which this is based are actually every other month, and to a modest amount of
measurement error in the replacement dates. The gradual decline between months +2
and +12 reflects modest compositional changes in the treatment households.37 In all
periods the coefficients are estimated with enough precision to rule out small changes in
consumption in either direction.

      With Figure 4 we perform the exact same exercise but using households who did
not participate in C4C. Our sample is the set of all households that were matched to
households that replaced their refrigerators. We assigned each household the
replacement date of the household to which that household is matched. We then
constructed event time before and after t=0 exactly as we did for Figure 3. The figure
exhibits no discernible pattern with estimated coefficients near zero and statistically
insignificant in all months, providing additional corroboration that our fixed effects are
adequately controlling for seasonal effects and underlying trends.



5.2        Baseline Estimates

      Table 3 presents our main results. The table reports least squares coefficients and
standard errors from six separate regressions. The specification described in column (1)
includes household by calendar month and month-of-sample fixed effects. In this
specification, refrigerator replacement decreases electricity consumption by 11.2 kilowatt
hours per month. This is similar in magnitude to the difference observed in the event
study figure. Mean electricity consumption among households who replaced their
refrigerators is about 150 kilowatt hours per month so this is a 7% decrease. Whereas


37 We show later that households who replaced refrigerators early in the program tended to save more
electricity after replacement. These households are disproportionately represented as one moves from left to
right in the figure. For example, whereas all treatment households are observed at t=0, only households who
replaced during the first year are represented at t=12.

                                                    21
refrigerator replacement decreases electricity consumption, the estimates indicate that
air-conditioning replacement increases consumption by about 8.5 kilowatt hours per
month. Mean electricity consumption among households who replaced their air-
conditioners is about 400 kilowatt hours per month, so this is a 2% increase.

     Column (2) adds month-of-sample by county fixed effects to better control for
differences in weather and other time-varying factors. The point estimate for
refrigerators remains about the same and the point estimate for air-conditioners
decreases slightly. In columns (3) we expand the specification to include an additional
regressor corresponding to an interaction between air-conditioning replacement and the
six “summer” months (May-October). We would expect air-conditioning replacement to
have little effect on electricity consumption during cool months, and most meaningfully
impact electricity consumption during warm months. The coefficient estimates appear to
bear this out. While new air-conditioners appear to have little impact during winter
months, the estimates indicate an increase in summer electricity consumption of 16.5
kilowatt hours per month.

     The difference in difference estimates use the change in the comparison group to
estimate what would have been the change in the treatment had the treatment group not
received the intervention – i.e the counterfactual. This assumes that the change is an
unbiased estimate of the counterfactual and is not testable. However, we can test
whether the changes over time in the treatment group are the same as those in the
control group in the pre-intervention period. It the time trends of the two groups are not
different in the pre-intervention period, then they would likely be the same in the post-
intervention period. However, we do find small but statistically significant differences in
pre-intervention period. A common correction for this is to include a linear time trend
for program participants. The results are essentially unchanged when in column (4) we
do indeed include a linear time trend for participants following Heckman and Hotz
(1989). In Appendix Table 2 we report results from including a quadratic and cubic
polynomial time trend for participants and results are again similar. This suggests that
the statistical significance is driven more by our large sample size rather than
meaningfully differential trends.

     Columns (5) and (6) present results from alternative specifications. In both

                                            22
columns we drop all control households, and estimate the regressions using only
households who participated in the program. Column (6), in addition, drops the month
during which replacement occurred. In these regressions, we are controlling for time
effects by exploiting differential timing of replacement across sample months. The
estimates change little in these specifications, suggesting that what matters most in these
regressions is the within-household comparison. In additional results, not reported, we
have also estimated regressions using a random sample of non-participating
households.38 Results are again very similar. Although we prefer to use the matched
comparison group, we find it reassuring that the results are similar regardless of which
comparison group we use, or whether we use a comparison group at all.



5.3      Heterogeneous Effects

      Table 4 presents estimates for different subsets of participants. The table reports
estimates and standard errors from six separate regressions. Coefficients are reported
from indicator variables for refrigerator and air conditioner replacement and all
regressions include household by calendar month and county by month-of-sample fixed
effects. Panel (A) describes how the effect of appliance replacement varies by the mean
household income in the county.39 For refrigerators, the estimates are negative and
statistically significant for all three income terciles with the largest decreases observed in
the highest-income counties. For air-conditioners, the estimates are positive and
statistically significant in two out of the three income terciles.

      Panel (B) presents estimates separately by the year of replacement. C4C was
launched in 2009 and we have in our analysis replacements made during each of the first
three years of the program. Point estimates tend to increase across years consistent with
newly eligible households tend to have less to gain from replacement, and as time goes

38 An additional possible specification would be to use a matched comparison group, in which the matching

is done both on geography and historical electricity usage. Given the insensitivity of our results, however,
we think that this would be highly unlikely to change the results. Moreover, matching on the basis of
historical consumption would require us to exclude households who replace in the first couple of months in
our sample.
39 We merged in the 2010 Mexican Census data using state and county names. For 93% of households there

was an exact match for both state and county. Requiring an exact match for the state and using probabilistic
string matching for the county we increased this to 98%. For the remaining 2% of households we used the
mean characteristics of the state.

                                                    23
on an increasing proportion of the participants are those that just barely meet the
eligibility requirements. For example, with appliances that are exactly 10 years old in
2010 or 2011.

      Continuing to explore heterogeneity in the effect of appliance replacement we now
turn to variation across months of the year. Figures 5A and 5B plot the effect of
appliance replacement by month of year. For refrigerators the estimates are similar
across calendar months. Engineering studies have found that ambient temperature is an
important driver of refrigerator electricity consumption (see, for example, Meier 1995),
but the change in consumption after replacement seems to be reasonably similar during
hot and cold months. For air-conditioning, estimates vary substantially across months.
Estimates are close to zero during winter months, but then large and positive during
summer months. The largest coefficient corresponds to September. Because the billing
data is bimonthly, this reflects change in consumption during August and September,
two of the warmest months in Mexico.



5.4     Comparing Our Results to Ex Ante Predictions

      Available ex ante analyses predicted that the savings from appliance replacement
would have been considerably larger. For example, the World Bank study calculated
that replacing 10+ year old residential refrigerators in Mexico would save 481 kilowatt
hours per year, with replacements of older refrigerators saving 700 kilowatt hours per
year.40 The same study calculates that replacement of residential air conditioners would
save 1,200 kilowatt hours per year. Our estimates imply considerably smaller savings.
Annual savings from refrigerator replacement are 132 kilowatt hours per year, about
one-quarter of the savings predicted by the World Bank.41 And for air-conditioning, we
are finding that after replacement electricity consumption increases by about 80 kilowatt
hours per year.

40 See Johnson, et. al (2009), Appendix C “Intervention Assumptions” pages 123-124 (air conditioners) and
page 125 (refrigerators). Another point of comparison is Arroyo-Cabañas, et al. (2009) which calculates that
replacing pre-2001 Mexican refrigerators would reduce electricity consumption by an average of 315
kilowatt hours per year.
41 There is some precedent in energy-efficiency studies for finding that realized energy savings are smaller

than ex ante estimates. See, for example, Dubin, Miedema, and Chandran (1986) and Metcalf and Hassett
(1999).

                                                    24
       One important explanation for the differences between our results and the ex ante
estimates is changes in appliance utilization. Although changes in utilization are likely
to be modest or even non-existent for refrigerators, it makes sense that there would be a
considerable “rebound” effect for air conditioning. Suppose that before C4C households
used their air-conditioners an average of 750 hours per year.42 This is slightly more than
2 hours per day for the entire year or 4 hours per day for half the year. Room air-
conditioner energy-efficiency has improved 13% over the last ten years.43 Absent any
change in utilization, therefore, air-conditioning replacement should save about 100
kilowatt hours per year. Instead, we see an increase of 80 kilowatt hours per year. For
this to be explained entirely through increased utilization would require a 26% increase
in utilization. Thus if the observed changes in electricity consumption associated with
air-conditioner replacement were to be explained entirely via an increase in utilization,
the price elasticity would need to be about - 2. Although we don’t think an elasticity of -
2 is entirely implausible, this is considerably larger than previous estimates in the
literature.44 Instead, we think it is more likely that a combination of factors tended to
push up electricity consumption both for refrigerators and for air-conditioners.

       First, it seems likely that some of these refrigerators and air-conditioners may not
have been working or not working well at the point of replacement. Appliances were
supposed to be in working order to be eligible for the program, but enforcement was
likely less than 100%. And even for air-conditioners that were “working”, there were
likely some that were not working well, perhaps because they needed new refrigerant or
other forms of maintenance.45




42This follows Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (2010) which assumes that room air-
conditioners are used 750 hours per year.
43 According to the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (2010), for 750 hours of operation the

average shipment-weighted electricity consumption for room-air conditioners has decreased from 794 to 693
kilowatt hours per year.
44 For example, Hausman (1979), finds that the elasticity of utilization for room air-conditioners is 0.27. It is

worth highlighting, however, that like most of the existing empirical work in this area, this estimate comes
from the United States. At lower income levels and lower baseline utilization levels the price elasticity is
going to be higher. Particularly important is where a household is relative to its “bliss point” for ambient
temperature. A household far away from its optimal level for thermal temperature has more scope to
change utilization in response to an improvement in energy-efficiency.
45 Here there is a bit of a distinction between C4C and most vehicle retirement programs. “Cash for

Clunkers”, for example, required vehicles to have been registered for at least 12 months prior to being

                                                       25
       Second, appliance sizes have increased over time. Both refrigerators and air-
conditioners were supposed to meet specific size requirements. New refrigerators were
supposed to be between 9 and 13 cubic feet, and have a maximum size no more than 2
cubic feet larger than the refrigerator which is replaced. Similar requirements were
imposed for air conditioners. Again, however, it is likely that enforcement was less than
100%. Moreover, even the modest increases in size allowed under the rules would be
expected to partially offset the potential efficiency gains. Minimum efficiency standards
both in the United States and in Mexico are functions of the total adjusted volume, with
each additional cubic foot adding 10 kilowatt hours per year.46

       Third, appliance features have expanded over time. Most new refrigerators have
ice-makers, and many also have side-by-side doors and through-the-door ice and water.
These features are valued by households but they are also energy-intensive. For
example, through-the-door ice increases electricity consumption by about 80 kilowatt
hours per year.47 Air-conditioners have become quieter, and added features like lower
cycle speeds (for operating a night), and remote control operation. These features make
air-conditioners easier and more convenient to use, likely leading to increased
utilization.

       Fourth, there is no evidence that the program was particularly effective at targeting
households with very old appliances. Program rules required appliances to be at least 10
years old and a disproportionate fraction of old appliances were reported to just barely
meet this requirement. The average reported age of the refrigerators that were replaced
is 13.2 years. Almost 70% were 10-14 years old, 20% were 15-19, and only 10% were 20
years or older.48 The average reported age for air-conditioners is 10.9 years and only 5%


traded. There is no equivalent registration system for appliances making it more likely that a program
brings in appliances that are not actually being used.
46 The current standard both in the United States and Mexico specifies that refrigerators with top-mounted

freezer and automatic defrost without through-the-door ice has a maximum energy use of 9.80AV+276.0
where AV is the total adjusted volume in squared feet. Under C4C refrigerators had to be between 9 and 13
cubic feet, implying a range of minimum consumption from 364 to 403 kilowatt hours per year.
47 Current energy-efficiency standards both in the United States and Mexico provide separate requirements

for refrigerators with and without through-the-door ice. Refrigerators without through-the-door ice have a
maximum energy use of 9.80AV+276.0 where AV is the total adjusted volume in squared feet. The
equivalent formula for refrigerators with through-the-door ice is 10.20AV+356.0.
48  There are a couple of possible explanations for the apparent lack of success at targeting very old
refrigerators. One possible explanation lies in the eligibility criteria themselves. As we discussed earlier, the

                                                       26
of the air-conditioners that were replaced are more than 15 years old. There is likely to
be a large amount of measurement error in these self-reported ages, but this apparent
lack of success at targeting very old appliances is potentially important because energy-
efficiency has improved steadily over time (see Figure 6).49



6        Cost-Effectiveness

6.1      Baseline Estimates

      Table 5, Panel (A) reports the mean annual impacts implied by our estimates.
Refrigerator replacement reduces electricity consumption by 132 kilowatt hours
annually, while air-conditioner replacement increases electricity consumption by 79
kilowatt hours per year. At average residential electricity prices, refrigerator
replacement saves household $13 annually, while air-conditioner replacement costs
households an additional $8 annually.50 Residential electricity prices in Mexico are
subsidized, so some have argued that the total economic value of these changes could be
considerably larger. However, it is important to distinguish carefully between average
and marginal costs. About half of the cost of electricity is the fixed cost of transmission
and distribution infrastructure and these costs do not change when there is a reduction
in electricity demand along the intensive margin.

      Panel (B) describes the total impact of C4C between May 2009 and April 2011.
During this period there were about 850,000 refrigerator replacements and about 100,000
air-conditioning replacements. Our estimates imply that total reduction in electricity
consumption associated with the program is about 100 gigawatt hours annually. As a

size of the subsidy is decreasing in household electricity consumption. This means that, ironically,
households with very inefficient appliances tend to not qualify for the most generous subsidies. Another
explanation is income. Low-income households tend to have older appliances, and also may be less likely to
participate in the program due borrowing constraints or other factors.
49 These data describe shipments of refrigerators in the United States. Equivalent data for Mexico are not
available but likely to be very similar given that the countries have identical energy-efficiency standards and
that a substantial share of appliances sold in Mexico are imported from the United States. The U.S. data is
also broadly consistent with Arroyo-Cabañas, et al. (2009) who report that consumption for Mexican
refrigerators has decreased 60% since refrigerators sold prior to 1980, 50% since 1981-1990, 40% since 1991-
1994, and 30% since 1995-2000.
50 These estimates were calculated using the estimates in Table 3, Column (2) multiplied by 12 to reflect

annual changes. To calculate household expenditure we used 9.6 cents per kilowatt hour, the average price
of electricity for Mexican residential customers.

                                                      27
point of comparison, residential sales nationwide in Mexico totaled 49,000 gigawatt
hours in 2009.51 At average residential electricity prices this implies total savings of
about $10 million annually. This panel also reports estimates of the total change in
carbon dioxide emissions. One of the central goals of C4C is to reduce carbon dioxide
emissions so these estimates are an important measure of the effectiveness of the
program. Multiplying the change in electricity consumption by the average carbon
intensity of electricity generation in Mexico yields the total decrease in carbon dioxide
emissions.52 Electricity generation in Mexico is somewhat less carbon-intensive than in
the United States, reflecting in part the fact that Mexico has a higher fraction of
hydropower.53 The total decrease in carbon dioxide emissions implied by our estimates
is 62 thousand tons of carbon dioxide annually.54 Using a conservative estimate for the
social cost of carbon dioxide ($20 per ton) this implies an additional $1.2 million in
benefits annually.55

      Panel (C) reports baseline estimates of cost-effectiveness. Based on the total
number of participants and the subsidies that they received we calculate that direct
program costs were $130 million for refrigerators, and $13 million for air-conditioners.
This includes the cash subsidies received by households, but not costs incurred in


51 Secretaría de Energía, “Prospectiva del Sector Eléctrico 2010-2025,” released 2010, Table 12, “Ventas
Internas Sectoriales de Energía Eléctrica, 1999-2009.”
52 According to Mexico Secretaría de Energía, ``Balance Nacional de Energía’’, 2010, pages 53-54, electricity
generation in Mexico in 2009 produced 113.4 million tons of carbon dioxide. According to Mexico Instituto
Nacional de Estadística y Geografía, “El Sector Energético en Mexico 2009”, Table 2.4.1, total electricity
generation in 2009 was 193 billion kilowatt hours. Thus each megawatt hour (1000 kilowatt hours) of
electricity generation implies an average of (113.4) / (193) = .59 tons of carbon dioxide emissions. Johnson,
et. al (2009) report for Mexico in 2008 a somewhat lower emissions factor (.54).
53 From U.S. DOE (2011c), Table 12.7a “Emissions from Energy Consumption for Electricity Generation”

total carbon dioxide emissions in 2008 for electricity generation were 2.48 billion metric tons. From Table
8.2a “Electricity Net Generation,” total electricity generation was 3.95 trillion kilowatt hours. Thus each
megawatt hour of electricity generation implies approximately (2.48) / (3.95) = .63 metric tons of carbon
dioxide emissions.
54 These calculations capture the energy consumed in refrigerator operation but not from the energy

consumed in other parts of the refrigerator “life-cycle”. Taking into account materials production and
processing, assembly, transportation, dismantling, recycling, shredding, and recovery of refrigerant, Kim,
Keoleian, and Horie (2006) find that energy usage during operation accounts for 90% of total life-cycle
energy use.
55Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton (2011) presents a range of values for the social cost of carbon dioxide
according to different discount rates and for different time periods that is intended to capture changes in net
agricultural productivity, human health, property damages from increased flood risk, and other factors. In
Table 4 with a 3% discount rate (their “central value”) for 2010 they find a social cost of carbon dioxide of
$21.40 (in 2007 dollars) per metric ton of carbon dioxide. In 2010 dollars this is approximately $22.

                                                      28
program design, administration, advertising, or other indirect costs. Evidence from
previous studies indicates that these indirect costs are important (Joskow and Marron,
1992). Dividing these costs by the estimated change in electricity consumption provides
a measure of the direct program cost per kilowatt hour reduction. The relevant change
here is the total discounted lifetime change in electricity consumption. For this
calculation we adopt a 5% annual discount rate and assume that the program
accelerated appliance replacement by 5 years. Under these assumptions the program
cost per kilowatt hour is $.25 for refrigerators and $.30 overall. We do not report
program cost per kilowatt hour separately for air-conditioners because the program led
to an increase rather than a decrease in consumption. The program cost per ton of carbon
dioxide emissions can be calculated similarly. For both refrigerators-only and for the
entire program this exceeds $400 per ton.

     These estimates of cost-effectiveness change predictably under alternative
assumptions. The choice of a 5% discount rate is fairly standard in the literature (see,
e.g., Arimura, Li, Newell, and Palmer 2011). With a 0% discount rate the program cost
per cost per kilowatt hour is $0.27 compared to $0.30, and the program cost per ton of
carbon dioxide is $460 compared to $506. The measures of cost-effectiveness are more
sensitive to the assumption about how many years over which to calculate lifetime
benefits. We have assumed that the program accelerates appliance replacement by 5
years but it seems likely that many of these participants were “free riders”, i.e.
households who would have replaced their appliances anyway, in which case the
program does not accelerate replacement at all and 5 years is too generous. On the other
hand, even for “free riders”, the program prevents appliances from being resold to other
households who might have continued to use them for many years. If one assumes that
the program accelerated appliance retirement program by 10 years, then the program
cost per kilowatt hour is $0.17 compared to $0.30, and the program cost per ton of
carbon dioxide is $283 compared to $506.

     Some have argued that C4C would have been much more cost-effective if
participants had been required to purchase more energy-efficient appliances. Program
rules required participants to purchase refrigerators and air-conditioners that exceeded
the minimum energy-efficiency standards by 5%. These standards date back to 2002, and

                                            29
the market for both refrigerators and air-conditioners has moved considerably past this.
The United States, for example, has adopted new energy-efficiency standards for
refrigerators that will take effect in 2014 that are about 25% more energy-efficient than
current standards. A typical refrigerator meeting these more stringent standards uses 63
fewer kilowatt hours annually.56 Had the refrigerator replacements saved 63 more
kilowatt hours per year, the program cost per kilowatt hour (for refrigerators) would
have been $0.17 compared to $0.25, and the program cost per ton of carbon dioxide (for
refrigerators) would have been $289 compared to $427.



6.2     Discussion and Limitations

      These estimates of the program cost per kilowatt hour avoided and per ton of
carbon dioxide abated are high compared to most available estimates in the literature.
For example, electric utilities in the United States reported in 2010 spending $2.9 billion
in energy-efficiency programs leading to 87 terawatt hours of energy savings, implying
an average direct program cost per kilowatt hour of 3.3 cents.57 Economists have long
argued that these self-reported measures likely overstate the cost-effectiveness of these
programs (Joskow and Marron, 1992). Nonetheless, it is striking that our estimate for
C4C is 9 times larger. Allcott (2011) reports cost-effectiveness measures for peer-
comparison programs from OPOWER ranging from 2-5 cents.

      With regard to carbon dioxide abatement an important point of comparison is Cash
for Clunkers.58 Knittel (2009) finds that the direct program cost for Cash for Clunkers
exceeded $450 per ton. Our estimates for C4C are in the same ballpark. The high cost per
ton in both cases reflects the fact that the carbon dioxide savings per replacement is
relatively small and realized over relatively few years. Knittel (2009) assumes, in the
baseline estimates, that Cash for Clunkers accelerated vehicle retirement by four years.

56
   The current standard both in the United States and Mexico specifies that refrigerators with top-mounted
freezer and automatic defrost without through-the-door ice has a maximum energy use of 9.80AV+276.0
where AV is the total adjusted volume in squared feet. The new U.S. standard for this refrigerator type
adopts a formula 8.07AV+233.7 so a 12 cubic foot refrigerator uses 63 fewer kilowatt hours per year.
57 U.S. DOE (2011b), Tables 9.6 and 9.7.

58An important distinction between C4C and Cash for Clunkers programs is that C4C was never envisioned
as a stimulus program whereas with Cash for Clunkers one of the central objectives of the program from the
beginning was to stimulate aggregate demand (Mian and Sufi, forthcoming).

                                                   30
Recent work by Mian and Sufi (forthcoming) finds that the effect of the program on auto
purchases was almost completely reversed by as few as 7 months after the program
ended. If indeed the program accelerated retirement by so little, then the implied cost
per ton of carbon abatement for Cash for Clunkers would by much larger.

     It is important to emphasize that program cost per kilowatt hour avoided and
program cost per ton of carbon dioxide abated are both measures of cost-effectiveness,
and do not capture the full set of welfare implications of a program like C4C. Although
commonly used in previous studies of energy-efficiency, these measures miss several
important program components on both the cost and benefit side, and don’t carefully
distinguish between private and social costs and benefits. For example, a substantial
benefit from the program is that households receive utility from using newer, more
feature-rich appliances. With refrigerators, households enjoy better insulation, and in
some cases automatic ice-makers, through-the-door water and ice and other features.
There may even be modest health benefits in the form of improved cooling and
temperature consistency leading to less spoilage. These increases in utility were not the
primary objective of the program, but they are a substantial source of benefits.

     These measures also capture only some of the total costs of the program. These
measures of cost-effectiveness include the direct cost of the subsidies, but not the
indirect costs from administering the program. Another important component in the full
welfare analysis is the private costs borne by households to purchase these appliances.
Even the households in C4C who qualified for the most generous subsidies ended up
paying for a large part of the price of these appliances out of pocket. A comprehensive
welfare analysis would also want to take into account the costs borne by buyers in the
secondary market. These households are perhaps the biggest losers from the program,
now without access to the over one million old refrigerators and air-conditioners that
have been destroyed. These older appliances have real economic value, particularly in a
country like Mexico where appliance saturation is less than 100% and electricity rates are
subsidized.

     The sense in which these cost-effectiveness numbers make sense is, instead, as a
metric   for   comparing   tradeoffs   between    government     expenditure,      electricity
consumption, and the environment. As we framed at the beginning, when policymakers

                                            31
envision appliance replacement programs they typically have in mind these tradeoffs, so
it makes sense to evaluate the program on this basis. And, along this dimension, C4C is
an expensive policy. Viewed as strictly a tradeoff between government expenditure and
the environment, the Mexican government could do much better buying permits in the
European Union Emissions Trading System and tearing them up. As of March 2012, the
price of a permit is about $10 per ton. Thus, purchasing permits and tearing them up
would allow the Mexican government to “buy” carbon dioxide abatement at a cost
about 1/50th the cost of C4C.



7.     Conclusion

     At first glance, there would seem to be much to like about an appliance
replacement program like C4C. Over the last 30 years residential appliances have
experienced unprecedented gains in energy-efficiency, so there would seem to be scope
for these programs to substantially decrease energy consumption. Moreover, residential
appliances like refrigerators are long-lived durable goods with a low baseline
replacement rate, so it seems reasonable to believe that a subsidy could substantially
accelerate their turnover.

     Thus it is hard to not be somewhat disappointed by the program results. We found
that households who replace their refrigerators with energy-efficient models indeed
decrease their energy consumption, but by an amount considerably smaller than was
predicted by ex ante analyses. Even larger decreases were predicted for air-conditioners,
but we find that households who replace their air-conditioners actually end up
increasing their electricity consumption. Our results indicate that C4C reduces electricity
consumption at a program cost of about $.30 per kilowatt hour, and reduces carbon
dioxide emissions at a program cost of about $500 per ton.

     These results underscore the urgent need for careful modeling of household
behavior. A central feature in our household production framework, and a key theme
throughout the study, has been the importance of accounting for changes in utilization.
A nice feature of the analysis is that refrigerators and air-conditioners occupy different
ends of the spectrum along this dimension, making comparisons particularly interesting.

                                            32
Households receive utility from using these appliances, and they can and should
increase utilization when upgrading to more energy-efficient appliances. This
“rebound” is a good thing – it means that households are increasing their utility. It does,
however, complicate the design of energy-efficiency policy and ceteris paribus, in
pursuing environmental goals it will make sense for policymakers to target appliances
for which demand for utilization is inelastic.

     More broadly our results point to several lessons for the design and evaluation of
energy-efficiency policies. Over time appliances have become more energy-efficient, but
also bigger and better. These size and quality increases are another form of the demand
for increased utilization, and it makes sense to take them into account when designing
policy. Also, despite attempts by administrators to build enforcement mechanisms into
the program design, it is difficult to prevent people from receiving subsidies for non-
working durable goods. While one can envision third-party enforcement mechanisms,
this would add cost to the program and be susceptible to fraud.




                                             33
References

Allcott, Hunt. 2011. “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,” Journal of Public
Economics, 95(9-10), 1082-1095.
Allcott, Hunt and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2011. “External Validity and Partner Selection
Bias,” Working Paper.
Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone. 2012. “Is There an Energy-efficiency Gap?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1), 3-28.
Andrade Salaverria, D. 2010. “Evaluación Ambiental y Plan de Manejo Ambiental del
Programa de Eficiencia Energética Coordinado por la Secretaria de Energia,” World Bank.
Arimura, Toshi H., Shanjun Li, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2011. “Cost-
Effectiveness of Electricity Energy-efficiency Programs” NBER Working Paper 17556.
Arroyo-Cabañas, J.E. Aguillón-Martínez, J.J. Ambríz-García, and G. Canizal. 2009.
“Electric Energy Saving Potential by Substitution of Domestic Refrigerators in Mexico”
Energy Policy, 37, 4737-4742.
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers. 2010. “Fact Book 2010”, Washington
DC.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Carl Blumstein, and Meredith Fowlie. 2008. “Demand Side
Management and Energy-efficiency Revisited,” Energy Journal, 29(3), 91-104.
Baker, Paul, Richard Blundell & John Micklewright. 1989. “Modeling Household
Energy Expenditures Using Micro-Data,” Economic Journal, 99, 720-738.
Becker, Gary S. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75, 493-
517.
Comisión Federal de Electricidad (“CFE”), Subdirección de Programación. 2011.
“Programa De Obras E Inversiones Del Sector Eléctrico 2011-2025”.
Davis, Lucas W. 2008. “Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water:
Evidence from a Field Trial,” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2), 530-546.
Davis, Lucas W. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. “International Trade in Used Vehicles:
The Environmental Consequences of NAFTA,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 2(4), 58-82.
Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. “An Econometric Analysis of
Residential Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica, 52(2), 345-362.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., Allen K. Miedema, and Ram V. Chandran. 1986. “Price Effects of
Energy-Efficient Technologies: A Study of Residential Demand for Heating and
Cooling,” RAND Journal of Economics, 17(3), 310-325.
Engle, Robert F., C.W.J. Granger, John Rice, and Andrew Weiss. 1986.
Semiparametric Estimates of the Relation Between Weather and Electricity Sales,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81(394), 310-320.




                                          34
Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton. 2011. “Estimating the
Social Cost of Carbon for Use in U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and
Interpretation,” NBER Working Paper 16913.
Fuchs, Alan and Paul Gertler. 2008. “Conditional Cash Transfers and Energy
Expenditure: Potential Effect of Oportunidades Energy Component,” in External
Evaluation of Oportunidades, Vol. 4, 227-288.
Gertler, Paul, Orie Shelef, Catherine Wolfram, and Alan Fuchs. 2011. “Poverty,
Growth and the Demand for Energy,” EI@Haas Working Paper 224.
Hahn, Robert. 1995. “An Economic Analysis of Scrappage,” RAND Journal of Economics,
26(2), 222-242.
Hartman, R.S. 1981. “An Analysis of Department of Energy Residential Appliance
Efficiency Standards,” Energy Journal, July 1981, 2, 49-70.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
Energy-Using Durables,” Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 33-54.
Hausman, Jerry A. and Paul L. Joskow. 1982. “Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of
Appliance Efficiency Standards,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceesings, 72(2),
220-225.
Heckman, James J. and V. Joseph Hotz. 1989. “Choosing Among Alternative
Nonexperimental Methods for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of
Manpower Training,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 84(408), 862-874.
Inhaber, Herbert. 1997. “Energy Conservation is a Waste,” Wall Street Journal, July 28.
Ito, Koichiro. 2012. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence
from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing,” EI@Haas Working Paper 210.
Jevons, W. Stanley. 1865. The Coal Question, Macmillan and Company, London.
Johnson, Todd M., Claudio Alatorre, Zayra Romo, and Feng Lui. 2009. “Low-Carbon
Development for Mexico,” World Bank, Conference Edition.
Joskow, Paul L. and Donald B. Marron. 1992. “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost?
Evidence from Utility Conservation Programs,” Energy Journal, 13(4), 41-74.
Joskow, Paul L. and Donald B. Marron. 1993. “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost?
Further Thoughts and Evidence,” Electricity Journal, 6(6), 14-26.
Khazzoom, J. Daniel. 1980. “Economic Implications of Mandated Efficiency Standards
for Household Appliances,” Energy Journal, 4(1), 21-40
Kim, Hyung Chul, Gregory A. Keoleian, and Yuhta A. Horie. 2006. “Optimal
Household Refrigerator Replacement Policy for Life Cycle Energy, Greenhouse Gas
Emissions, and Cost,” Energy Policy, 34, 2310-2323.
Knittel, Christopher R. 2009. “The Implied Cost of Carbon Dioxide under the Cash for
Clunkers Program,” EI@Haas Working Paper 189.
Loughran, David S. and Jonathan Kulick. 2004. “Demand-Side Management and
Energy-efficiency in the United States,” Energy Journal, 25(1), 19-41.


                                            35
McKinsey and Company. 2009a. “Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy,”
released July 2009.
McKinsey and Company. 2009b. “Low Carbon Growth – A Potential Path for Mexico,”
Presentation by Francisco Barnes Jr. at Carbon Markets Workshop, August 20, 2009.
Meier, Alan, Janice Wright, and Arthur H. Rosenfeld. 1983. Supplying Energy Through
Greater Efficiency: The Potential for Conservation in California’s Residential Sector, Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Meier, Alan. 1995. “Refrigerator Energy Use in the Laboratory and in the Field,” Energy
and Buildings, 22, 233-243.
Metcalf, Gilbert and Kevin Hasset. 1999. "Measuring the Energy Savings from Home
Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data," Review of Economics
and Statistics, 81, 516-528
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. forthcoming. “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from
the 2009 'Cash for Clunkers' Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Owen, David. 2010 “The Efficiency Dilemma,” The New Yorker, December 20.
Pollak, Robert A. and Michael L. Wachter. 1975. “The Relevance of the Household
Production Function and Its Implications for the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Political
Economy, 83(2), 255-277.
Reiss, Peter and Matthew White. 2008. “What Changes Energy Consumption? Prices
and Public Pressures,” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(3), 636-663.
Rosenfeld, Arthur H. and Deborah Poskanzer. 2009. “A Graph is Worth a Thousand
Gigawatt-Hours,” Innovations, 4(4), 57-79.
Schipper, Lee and Michael Grubb. 2000. “On the Rebound? Feedback Between Energy
Intensities and Energy Uses in IEA Countries,” Energy Policy, 28 (6-7), 367-388.
Secretaría de Energía (“SENER”). 2008. “Estudio Sobre Tarifas Eléctricas y Costos de
Suministro,” June 2008.
Strassel, Kimberley. 2001 “Conservation Wastes Energy,” Wall Street Journal, May 17.
U.S. Department of Energy (“DOE”), Energy Information Administration. 1994-2011.
“Electric Power Annual”, DOE/EIA-0348, various issues.
U.S. Department of Energy (“DOE”), Energy Information Administration. 2011a.
“International Energy Outlook 2011”, DOE/EIA-0484, released September 2011.
U.S. Department of Energy (“DOE”), Energy Information Administration. 2011b.
“Electric Power Annual 2010”, DOE/EIA-0348, released November 2011.
U.S. Department of Energy (“DOE”), Energy Information Administration. 2011c.
“Annual Energy Review 2010”, DOE/EIA-0384, released October 2011.
Wolfram Catherine, Orie Shelef and Paul Gertler. 2012. “How Will Energy Demand
Develop in the Developing World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1), 119-138.
Zhou, Nan, Mark D. Levine, Lynn Price. 2010. “Overview of Current Energy-Efficiency
Policies in China,” Energy Policy, 38, 6439-6452.

                                              36
                                                        FIGURE 1
                                   Durable Good Ownership Rates by Income Level in Mexico
              1
              .8




                                                Television
Share of Households with Asset
                  .6




                                               Refrigerator
      .4




                                               Car or Truck
              .2




                                                                          Histogram for Income
              0




                                 100                   1000                           10000        100000
                                                     Annual Household Income (U.S. 2010 Dollars)




                                                                     37
                                      FIGURE 2a
                Comparing Participants to Non-Participants: Refrigerators




                                      FIGURE 2b
              Comparing Participants to Non-Participants: Air Conditioners




Note: These figures plot average electricity consumption by calendar month for households who replaced their
refrigerators and air-conditioners through the C4C program (“participating households”), non-participating
households matched to these treatment households using account number information (“matched non-participating
households”) and all non-participating households. For all households the sample is restricted to observations from
the first year of the program (May 2009-April 2010). Additionally, for treatment households the sample is limited to
those who adopted after the first year of the program (May 2010-April 2011). This restriction ensures that the figure
describes pre-treatment means i.e. from before households receive a new appliance.




                                                       38
                                     FIGURE 3
   The Effect of Refrigerator Replacement on Household Electricity Consumption




Note: This figure plots estimated coefficients and 95th percentile confidence intervals describing monthly electricity
consumption before and after refrigerator replacement. Time is normalized relative to the delivery month of the
appliance (t=0) and the excluded category is t=-1. The sample includes 858,962 households who received new
refrigerators through C4C between March 2009 and May 2011 and an equal number of non-participating control
households matched to treatment households using account number information. The regression includes
household and county by month-of-sample fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.




                                                        39
                                          FIGURE 4
                       Assessing the Validity of the Comparison Group




Note: This figure is constructed similarly to Figure 3 but using households who did not participate in C4C. The
sample includes 858,962 non-participating households matched using account number information to households
who replaced their refrigerators through the C4C program. Each household is assigned the replacement date for the
household to which that household is matched. Time is normalized relative to this month (t=0) and the excluded
category is t=-1. The regression includes household and county by month-of-sample fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by county.




                                                      40
                                        FIGURE 5A
                 The Effect of Refrigerator Replacement by Month of Year




                                        FIGURE 5B
               The Effect of Air Conditioner Replacement by Month of Year




Note: Each figure plots estimated coefficients and 95th confidence intervals corresponding to an indicator variable
for households that have replaced their appliance from 12 separate regressions, one for each calendar month. The
dependent variable in all regressions is monthly electricity consumption in kilowatt hours and the regressions
include, in addition household by calendar month fixed effects and month-of-sample by county fixed effects. The
sample includes billing records from May 2009 through April 2011. The 1,914,160 households in the complete
sample include 957,080 households who participated in C4C and an equal number of matched control households.
Standard errors are clustered by county.




                                                       41
                                      FIGURE 6
                 Improvements in Appliance Energy-Efficiency Over Time




Note: This figure plots average electricity consumption for new room air-conditioners and refrigerators shipped for
sale in the United States, 1972-2009. Electricity consumption is normalized to 100 at the beginning of the period for
both appliances. Between 1972 and 2009, refrigerator electricity consumption decreased from 1716 to 450 kilowatt
hours per year, a 74% decrease. During the same period, room air-conditioner electricity consumption decreased from
1271 to 693 kilowatt hours per 750 hours of operation, a 45% decrease. This figure was constructed by the authors
using data from various editions of the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers Fact Book. See Nadel (2002) and
Rosenfeld and Poskanzer (2009) for similar figures. Data from 1973-1979 are not available. Refrigerators have
experienced modest increases in capacity over time, so the figure understates decreases in electricity consumption per
cubic foot of capacity.




                                                       42
                               TABLE 1
               Durable Good Saturation Levels By Country



                                                               Population
                              Refrigerators       Cars
                                                                (millions)


Brazil (2009)                     93%             37%              192
China (2002)                      48%             1%              1,325
India (2007/2008)                 13%             2%              1,140
Indonesia (2004)                  17%             5%               235
Mexico (2008)                     83%             29%              111
Sub-Saharan Africa (2006)         11%             5%               578

Total                              32%             5%             3,576

Notes: Population is from the World Bank for 2008. Saturation levels
come from a variety of country-specific nationally-representative surveys.
For sources and additional details see Wolfram, Shelef, and Gertler (2012).




                                    43
                                                 TABLE 2
                      Demographics and Appliance Saturation in Mexico, Census 2000-2010


                                                       2000 Census          2005 Census         2010 Census


Demographics:

       Total Population (in millions)                      97.0                 102.8               112.0

       Total Number of Households (in millions)            22.6                 24.7                28.7

       Household Size (persons)                             4.3                  4.2                 3.9

       Household Head Completed High School               26.8%                29.6%                32.1%

       Number of Rooms in Home                             4.32                 4.19                4.58

       Improved Flooring                                  86.0%                89.2%                93.9%



Electricity and Appliance Saturation:

       Refrigerator                                       68.2%                79.1%                82.5%

       Washing Machine                                    51.6%                63.0%                67.0%

       Television                                         85.6%                90.9%                92.6%

       Computer                                            9.2%                19.9%                30.0%

       Electricity in the Home                            94.7%                96.4%                97.5%




Notes: This table describes data from the Mexican National Census Censo de Poblacion y Vivienda from the years
indicated in the column headings. These statistics were compiled by the authors using microdata from the long-
form survey which is completed by a 10% representative sample of all Mexican households. All statistics are
calculated using sampling weights. We have cross-checked total population, number of households, and
appliance saturation at the national and state level against published summary statistics and the measures
correspond closely. Improved flooring includes any type of home flooring except for dirt floors.




                                                     44
                                                         TABLE 3
                         The Effect of Appliance Replacement on Household Electricity Consumption



                                                         (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)


 1[New Refrigerator]it                                 -11.2**        -11.0**     -11.0**    -11.5**    -11.5**      -11.4**
                                                        (0.5)          (0.4)       (0.4)      (0.4)      (0.5)        (0.5)

 1[New Air Conditioner]it                               8.5*           6.6**       -0.2       -0.7        1.2          1.2
                                                        (3.6)          (2.2)       (0.8)      (0.8)      (0.8)        (0.9)

 1[New Air Conditioner]it x 1[Summer Months]it                                    16.5**     16.6**     12.6**       14.5**
                                                                                   (4.2)      (4.2)      (3.9)        (4.1)

 Household By Calendar Month Fixed Effects              Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
 Month-of-Sample Fixed Effects                          Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
 Month-of-Sample By County Fixed Effects                No             Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
 Including Linear Time Trend for Participants           No             No          No         Yes        No           No
 Including Treatment Households Only                    No             No          No         No         Yes          Yes
 Dropping Month of Replacement                          No             No          No         No         No           Yes

  Number of Households                                1,914,160   1,914,160     1,914,160 1,914,160 957,080          957,080
  R2                                                     .92          .93          .93        .93          .97          .97
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from six separate regressions. In all regressions the
dependent variable is monthly electricity consumption in kilowatt hours and the coefficients of interest correspond to
indicator variables for households who have replaced their refrigerator or air-conditioner through C4C. The sample includes
billing records from May 2009 through April 2011 from the complete set of households that participated in the program and
a sample of non-participating households matched to treatment households using account number information. Mean
electricity use is 153 kilowatt hour and 395 kilowatt hour per month for households who replaced refrigerators and air
conditioners, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by county. Double asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1%
level; single asterisks at the 5% level.




                                                                 45
                                         TABLE 4
          The Effect of Appliance Replacement by Income and Year of Replacement

                                                        Refrigerators          Air Conditioners


                            A.   By Mean Household Income in County

First Tercile (Less than $5,008/year)                     -8.9** (0.2)             4.5* (2.2)
                                                          N=305,859                N=13,203


Second Tercile ($5,008 - $7,637/year)                    -11.7** (0.8)            5.9** (1.1)
                                                          N=275,751               N=42,175


Third Tercile (More than $7,637/year)                    -12.4** (0.7)             7.7 (4.8)
                                                          N=277,352                N=43,226



                                    B.   By Year of Replacement

Appliance Replaced in 2009                               -10.2** (0.4)             2.0 (3.0)
                                                          N=180,507                N=15,267


Appliance Replaced in 2010                               -11.2** (0.4)            8.1** (2.4)
                                                          N=497,148                N=59,499

Appliance Replaced in 2011                                -5.9** (0.4)            8.7** (2.1)
                                                          N=181,307                N=23,838

Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from six separate
regressions, three per panel. In each regression the sample is restricted to a subset of C4C
participants as indicated in the row headings, along with a matched sample of non-
participating households. In all regressions the dependent variable is monthly electricity
consumption in kilowatt hours. Coefficients are reported from indicator variables for whether
the household had replaced their refrigerator or air conditioner. All regressions include
household by calendar month and county by month-of-sample fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by county. Double asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% level; single
asterisk denotes 5% level. The total number of households in each panel is slightly larger than
the sample size in Table 3 because 486 households replaced both a refrigerator and an air-
conditioner.




                                               46
                                                       TABLE 5
                      Electricity Expenditures, Carbon Dioxide Emissions, and Cost-Effectiveness

                                                                 Refrigerators       Air        Both Appliances
                                                                                 Conditioners      Combined
                                                                      (1)            (2)              (3)

                                               A.        Mean Per Replacement


Mean Annual Change in Electricity                                    -132            79               --
Consumption Per Replacement (Kilowatt Hours)


Mean Annual Change in Household                                      -$13            $8               --
Expenditure Per Replacement (U.S. 2010 dollars)

                                                            B.     Totals


Total Replacements Nationwide                                      858,962          98,604          957,566
(Between May 2009 and April 2011)


Total Annual Change in Electricity                                  -113.4           7.8            -105.6
Consumption (Gigawatt Hours)


Total Annual Change in Household                                    -$10.9           $0.7           -$10.2
Expenditures (U.S. 2010 dollars, millions)


Total Annual Change in Carbon Dioxide                                -66.9           4.6             -62.3
Emissions (Thousands of Tons)

                                                    C.     Cost-Effectiveness


Total Direct Program Cost                                           $129.9          $13.3           $143.2
(U.S. 2010 dollars, millions)


Program Cost Per Kilowatt Hour                                      $0.25             --             $0.30
(U.S. 2010 dollars)


Program Cost Per Ton of Carbon Dioxide                               $427             --             $506
(U.S. 2010 dollars)



Notes: This table reports estimated aggregate impacts of C4C for appliance replacements completed
between May 2009 and April 2011. Mean annual change in electricity consumption per replacement
comes from Table 3, Column (2), multiplied by 12 to reflect the annual change. Mean annual electricity
consumption is 1,836 kilowatt hour per year and 4,740 kilowatt hour per year for households who
replaced refrigerators and air conditioners, respectively. Change in expenditures is calculated using an
average price of $.096 per kilowatt hour. Carbon dioxide emissions were calculated using 0.59 tons of
carbon dioxide per megawatt hour (590 tons per gigawatt hour), the average emissions intensity of
electricity generation in Mexico in 2008. Direct program cost is the dollar value of the cash subsidies and
excludes administrative costs. In calculating the program cost per kilowatt hour and program cost per
ton of carbon dioxide we assumed that the program accelerated replacement by 5 years and adopt a 5%
annual discount rate.




                                                             47
                                                APPENDIX TABLE 1
                                                 Subsidy Amounts

Consumption       Consumption Thresholds         Consumption Thresholds           Cash Subsidy         Maximum
Category              for Refrigerators in        for Air Conditioners in           Amount           Credit Amount
                  Kilowatt Hours Per Month       Kilowatt Hours Per Month

                     (excluding summer)                (summer only)


1                           76-175                         251- 500                1,800 Pesos         3,400 Pesos
                                                                                  ($142 dollars)      ($269 dollars)

2                           176-200                        501-750                  1,000 Pesos        4,200 Pesos
                                                                                   ($79 dollars)      ($332 dollars)

3                           201-250                       751-1,000                     --             5,200 Pesos
                                                                                                      ($411 dollars)

4                            250+                           1,000+                      --             8,700 Pesos
                                                                                                      ($688 dollars)

Notes: This table describes the available direct cash payments and subsidized financing available to Mexican
households participating in C4C starting December 2009. Between April 2009 and November 2009 the consumption
limits were slightly more restrictive (e.g. 76-140 in the first category) and the maximum credit amounts were slightly
less generous. Consumption thresholds are defined using mean monthly consumption over the last calendar year,
excluding summer months for a refrigerator replacement and excluding non-summer months for an air-
conditioning replacement. Households below the first consumption category are not eligible for either form of
subsidy. Dollar amounts are reported in U.S. 2010 dollars using the annual average exchange rate for that year
(12.645 Pesos per dollar). In addition to the cash subsidies listed above, participants in the first three consumption
categories receive a 400 Peso ($31 dollars) subsidy to cover transportation and disposal of the old appliance.




                                                         48
                                                 APPENDIX TABLE 2
                                  Main Results Including Time Trend for Participants


                                                        (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)
                                                      Baseline          Linear          Quadratic             Cubic


1[New Refrigerator]it                                  -11.0**          -11.5**           -11.4**            -11.5**
                                                        (0.4)            (0.5)             (0.5)               (0.5)


1[New Air Conditioner]it                                -0.2             -0.7              -0.5                -0.5
                                                        (0.8)            (0.8)             (0.8)               (0.8)

1[New Air Conditioner]it x 1[Summer Months]it          16.5**           16.6**            16.2**              16.1**
                                                        (4.2)            (4.2)             (4.2)               (4.2)


Household By Calendar Month Fixed Effects               Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes
Month-of-Sample By County Fixed Effects                 Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes

Number of Households                                 1,914,160        1,914,160          1,914,160          1,914,160
Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from four separate regressions. In all regressions the
dependent variable is monthly electricity consumption in kilowatt hours and the coefficients of interest correspond to
indicator variables for households who have replaced their refrigerator or air-conditioner through C4C. Column (2)
includes an interaction between month-of-sample and an indicator for whether the household participated in C4C.
Column (3) contains that same term as well as an interaction between month-of-sample squared and an indicator for
participation. Column (4) contains both of those terms plus an interaction for month-of-sample cubed and an indicator
for participation. The sample includes billing records from May 2009 through April 2011 from the complete set of
households that participated in the program and a sample of non-participating households matched to treatment
households using account number information. Standard errors are clustered by county to allow for arbitrary serial
correlation and correlation across households within municipalities. Double asterisks denote statistical significance at
the 1% level; single asterisks at the 5% level.




                                                                49
                                               APPENDIX TABLE 3
                          Demographics and Appliance Saturation in Mexico, ENIGH 2000-2010


                                         2000          2002           2004          2006          2008          2010
                                        ENIGH         ENIGH          ENIGH         ENIGH         ENIGH         ENIGH


Demographics:

    Total Population (in millions)        98.8          101.2         103.2         105.0         110.0         112.7

    Total Number of Households            23.7          24.5          25.6           26.5          27.4          29.1
    (in millions)

    Household Size (persons)               4.2           4.1           4.0           4.0           4.0            4.0

    Number of Rooms in Home                 -            3.0           4.0           4.0           4.0            4.0



Electricity and Appliance Saturation:

    Refrigerator                         73.9%         76.5%         79.3%          80.4%         83.0%         83.5%

    Washing Machine                         -          57.1%         61.9%          65.1%         51.4%         64.4%

    Television                           90.0%         96.5%         98.0%          99.3%         94.0%         94.0%

    Computer                                -          13.7%         17.0%          20.0%         23.0%         26.7%

    Electricity in the Home              99.3%         99.1%         97.3%          98.5%         97.9%

    Air Conditioning System                 -           7.3%         10.0%          11.4%         11.2%         13.0%


Notes: This table describes data from the Mexican Encuesta Nacional de Ingreso y Gasto en los Hogares (ENIGH), a biannual
survey conducted August through November. These statistics were compiled by the authors using microdata from the
long-form survey which is completed by a representative sample of Mexican households. All statistics are calculated
using sampling weights. We have cross-checked total population and number of households at the national and state
level against published summary statistics and the measures correspond closely. We also carefully examined, but are not
reporting, expenditure information in ENIGH including, in particular, purchases of refrigerators and air conditioners. We
found that the implied number of purchases in these data varied by an unreasonably large amount across years and
implied a total number of purchases considerably lower than total annual purchases for those appliances according to
Mexican industry sources.




                                                           50
