                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SHOULD BENCHMARK INDICES HAVE ALPHA? REVISITING PERFORMANCE
                           EVALUATION

                                           Martijn Cremers
                                           Antti Petajisto
                                            Eric Zitzewitz

                                        Working Paper 18050
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18050


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             May 2012
We wish to thank Yakov Amihud, Nick Barberis, Lauren Cohen, Wayne Ferson, Ken French, John
Griffin, Ilan Guedj, Ron Kaniel, Michael Lemmon, Jonathan Lewellen, Juhani Linnainmaa, Raj Mehra,
Claudia Moise, Lubos Pastor, Christopher Polk, Tarun Ramadorai, Pedro Santa-Clara, Clemens Sialm,
Laura Starks, Michael Stutzer, Paul Tetlock, Ivo Welch, and two anonymous referees for comments,
as well as conference participants at AFA 2010 Annual Meeting, EFA 2009 Annual Meeting, FIRS
2009 Conference, FMA 2009 European Conference, London School of Economics, NBER Asset Pricing
Meeting, Utah Winter Finance Conference, and seminar participants at AQR Capital, Arizona State
University, Dartmouth College, Harvard Business School, Helsinki School of Economics, HKUST,
INSEAD, Numeric Investors, NYU Stern, UC Irvine, University of Alabama, University of Amsterdam,
University of Colorado, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, University of Michigan, University
of Texas at Austin, University of Toronto, Wharton, and Yale School of Management. We also thank
Frank Russell Co, Standard and Poor’s, Dow Jones Wilshire, and Morningstar for providing us with
data. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Q-Group, as well as the EFA Best Paper
award of the Commonfund Institute, the FMA Europe Best Paper award, and the Roger F. Murray
Prize of the Q-Group. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Martijn Cremers, Antti Petajisto, and Eric Zitzewitz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Should Benchmark Indices Have Alpha? Revisiting Performance Evaluation
Martijn Cremers, Antti Petajisto, and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 18050
May 2012
JEL No. G11,G14,G23

                                            ABSTRACT

Standard Fama-French and Carhart models produce economically and statistically significant nonzero
alphas, even for passive benchmark indices such as the S&P 500 and Russell 2000. We find that these
alphas arise primarily from the disproportionate weight the Fama-French factors place on small value
stocks, which have performed well, and from the CRSP value-weighted market index, which is historically
a downward-biased benchmark for U.S. stocks. We propose small methodological changes to the Fama-French
factors to eliminate the nonzero alphas, and we also propose factor models based on common and
tradable benchmark indices. Both kinds of alternative models improve performance evaluation of actively
managed portfolios, with the index-based models exhibiting the best performance.


Martijn Cremers                                    Eric Zitzewitz
Yale School of Management                          Department of Economics
135 Prospect Street                                Dartmouth College
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                           6106 Rockefeller Hall
martijn.cremers@yale.edu                           Hanover, NH 03755
                                                   and NBER
Antti Petajisto                                    eric.zitzewitz@dartmouth.edu
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 W 4th St., Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
antti.petajisto@stern.nyu.edu
1 Introduction
        Practitioners typically evaluate money managers by comparing their returns to benchmark
indices, such as the S&P 500 for large-cap stocks and the Russell 2000 for small-cap stocks. In
contrast, academics use the Carhart four-factor model and the Fama-French three-factor model as the
standard benchmarks. Our paper provides evidence that the practitioner and academic approaches can
yield very different results, because the academic factor models assign large nonzero alphas even to
the passive benchmark indices.

        For example, regressing the excess returns of the S&P 500 index (including dividends) on the
Carhart four-factor model yields an annual alpha of 0.82% (t = 2.78) over our sample period from
1980 to 2005. The Russell 2000 annual alpha is –2.41% (t = –3.21). A portfolio that is long S&P 500
growth and short Russell 2000 growth has an impressive annual alpha of 5.23% (t = 4.23). Hence,
even pure index funds that track common benchmark indices appear to have significant positive or
negative “skill.” Yet these benchmark indices represent broad, well-diversified, and passive portfolios
that almost by definition should have zero abnormal returns or alphas—after all, the S&P 500 and
Russell 2000 together cover about 85% of the U.S. equity market value and are the two most common
benchmark indices for fund managers.

        This problem is not limited to common benchmark indices or the time periods over which
these indices have existed. When we examine the Carhart and Fama-French alphas of size and book-
to-market (BM) decile portfolios, we find that the largest size decile portfolios have positive alphas,
the small-cap portfolios tend to have negative alphas, and the differences are more extreme for growth
stocks. As with the indices, we can reject the joint null hypothesis that the true alphas are zero and that
the deviations from zero arise through chance (with p-values that are always less than 0.1% even when
we allow for clustering of returns within time periods). The evidence of nonzero alphas for the decile
portfolios strengthens when we extend the analysis to the 1927–2005 period.

        We find that there are three main causes of these nonzero alphas. First, the Fama-French (FF)
methodology equal-weights the 2x3 size-by-BM portfolios when constructing the small-minus-big
(SMB) and high-minus-low (HML) factors, even though these portfolios contain very different
amounts of market cap. Relative to value-weighting—the approach taken by indices and (necessarily)
by investors collectively—the FF approach overweights stocks in the small value portfolio, which
have outperformed during the time period commonly studied in the literature (e.g., Loughran, 1997).
Overweighting small value stocks exaggerates the return of the SMB factor. This causes the (value-




                                                     2
weighted) Russell 2000, with its positive loading on SMB, to underperform its FF benchmark, and the
S&P 500, with its negative loading on SMB, to outperform.5

         Second, beginning with Carhart (1997), the Fama-French-Carhart (FFC) methodology
generally uses the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted excess return as its
market factor.6 This index includes not only U.S. common stocks, but also non-U.S. firms, closed-end
funds, real estate investment trusts (REITs), and other securities such as shares of beneficial interest
(SBIs). These other assets dramatically underperformed U.S. common stocks from 1980 to 2005,
yielding an annual Carhart alpha of -4.01% (t = 2.67). Thus, the CRSP-VW index underperforms U.S.
common stocks by about 23 basis points per year. For indices that hold mainly U.S. common stocks,
such as the S&P 500, this contributes to positive alphas.

         Third, annual changes to the indexes also contribute to negative index alphas, especially for
small-capitalization indices. For example, every year, at the end of June, Russell adds and deletes
stocks from its indices according to a pre-announced formula. In anticipation of the one-time demand
shock by index investors, stocks being added to the Russell 2000 outperform stocks being deleted in
June, and the reverse occurs in July, lowering the returns on the index itself. We find that about one-
half of the negative alpha of the Russell 2000 occurs during June and July, suggesting the
reconstitution effect also has an impact on index alphas.7 But reconstitution is not the full story,
because the Russell 2000 exhibits a negative, statistically and economically significant alpha in the
other 10 months of the year as well, and we also find negative alphas for small-cap portfolios such as
the S&P 600 and size decile portfolios that suffer from smaller or negligible reconstitution effects.

         These sources of nonzero alphas represent a combination of ex-ante and ex-post biases. For
instance, the outperformance of small value and underperformance of non-U.S. common stocks
included in CRSP during our time period need not persist out-of-sample. In contrast, the
underperformance of closed-end funds, whose returns reflect underwriting and management fees,
might be expected to persist. Even the ex-post biases we document are undesirable, however, in that




5
  Note that if one size factor and one value factor were enough to span average returns across the size-value
grid, then any combination of the factors would still explain the cross-section of returns. Hence, the
problem with nonzero alphas arises because one value factor and one size factor are not enough to span
historical returns across the size-value grid: there seems to be a separate value effect for small and large
stocks.
6
 Fama and French (1993) use only U.S. common stocks in the market portfolio. In subsequent papers they
use the CRSP value-weighted index, which is the market return provided on Ken French’s website.
7
  We also investigated whether flows into index funds or institutional portfolios benchmarked to the various
indices are related to benchmark alphas, but did not find any robust associations.



                                                      3
they affect performance evaluation in the time period commonly studied, and they indicate a general
lack of robustness, which could lead to biased alphas (in either direction) in future time periods.

        We explore three alternative remedies. The first modifies the Fama-French-Carhart
methodology by value-weighting the SMB and HML factors and by limiting the market factor to U.S.
common stocks, thereby bringing the FFC methodology closer to the practices of the asset managers it
is used to evaluate. The second substitutes index-based factors (S&P 500 for the market; Russell 2000
minus S&P 500 for SMB; Russell 3000 Value minus Russell 3000 Growth for HML), which are
value-weighted and exclude most of the underperforming securities included in the CRSP value-
weighted index. The third augments both the modified FFC and index-based models with three
additional factors—one to capture the relative performance of midcaps, and three HML factors instead
of one to allow the value-growth effect to differ for large, midcap and small cap stocks.

        We find that both modified FFC and index models reduce index alphas significantly (for
index models this, of course, is partly mechanical). Both modified FFC and index models produce less
out-of-sample tracking error volatility when used to explain actively managed mutual fund returns.
Index models perform slightly better than modified FFC models in this latter analysis. The seven-
factor versions of the models yield lower (out-of-sample) tracking error volatility than the four-factor
versions. Surprisingly, the improvements from adding three factors are fairly modest relative to the
improvement from switching to our alternative four-factor models from the FFC model.

        Finally, we provide an example of how the benchmark model biases can affect conclusions
about manager performance. We compare the average alphas of actively managed mutual funds in
different size style categories. Alphas from the FFC model suggest that small-cap managers
underperform large-cap managers by -2.13 percentage points per year. This counter-intuitive result is
fully reversed when we switch to any of our modified or index factor models.

        This is not the first study to document nonzero alphas. Fama and French (1993, Table 9a and
p. 41) themselves note a positive alpha in the large-growth corner of their 5x5 sort and a negative
alpha in the small-growth corner. Chan, Dimmock, and Lakonishok (2009) document a negative and
statistically significant alpha for the Russell 2000 Growth index (their Table 8). Both papers make
subtle choices that (presumably unintentionally) minimize the problem. Fama and French equal-
weight their 25 stock portfolios in their presentation and F-statistics, which gives the positive alpha
large-growth corner portfolio a 4% weight, despite its containing 30% of market capitalization (their
Table 1). Chan et al. (2009) study a 13-year sample and thus find a statistically significant alpha for
only one of the eight Russell indices they study.

        The lower power of regression-based factor models in a short time period is less of an issue
for Chan et al. (2009), since their main focus is on characteristics-based models. Our focus is instead
on the more widely used factor models. In addition to more thoroughly documenting nonzero alphas,


                                                     4
our main contribution is to understand their exact source. We trace the alphas to specific choices made
in the construction of factors. Fortunately, these choices are easily altered, and with minimal effort,
the profession can adopt alternative factor models that better measure portfolio performance.

        Our contribution here is methodological as well as conceptual and related to the
benchmarking and pricing models of Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997). Sharpe’s (1992)
style analysis is one of the few studies using multiple benchmark indices for performance evaluation.
However, it does not investigate model construction in any detail or evaluate alternative model
specifications. In addition to indices, Elton, Gruber, and Blake (1999) advocate the use of factors
based on mutual fund returns. Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) present a nonlinear
benchmarking methodology based on characteristics-matched portfolios that avoids many of the issues
we document, albeit at the cost of requiring knowledge of portfolio holdings and a nontrivial amount
of computation. In this paper we focus on refining factor models that do not require holdings data,
given that this approach remains popular among researchers and practitioners. Furthermore, we focus
on unconditional factor models (unlike Ferson and Schadt 1996) and only on the value and size
dimensions, again to keep the scope of our study manageable and to make it relevant for the large
number of researchers and practitioners who evaluate portfolio performance using the unconditional
four-factor FFC model.

        This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the criteria for judging a benchmark
model and how they differ from those used for pricing models. Section 3 explains the data sources,
including the basics of the most common benchmark indices. Section 4 presents evidence on
benchmark index alphas under the Carhart model and investigates the sources of those alphas. Section
5 presents alternative factor models, examines the common variation in returns explained by various
factor models, and explores how the choice of model affects conclusions about the relative
performance of managers in different styles. We present our conclusions in Section 6.


2 Defining a Good Benchmark Model
        We define a “benchmark” portfolio as a passively managed portfolio with risk exposures
similar to the portfolio whose performance we are evaluating. A “factor” is any excess return that
could be used in constructing a benchmark. We define an “index” as a commonly known and used
benchmark such as the S&P 500. A benchmark portfolio could simply be an index, or it could be a
combination of multiple factors; for example, the Carhart four-factor model produces a benchmark
portfolio that is a weighted combination of four factor portfolios.

        Criteria for defining a “good” benchmark model for portfolio performance evaluation are not
identical to those of a good pricing model, even though pricing models can also be used as benchmark
models. A pricing model should be the simplest possible model that explains the cross-section of


                                                     5
expected stock returns. Asset pricing theory suggests that expected returns should be a linear function
of betas of the portfolio with respect to one or more systematic risk factors. Empirically motivated
factors, in principle, could be derived from any stock characteristic that is believed to predict returns
out-of-sample.

        A benchmark model, in comparison, should provide the most accurate estimate of a portfolio
manager’s added value relative to a passive strategy. This implies that a benchmark model should
include the pricing model so that the manager does not get credit for simply bearing more systematic
risk. A benchmark model can also include non-priced factors to reduce noise in alpha estimates or can
even encompass well-known “anomalies.” For example, if momentum has historically produced
excess returns, but whether it will do so once widely known is in question, then controlling for past
exposure to momentum in a benchmark might be justified. Even including industry risk in the
benchmark might be warranted when evaluating the abnormal performance of a fund manager with a
persistent tilt toward a particular industry, regardless of the fact that industry risk should presumably
not be priced ex-ante and therefore should not be included in a pricing model.

        In this spirit, Fama and French (1993) propose two bond market factors, despite their long-
term risk premia being close to zero, both because they explain significant time-series variation in
returns and because their risk premia may vary over time. Furthermore, Pastor and Stambaugh (2002)
show that including non-priced factors in a benchmark model helps in estimating alphas, even if we
know the true ex-ante pricing model. However, most academics have chosen to use the Fama-French
three-factor model and Carhart four-factor model for benchmarking applications.

        In contrast to the academic literature, practitioners generally compare money managers
against their self-declared benchmark indices such as the S&P 500 or Russell 2000. The mere
subtraction of the benchmark index return may oversimplify performance evaluation, but this
approach can be made more flexible by using a set of benchmark indices as factors for benchmarking
purposes.

        To determine how well a model performs as a benchmark for money managers, we test
several properties. First, a new model should track the time series of returns better than old models,
producing lower out-of-sample tracking error volatility. This also means that the factors should
capture common variation in returns, which is a necessary condition for a nonzero factor premium in
the Arbitrage Pricing Theory. Second, a model should explain the cross-section of average returns
well, without generating significant alphas across large segments of the market such as large caps or
small caps. This should hold for test assets such as size and book-to-market-sorted portfolios as well
as for a cross-section of mutual funds (unless it is plausible that the average managerial skill varies
from large positive to large negative values across market segments or styles).




                                                    6
         Unfortunately, no model with a reasonable number of factors is likely to span the entire cross-
section of average returns. Even across the two dimensions of size and value we would need more
than three factors; for example, Fama and French (1993) report significant alphas for large growth and
small growth portfolios using their three-factor model. To make comparisons across models, we must
therefore decide how to weight these pricing errors across portfolios. In other words, because we
cannot price everything correctly, we must identify whether we care about pricing some portfolios
(such as the ones with greater market value) more than other portfolios (such as the ones with very
little market value).

         In this paper we work with three kinds of test assets: 1) common benchmark indices such as
the S&P 500 and Russell 2000, 2) other passive portfolios such as CRSP size deciles, and 3) portfolios
of actively managed U.S. equity mutual funds. The common theme in our tests is that we try to price
real-world investment portfolios rather than portfolios that are narrowly defined, have little market
capitalization, or have significant time variation in their composition. For example, we consider it
more important to price the S&P 500 correctly than to price a portfolio of illiquid microcap value
stocks with a trivial amount of market capitalization.

         The question of which factor model, among all of those used, is the best one for performance
evaluation is simply too broad to address in this paper. Instead, we focus on a narrower question:
along the two dimensions of size and value—overwhelmingly the most common ways for both
academics and practitioners to slice the equity market into different investment styles—what are the
problems with our existing academic performance evaluation models, and how could they be
improved while maintaining the same basic structure? We build directly on the enormous contribution
of Fama and French (1993), who introduced the original size and value factors. Understanding these
problems with size and value benchmarks is, of course, a prerequisite for addressing the broader
question of the best factor model in all dimensions.

         Our analyses focus on explaining average or “unconditional” returns, the approach most
commonly taken by researchers. Conditional performance evaluation (e.g., Ferson and Schadt, 1996)
represents another interesting but separate topic that could be investigated after the issues with the
more common unconditional models are understood.


3 Data

3.1 Benchmark Indices
         We include all non-specialized U.S. equity benchmark indices that are commonly used by
practitioners. This covers a total of 23 indices from three index families: Standard and Poor’s, Frank



                                                       7
Russell, and Dow Jones Wilshire. Our data, obtained directly from these three index providers, covers
monthly and daily index returns (including dividends) as well as month-end index constituents.

         The main S&P indices are the S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400, and S&P SmallCap 600. The
S&P 500 is the most common large-cap benchmark index, consisting of approximately the largest 500
stocks. It is further divided into a growth and value style, with equal market capitalization in each. The
S&P 400 and S&P 600 consist of 400 midcap and 600 small-cap stocks, respectively, and they are
also further divided into separate value and growth indices.

         From the Russell family we select 12 indices: the Russell 1000, Russell 2000, Russell 3000,
and Russell Midcap indices, plus the value and growth components of each. The Russell 3000 covers
the largest 3,000 stocks in the U.S., and the Russell 1000 covers the largest 1,000 stocks. The Russell
2000 is the most common small-cap benchmark, consisting of the smallest 2,000 stocks in the Russell
3000. The Russell Midcap index contains the smallest 800 stocks in the Russell 1000.

         Finally, we include the two most popular Wilshire indices, namely the Wilshire 5000 and
Wilshire 4500. The Wilshire 5000 covers essentially the entire U.S. equity market, with about 5,000
stocks in 2004 and peaking at over 7,500 stocks in 1998. The Wilshire 4500 is equal to the Wilshire
5000 minus the 500 stocks in the S&P 500 index, which makes it a mid- to small-cap index.

         Since 1998, all mutual funds have had to report a benchmark index to the SEC. Table 1,
which shows the self-reported benchmark indices for U.S. all-equity mutual funds in January 2007,
indicates the popularity of each index. The most common self-declared benchmark index is the S&P
500. The Russell 2000 is the second-most popular benchmark, and its value and growth components
are also relatively popular. The most common self-declared midcap index is the S&P 400, although
the Russell Midcap group of indices is collectively more popular.8 Wilshire indices are less common
in terms of the number of funds, but they each have a nontrivial amount of assets benchmarked to
them.

         S&P indices do not cover all stocks, due to S&P’s relatively tight selection criteria on
profitability and other firm characteristics. Additionally, the market cap boundaries of each S&P index
are very flexible, as market cap is only one of S&P’s selection criteria. In contrast, Russell indices
cover virtually their entire target universe and use strict market cap cutoffs.9




8
 The Russell style indices have recently become more common benchmarks than the S&P style indices,
whereas the S&P 500 style indices used to be more popular in the 1990s. Boyer (2006) provides more
details on the S&P 500 style indices.
9
  These points are illustrated in Figure 1 of the Online Appendix, which shows the fraction of ordinary
common stock of U.S. firms covered by the most common indices as a function of market capitalization.
Each month and for each market cap rank n, we compute the fraction of the neighboring 20 stocks (i.e.,


                                                      8
3.2 Other Data Sources
           All stock data are from CRSP, supplemented with accounting data from Compustat. Mutual
fund data items are primarily from CRSP, with the exception of quarterly holdings data from
Thomson Financial, self-reported benchmark index data from Morningstar, and daily fund returns
before 2001 from a survivorship-free database originally obtained from the Wall Street Web and used
by Goetzmann, Ivkovic, and Rouwenhorst (2001). The CRSP and Thomson Financial mutual fund
databases are matched using MFLINKS. We pick a sample of U.S. all-equity mutual funds with at
least $10 million in assets, following the screening procedure in Cremers and Petajisto (2009), to
address issues like incubation bias. Fama-French factor and portfolio data are from Ken French’s
website.


4 Alphas of Benchmark Indices

4.1 Baseline Results
           Table 2 presents estimates of Carhart and Fama-French alphas for the major Russell, S&P,
and Wilshire indices from 1980 to 2005.10 Alphas are positive and statistically significant for the
general and growth versions of the large-cap indices (the Russell 1000 and S&P 500) and are negative
and statistically significant for the general and growth versions of the small-cap indices (the Russell
2000 and S&P 600). The alpha for the Wilshire 5000 is close to zero as expected, given that it
approximates the CRSP value-weighted index (which is included as a factor in the Carhart model).
Index alphas are similar for the Fama-French and Carhart models, reflecting generally minor loadings
on the momentum factor. Furthermore, an F-test of all index alphas jointly being equal to zero
produces a p-value below 0.0001%, meaning that index alphas are jointly statistically significant at
any reasonable level and again highlighting that the nonzero alphas are a problem for more than a few
indices.




stocks with market cap ranks from n–10 to n+10) that are in the index. The figure reports the average index
membership density from 1996 to 2005. We do not see discrete steps at 1,000 and 3,000 because we
average across market cap rankings throughout the year, whereas Russell updates its indices only once a
year.
10
   We use a sample period back to January 1980 when possible. For some indices (see the footnote to Table
2 for a list), the first available return data are from a later date. The Russell indices were introduced in
January 1984, and returns from 1980 to 1983 were calculated by Russell based on a back-casting of their
index construction rule (which is mechanically based on market capitalization). Following most of the
recent literature, we calculate our alphas in-sample, estimating factor weights over our entire sample
period. In unreported results, index alphas estimated using betas from a trailing 60-month window are
qualitatively similar.


                                                      9
         Figure 1 plots cumulative Carhart alphas for the growth, value, and general versions of the
S&P 500 and Russell 2000. The plots begin at January 1980 or the inception date (whichever is later),
with the exception of the S&P 500, which we extend back to January 1961 (the beginning of the
CRSP Mutual Funds dataset and thus of many performance evaluation studies). The S&P 500 exhibits
a positive alpha during the 1960s, 1980s, and 1990s, and an approximately zero alpha during the
1970s and since 2000.11 The negative alpha of the Russell 2000 is fairly steady throughout the sample.
For both indices, nonzero alphas are significantly more pronounced for the growth versions.

         Our main point does not depend on whether these patterns exist in every time period we
examine. Having both economically and statistically significant alphas in any time period potentially
indicates a lack of robustness for the benchmark model, and it is particularly troubling in the 1980–
2005 time period because this period is so commonly used by researchers (due to the availability of
mutual fund holdings data starting in 1980).


4.2 Sources of Index Alphas: Factor Construction
         The standard Fama-French model makes a number of methodological choices. We reexamine
these choices and consider whether they contribute to the index alphas. Fama and French (1993, p. 9)
note that the choices made in constructing their factors “are arbitrary ... and we have not searched over
alternatives.” Presumably, they avoided searching over alternatives to avoid the temptation of data
mining. This is an important concern for us as well; in proposing or recommending alternative
choices, we are always guided by an effort to mimic the choices made in the construction of actual
benchmark indices and real-world portfolios.

         Specifically, we examine four choices: 1) the universe of assets included in the market factor,
2) the weighting of component portfolios when constructing factors, 3) the imposition of a common
value factor for small and large stocks, and 4) the boundaries between size and BM categories. In each
case, we propose alternative choices that are more consistent with the construction of the benchmark
indices and real-world portfolios. We find that these alternative choices lead to factor models that
more closely approximate the mix of stocks held by comparable indices, and individually and
collectively reduce index alphas and their variance.




11
  Since writing the first draft of this paper in 2007, we have extended the results in Figure 1 and Table 2 to
the end of 2010. Including this period reinforces our conclusions from 1980–2005. In particular, large-cap
indices continued to have more positive FFC alphas than small-cap indices, and this continued to be
particularly true among the growth sub-indices. Versions of Figure 1 and Table 2 that extend to 2010 are
available in the Online Appendix.



                                                       10
4.2.1    Definition of the Market Portfolio

         For their market proxy, Fama and French (1993) use a value-weighted portfolio of the stocks
in their size and BM portfolios, plus stocks with negative book equity. Specifically, they include
common stocks of U.S.-headquartered and listed firms (CRSP share codes 10 and 11) that have a
sufficiently long history,12 thus excluding new issues. Carhart (1997) and most of the subsequent
literature instead use the CRSP value-weighted index, which includes all U.S.-headquartered and
listed common stocks, as well as closed-end funds, REITs, foreign firms with primary listings in the
U.S., and other asset types such as certificates, shares of beneficial interest, and units.13 This is also
the market return researchers commonly obtain from Ken French’s website.

         We find that the choice of which securities to include in the market proxy significantly affects
risk-adjusted returns. Table 3 reports Carhart alphas for the different components of the CRSP value-
weighted index, which has an alpha of exactly zero by construction since it is included as a factor in
the model. U.S. common stocks (share codes 10 and 11) collectively have an alpha of 23 basis points
(bp) per year over our 1980–2005 period. This is explained by the underperformance of other
securities such as foreign firms and closed-end funds, which have a surprisingly low Carhart alpha of
-4.01% (t = 2.67) per year. The stocks included in the Fama-French size-BM-sorted portfolios have an
alpha of 51 bp per year, indicating underperformance by stocks with insufficient data or negative book
value, which is also consistent with the general long-term underperformance of IPOs.14

         Given that the Carhart model is most often used as a benchmark for domestic nonspecialized
equity mutual fund portfolios, we use the holdings of these portfolios or their self-declared benchmark
indices as a guideline for what to include in the market factor (Table 3). New issues are included in
these portfolios, while closed-end funds, foreign firms, and assets such as shares of beneficial interest
are excluded from the indices and are held at much lower rates by funds, if at all. Foreign firms are
less likely to be included in indices or funds. REITs are the closest call; they are held by the
benchmark indices and by equity mutual funds, although the funds represent a slightly smaller fraction
of shareholders in REITs than in U.S. firms. For this reason, we exclude them from the market factor,
but as their inclusion affects the average return of the market proxy by less than 1 basis point per year,
results are very similar if they are included.


12
   This means that Compustat and CRSP data for the firm must have started 3.5–4.5 years and 0.5–1.5 years
earlier, respectively, depending on the month.
13
   American Depository Receipts (ADRs) are the only securities included in the CRSP stock file but
excluded from the CRSP value-weighted index.
14
   See Ritter (1991) for the long-term IPO performance, and also Barber and Lyon (1997, p. 342), who
discuss the associated reverse problem of the “new listing bias, which arises because … sampled firms
generally have a long post-event history of returns, while firms that constitute the index typically include
new firms that begin trading subsequent to the event month.”



                                                      11
        Overall, these results indicate that the CRSP value-weighted market portfolio is a downward-
biased benchmark for portfolios consisting of U.S. stocks even within our relatively long time period
of two-and-a-half decades. Instead, it would be more appropriate to benchmark actively managed U.S.
equity portfolios with a market portfolio consisting of only U.S. equities.15


4.2.2   Equal-Weighting in Fama-French factors

        The second Fama-French methodological choice involves the weighting of stocks in
constructing factors. In their seminal paper, Fama and French (1993) construct factors capturing the
relative performance of small and value stocks using the following procedure: They sort U.S. common
stocks into six value-weighted portfolios based on whether a stock’s market capitalization is “Big”
(above the NYSE median) or “Small” (below the median) and whether its BM ratio is “High” (top
three deciles), “Medium” (middle four deciles), or “Low” (bottom three deciles). They then equal-
weight across these six portfolios; their small-minus-big (SMB) factor is (Small-Low + Small-
Medium + Small-High)/3 – (Big-Low + Big-Medium + Big-High)/3, and their high-minus-low-BM
(HML) factor is (Small-High + Big-High)/2 – (Small-Low + Big-Low)/2, as illustrated in Panel B of
Table 4. Fama and French exclude from the six portfolios stocks with negative book equity or with no
book equity data available for the fiscal year ending in the prior calendar year, and so these stocks
receive zero weight in their factors.

        Panel A of Table 4 reports the average share of the CRSP market index represented by Fama
and French’s 2x3 portfolios as well as their average excess returns. Panel A also shows two portfolios
of stocks that are excluded by the Fama-French factors but still included in the CRSP index. Just like
in Fama and French (1993), two things are apparent: first, the growth portfolios have much more
market capitalization than the value portfolios, and second, the best performance by far has been
exhibited by the Small Value (or Small size – High book-to-market) portfolio.

        To see how this creates nonzero index alphas, let us consider two “target portfolios”: the
Fama-French size decile 10 portfolio, which contains the large stocks typical of the S&P 500 index,
and the size decile 4 portfolio, which contains the small stocks typical of the Russell 2000 index. The
fitted regression of either portfolio on the Fama-French factors produces the three-factor benchmark
portfolio, where the alpha is the difference in return between the target portfolio and its benchmark. If
the benchmark portfolio has the same broad category exposures as the target portfolio, the alphas are
likely to be zero; if the two differ significantly, this may be (but does not have to be) a source of


15
   Figure 3A in the Online Appendix plots the cumulative difference between the value-weighted return of
all U.S. common stocks in CRSP and the CRSP-VW return (which, as discussed, includes other types of
securities). The apparent downward bias in the CRSP-VW return is most pronounced in the 1980s and
1990s, which is also when the S&P 500 exhibits a positive alpha.



                                                     12
nonzero alpha. We conduct the analysis for the Fama-French three-factor model to keep it more
transparent, but the mechanism is virtually identical for the Carhart model with the added momentum
factor.

          The left-hand side of Panel C shows the weights that size decile 10 (large stocks) has on the
2x4 grid. The right-hand side of the panel shows the regression coefficients when the return on this
portfolio is regressed on the returns on the Fama-French factors: the negative beta on SMB is
expected, but the nonzero beta on HML is more surprising. Below the factor betas, we see the 2x4
portfolio weights implied by the three-factor model.

          The 2x4 weights of the size decile 10 target portfolio differ from the benchmark weights,
particularly in small caps. The target portfolio has a zero weight on small caps, while the benchmark
portfolio has a large and negative weight of –19.1%; two-thirds of this difference comes from heavy
underweighting of small value stocks, which have performed very well (Panel A). This significant
underweighting of small value stocks contributes to poor performance by the benchmark and thus a
positive alpha relative to this benchmark for this target portfolio.

          Why does the benchmark portfolio get such a large underweight on small value stocks?
Because the market beta is about 1, we start the benchmark portfolio with essentially the market
weights in Panel A. As previously discussed, SMB places equal weights on all six component
portfolios (Panel B), so it will reduce the weight on small value stocks (market weight 2.0%) too much
compared to small growth stocks (market weight 3.5%). Furthermore, a large negative beta on SMB
will increase the weight on large value stocks too much while not increasing the weight on large
growth stocks enough. To reduce this overweight on large value, the model produces a negative beta
on HML. But this comes at the cost of reducing the weight on small value even more, producing a
13% underweight.

          The small stocks in size decile 4 exhibit the opposite effect. When the returns of this portfolio
are regressed on the three-factor model, the market beta is again about 1, but SMB and HML betas are
positive. The equal-weighting of SMB implies that the large positive SMB beta produces an
overweight in small value and an underweight in small growth stocks. Furthermore, the SMB weights
generate a considerable growth bias in large stocks: about +18% weight in large growth and -15%
weight in large value. A positive HML loading is needed to offset this growth tilt, but it comes with
the cost of increasing the small-cap value bias even more. As a result, the benchmark portfolio has a
40% weight on small value compared to the target portfolio’s 19% weight, and it has the opposite
weights on small growth. Given the performance record of small value relative to small growth stocks
(Panel A), this value tilt in the three-factor benchmark significantly contributes to a negative alpha on
the target portfolio.




                                                      13
         A simple way to address this problem is to value-weight the SMB component portfolios
within the size groups. We conclude that an equal-weighted SMB distorts alphas in two ways. First,
overweighting value creates an artificially high average return for an equal-weighted SMB factor.
Second, the equal-weighted SMB factor distorts portfolio weights in large stocks in a way that induces
an offsetting HML loading. Taken together, these effects lead to an underweighting of small value
stocks in the benchmark for large-cap portfolios and an overweighting of small value stocks in the
benchmark for small-cap portfolios, which in turn contributes to a positive alpha for large stocks and
negative alpha for small stocks. A value-weighted SMB factor avoids both problems. We quantify this
effect in Section 4.3.


4.2.3    Single Value Factor across Size Groups

         One might still wonder why the weighting of the factor portfolios matters, and in particular,
why betas do not fully adjust for however the factors are constructed. For example, if we tilt the HML
factor toward a very high exposure to small value stocks, why does this not simply produce lower
HML betas and thus leave alpha estimates unaffected? The reason is that three factors are not enough
to span the average returns across the size-value grid: the value premium has been much stronger in
small caps than large caps across our sample period, so a single value factor cannot capture it. Because
of this incomplete spanning, one factor model is not just a rotation of another factor model; instead, it
does matter how the factors are selected.

         For example, as the returns illustrate in Panel A of Table 4, the outperformance of value
stocks over growth stocks is much more pronounced among small stocks (13.21–4.85 = 8.36% per
year) than large stocks (9.20–7.61 = 1.59% per year). Nevertheless, Fama and French and the
subsequent literature apply a single value factor (HML) that equally weights the outperformance of
value stocks among small and large stocks. Using a model that forces the large-cap and small-cap
value effects to be equal is likely to generate positive alphas for small value and large growth
portfolios and negative alphas for small growth and large value portfolios, and this is indeed what we
find in Table 2.

         While Ross’s (1976) Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT) predicts that returns should be linearly
related to factors, APT does not rule out separate value factors for large and small stocks. Indeed, the
industry practice of focusing portfolios on a particular capitalization range makes a decoupling of the
large and small-cap value effects seem less surprising. As a result, we experiment with models that




                                                    14
allow for separate big- and small-stock HML factors (BHML and SHML, respectively; see also Moor
and Sercu 2006).16


4.2.4      Boundaries between Size and Value Groups

           The fourth choice we revisit is Fama and French’s decision to partition stocks into two size
categories (big and small) and three (or four) value categories (low, medium, or high BM, and none).
In contrast, the industry practice has historically been to partition stocks into three or four size
categories (large, mid, small, and micro) but only two value categories (growth and value, with some
indices and portfolios including both), and this practice is reflected in the Russell and S&P family of
indices.

           The S&P 500 primarily includes stocks from NYSE size deciles 9 and 10, and midcap stocks
are drawn mostly from deciles 6–8. The Russell 2000 includes stocks from size deciles 2–5, and the
microcaps (included only in the Wilshire 5000) are primarily in decile 1. The growth components of
the indices include stocks from only the two-to-three lowest BM deciles, while stocks in the other
seven-to-eight BM deciles are usually in the value index. This is because the indices construct the
growth and value components so that they evenly divide the market cap of the index, whereas the
Fama-French decile cutoffs weight stocks equally and are based only on NYSE stocks, which tend to
have a value bias relative to Nasdaq stocks.17

           The SMB and HML betas of the 10x12 size-value portfolios yield three interesting patterns.18
First, only the largest cap decile is clearly negatively correlated with SMB; the midcaps (size deciles
6–8) are positively correlated with SMB despite being included among Big stocks, which should
mechanically induce a negative correlation. Second, BM deciles 4–9 (Medium and High in the Fama-
French scheme) are all positively correlated with HML. Third, the None (no BM) column has a
modest negative correlation with HML. One could argue, based on these correlations, that midcaps
should be included with Small rather than Big stocks, Medium-BM stocks should be included with
High-BM stocks, and the None portfolio of stocks should be included with Low-BM stocks.




16
   Figure 3B in the Online Appendix plots the cumulative difference in the log returns of the SHML and
BHML factors since 1961. The time periods in which Small Value differentially outperforms match the
time periods in which the S&P 500 exhibits a positive alpha (the 1960s, and especially the 1980s and
1990s).
17
   This is illustrated in Figure 2 of the Online Appendix, which shows how the holdings of the benchmark
indices map into the Fama-French 10x10 portfolios as well as two additional groups: “N” for common
stocks of U.S. firms not included in the Fama-French portfolios (such as new listings), and “O” for all other
share codes in the CRSP market index. The shading of each cell indicates the fraction of market cap that a
particular index covers among those stocks.
18
     Results are not reported in order to save space but are available upon request.


                                                          15
         Given these results, we suggest modifications to make the academic partitions more closely
reflect the industry approach. The first is to divide Big stocks (NYSE size deciles 6–10) into large-cap
(deciles 9 and 10) and midcap stocks (deciles 6–8). The second modification is to include Medium-
BM stocks with High-BM stocks, which also results in the share of capitalization treated as Value and
Growth being closer to the 50-50 split used in the industry. We do not include stocks in the None
portfolios with the Low-BM stocks because some of these stocks can be characterized as extreme
value stocks (e.g., those in financial distress with negative book equity), although including them
makes little difference to the results that follow.


4.3 Impact of Alternative Models on Benchmark Alphas

4.3.1    Alphas of Common Benchmark Indices

         In this section, we examine how alternative choices in constructing factors affect the index
alphas as well as their implied loadings on size-BM portfolios. Panel A of Table 5 contains the results
for the S&P 500 and Panel B for the Russell 2000.19 Each panel estimates several alternative models
and calculates the weights implied by the resulting betas on a 3x4 set of size-BM portfolios (Large,
Mid, and Small size; Low, Medium, High, and No BM).20 These implied weights are then compared
with the weights estimated from a “flexible model” (which includes each of the 12 portfolios as a
factor), with a “flexible Non-Negative Least Squares (NNLS)” version that restricts all weights to be
nonnegative, and with the actual percentage of the index accounted for by each portfolio as calculated
from holdings data. This comparison helps identify instances in which the structure of the factor
model leads to a mismatch between the model-implied weights on the 3x4 portfolios and the index’s
actual weights. Although such mismatches need not necessarily contribute to index alphas, for the
indices examined, we find that models producing close portfolio weight matches also produce smaller
index alphas.

         The first column in Panel A of Table 5 estimates the standard Carhart four-factor model for
the S&P 500. The second column replaces the CRSP value-weighted index (CRSP-VW) with a value-
weighted average of only U.S. common stocks (share codes 10 and 11). The third column replaces the
equal-weighted SMB of Fama-French with a version that value-weights the High-, Medium-, and



19
   The full table (available upon request) contains nine panels, one each for the combined, growth, and
value versions of the S&P 500, Russell 2000, and Russell Midcap.
20
   Each model implies a benchmark portfolio, given by the sum of the product of the Fama-French-Carhart
factor portfolios and the estimated betas. This particular benchmark portfolio (i.e., the “fitted” or explained
return) in turn implies specific weights on the portfolios in the 3x4 size-BM space, which can be quite
different from the actual average weights of the benchmark on these portfolios (based on the flexible model
including all 12 factors or the holdings).


                                                       16
Low-BM portfolios; the fourth column also includes the No BM stocks in SMB. The fifth column
replaces HML with BHML and SHML. The sixth column moves the size and BM boundaries to
correspond more closely with industry practice, including Medium-BM stocks with High-BM stocks
in constructing the HML factors and splitting midcaps apart from Big stocks, which involves replacing
SMB with SMM (Small minus Mid) and MMB (Mid minus Big) and adding a Midcap HML factor
(Mid High minus Mid Low).21

         The alpha of the S&P 500, which is 82 bp per year in the Carhart model, declines as the
models become more flexible. Replacing the CRSP-VW index with U.S. common stocks (column 2)
reduces the alpha by 23 bp, or roughly the difference in the average returns of these two indices.
Value-weighting SMB (column 3) decreases the alpha by another 26 bp to 33 bp per year, which is no
longer statistically significant. Replacing HML with BHML and SHML (column 5) further decreases
the alpha to 11 bp per year, whereas moving the size and BM boundaries (column 6) marginally
increases the alpha to 21 bp. Overall, the first two steps (up to column 3) are the most important in
terms of changing the alpha, and they also bring the model-implied 3x4 portfolio weights closer to the
actual index weights.

         Panel B of Table 5 shows the same exercise for the Russell 2000. Switching from an equally-
weighted to a value-weighted SMB in column 3 increases the estimated alpha by a full percentage
point per year, from -2.66% to -1.62%. However, even in the more flexible models, the negative alpha
of the Russell 2000 remains significant. As we show later, the remaining alpha is concentrated in June
and July, suggesting that it is related to the annual reconstitution of the index at the end of June.

         Table 6 presents an overview of the results for the nine indices. The absolute value of average
index alphas and the sum of their squares clearly decline moving from left to right, and the
methodological gap between the academic model and portfolio and index construction in the financial
industry narrows. The fit between the models’ implied loadings on the 3x4 portfolios and the actual
holdings also improves. Again the largest improvements in alphas come from the first two steps,
between (1) and (3), which include switching to a market portfolio with only U.S. stocks as well as to
a value-weighted SMB factor. Alphas decline further between (4) and (6), but this requires adding
more factors, which may potentially offset the benefit of reduced index alphas.

         Finally, we formally test whether the alphas of the nine benchmark indices in Table 6 are
jointly equal to zero under the various models by calculating the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken test statistic
and its associated p-value. The p-value is adjusted for the relatively small sample size but assumes a


21
   In an earlier version of the paper, we made these three changes (i.e., splitting SMB into SMM and
MMB, adding MidHML, and including Medium with High BM stocks) successively, but since doing so
provided no additional insight, we combine them in this version.



                                                      17
normal distribution of the residuals, and gives the probability that pricing errors are larger than
observed if the model were to hold exactly. At the 5% level, the alphas of the nine indices remain
jointly significant starting with Carhart and continuing until becoming insignificant in the modified
factor models in (5) and (6).


4.3.2   Alphas of Other Passive Portfolios

        As previously mentioned, the nonzero index alphas are not simply a problem associated with
the S&P 500 and the Russell 2000: instead, the index alphas are symptoms of a more general pattern
in which, under the Carhart model, the largest stocks get positive alphas and small-cap stocks get
negative alphas. To illustrate this, Table 7 shows the Carhart and Fama-French alphas of decile
portfolios based on market capitalization. We construct the size deciles ourselves to include all U.S.
stocks each month (including those with missing or negative book equity) using the size decile cutoffs
of the previous month from Ken French’s website. Another benefit of using these size deciles is that
we can now investigate much earlier time periods, going back all the way to 1926, whereas our index
data generally do not start until 1980.

        The alphas of these passive size decile portfolios are indeed consistent with the pattern in
alphas of the indices. They are also again robust to whether we use the Fama-French three-factor
model or the Carhart four-factor model. Furthermore, most though not all alphas are similar in the
period 1980–2005 compared to the much longer time period of 1927–2005. Portfolios of large-cap
stocks tend to have positive alphas, e.g. size decile 10 has an annualized Carhart alpha of 0.98% (t =
2.71) for 1980–2005 and of 0.42% (t = 2.01) for 1927–2005. Small-cap deciles tend to have negative
alphas, with a greater statistical significance for the three-factor model and the full period 1927–2005.

        Just like for the indices, these nonzero alphas largely disappear when we slightly modify the
factors. We show the results using models (4) and (6) from Table 5. Both modified factor models, the
four-factor and the seven-factor version, significantly reduce the nonzero alphas and render all of them
statistically insignificant in both time periods. We also formally test whether the alphas are jointly
equal to zero for all 10 size deciles by calculating the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken test statistic and its
associated p-value. Using a 5% p-value as the threshold, we find that both modified factor models can
explain the size decile portfolios, whereas the Fama-French and Carhart models are rejected.


4.4     Index Reconstitution
        Index reconstitution effects present another possible explanation for the negative alpha of the
small-cap indices (Petajisto 2011). Additions to and deletions from the Russell indices are determined




                                                     18
once per year based on closing market capitalizations on May 31 and are implemented at the end of
June.22 Stocks being added to the Russell 2000 outperform those being deleted in June due to the
anticipation of large index fund trading at the end of the month, and some of the excess returns revert
in July. These patterns should depress the returns of the Russell 2000 relative to non-Russell 2000
stocks and may contribute to the negative alpha we find.

         We expect these rebalancing effects to be concentrated in June and July, and thus perform a
simple test of whether the index reconstitution effect is an important source of the negative alpha of
the Russell 2000 by comparing the June and July alphas with those from other months. In Table 8, we
estimate three models for the Russell 2000 and its growth component: the Carhart model, model (4)
(Carhart with a market factor that includes only U.S. common stocks and a value-weighted SMB
factor that includes the No BM portfolios), and model (6) (model 4, with SMB split into Mid-minus-
Big (MMB) and Small-minus-Mid (SMM), HML replaced by BHML, MidHML, and SHML, and the
Medium-BM stocks included with the High-BM stocks in the HML factor). We add to each model an
indicator variable for June and July; the constant in the model captures the average alpha from August
to May, while the June-July coefficient captures any extra alpha in these two months, which could be
due to reconstitution.

         We find that the alphas for June and July are negative and significant and collectively explain
at least half of the negative alphas for these indices. The proportion that is not explained by the June-
July coefficient drops by about half from model (1) to model (6). For models (4) and (6), the August-
to-May alpha is no longer statistically significant at even the 10% level, but the June-July coefficient
remains highly significant. In unreported versions of these regressions that include an indicator
variable for each month, the June and July coefficients are both significant and of roughly equal size.
The only other months with nonzero alphas are December (positive) and January (negative),
consistent with the well-known January effect.


5 Choosing an Alternative Approach
         What do we propose as better factor models that are not subject to the aforementioned issues?
We test two different approaches. The first approach is to modify the original FFC factors as discussed
above. In our four-factor version (MOD4, or column 4 in Table 5), we restrict the market portfolio to
U.S. stocks, value-weight the SMB factor, and leave the HML and UMD unmodified.23 We also



22
   Over most of our sample period, the Russell reconstitution took place at the close of the last trading day
in June. In 2004, Russell changed this to the Friday that falls between June 21 and June 27.
23
   Value-weighting the HML factor essentially turns it into a BHML factor, which enhances the model's
ability to explain the performance of Large-Growth and Large-Value indices and portfolios, but at the cost
of its ability to explain the performance of small-cap portfolios.


                                                      19
experiment with a seven-factor version of our modified FFC model (MOD7, or column 6 in Table 5),
which introduces a factor for the relative performance of midcaps, splits the value factor in three for
the different size groups, and modifies the Small/Big and High/Low-BM cutoffs.

           Our second approach is to create size and value factors based on the most commonly used
benchmark indices. Our four-factor version (IDX4) replaces SMB and HML with the return
differences between the Russell 2000 and S&P 500 and the Russell 3000 Value and Growth indices,
respectively. The seven-factor version (IDX7) adds a factor for the relative performance of the Russell
Midcap index and separate Value-Growth factors for the most benchmarked indices in each
capitalization group (S&P 500, Russell Midcap, Russell 2000).

           Our purpose here is relatively narrow: to find a benchmark model that controls for market,
size, and value factors and improves upon the Fama-French-Carhart models in various performance
evaluation applications. This means not generating significant alphas for large segments of the market
and also better explaining the time-series and cross-sectional variation in returns in real-world
portfolios. Because we are now comparing the performance of academic and index-based models, we
switch from using indices as test assets to using portfolios of actively managed mutual funds.


5.1 Explaining Common Variation in Mutual Fund Returns

5.1.1      Methodology

           A factor model should capture a significant amount of the time-series variation in portfolio
returns. This is not only a necessary condition in Arbitrage Pricing Theory for a factor to be priced,
but it is also useful for benchmarking purposes because a benchmark that more closely tracks a
portfolio return over time produces tighter standard errors for alpha. As our measure of a model’s
explanatory power, we use the time-series standard deviation of the difference between the return on a
portfolio and the return on its benchmark (as determined by the model), commonly called tracking
error volatility (or just “tracking error” for simplicity). In-sample tracking error could be computed as
the root mean squared error of a single time-series regression; however, we specifically want to
compute out-of-sample tracking error, so we estimate the benchmark portfolio using only past data
and then test how well that benchmark tracks the portfolio in the subsequent period. Tracking error is,
of course, just a scaled version of R2, and thus our tests are analogous to those of Fama and French
(1993). However, tracking error conveniently indicates the standard deviation of a money manager’s
realized alpha, and it also allows our tests to be run out-of-sample, which penalizes a model for
overfitting the data and therefore does not bias the results in favor of models with a large number of
factors.




                                                     20
        Our test assets are actively managed U.S. all-equity mutual funds. This sample represents not
only a large cross-section of portfolios, varying from small-cap to large-cap and from value to growth
stocks, but it also includes the kind of actual investment portfolios encountered in practical
applications.

        We analyze two different measures of return. One is the net excess return on a fund (after
fees) relative to the risk-free rate. The other is the benchmark-adjusted return on a fund, which means
the net return (after fees) in excess of a fund’s benchmark index. Rather than relying on the self-
reported benchmarks shown in Table 1, each time a fund reports holdings, we follow the methodology
of Cremers and Petajisto (2009) and select the index that produces the lowest Active Share, i.e., the
index that has the greatest overlap with the fund’s portfolio holdings. The rationale behind the
benchmark-adjustment is simple: if the benchmark index already captures most of the style differences
across funds, then we may not even need an extensive model to account for the residual style
differences.

        To estimate tracking error for each model, we first need to estimate betas of funds with
respect to each model. We estimate betas based on 12 months of daily data on fund returns and index
returns (see Appendix A for more discussion of beta estimation). We repeat the beta estimation each
time a fund reports its portfolio holdings in the Thomson database, which usually occurs quarterly or
semiannually, using the 12 months prior to the report date. Tracking error is then computed for each
fund using monthly out-of-sample returns.

        We focus on the time period 1996–2005. If we were to start the period earlier, we would have
to include years when some indices had not been officially launched and were not known to investors,
which probably had an impact on fund manager behavior. The Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) began requiring all mutual funds to disclose a benchmark index in their prospectuses in 1998,
so this period coincides with one in which managers probably became more benchmark-aware.


5.1.2   Results

        Panel A of Table 9 shows the equal-weighted annualized tracking error across all of our
benchmark models using excess return or benchmark-adjusted return as the dependent variable. In
terms of excess returns, the average fund experienced volatility of 17.35% per year. Controlling for
the market portfolio reduces it by about a half to 8.28%, and the Fama-French three-factor model
reduces it further to 6.50% per year. Adding the Carhart momentum factor makes little difference for




                                                   21
tracking error. The modified versions of FFC produce lower tracking error than the unmodified
version, particularly when the extra factors are added.24

           The index models produce even lower tracking error. Our four-factor index model yields a
tracking error of 6.15%, or 5% less than Carhart. Adding a midcap index together with midcap and
small-cap value factors further reduces tracking error to 5.80%. This is 64 bp, or 10%, lower than with
the Carhart model, indicating an economically meaningful improvement in (out-of-sample) tracking
error when using the seven-factor index model.

           First subtracting the benchmark index from returns further reduces tracking error in all
versions of the model. Even without a factor model, simply subtracting the benchmark index return
from fund returns reduces tracking error to 6.91%, which is more than three-quarters of the
improvement from the CAPM to the unmodified Fama-French model. This suggests there is some
merit in the industry's simple approach of benchmark-adjusting returns (although the industry often
uses self-reported benchmarks rather than the benchmark derived from holdings that we are using
here). Index models still produce lower tracking errors than the analogous modified FFC models, even
after benchmark-adjusting returns, although the differences are smaller in percentage terms. The
benefit of using additional factors and index models rather than modified FFC is slightly smaller after
benchmark adjusting.

           Panel B repeats the same exercise but using only relatively passive funds, which are easiest to
explain with factor models. We compute each fund’s Active Share following Cremers and Petajisto
(2009), and we select funds in the bottom 50% of Active Share within each benchmark index. We find
that all tracking errors go down by about 120–140 bp per year but that conclusions about the relative
performance of models remain unchanged. Panel C shows results from a shorter estimation window
and using monthly data.25 Index models continue to outperform modified FFC, but in the monthly
data, four-factor models perform better than seven-factor models. This is likely due to the fact that
beta estimates are less precise in the monthly data, differentially degrading out-of-sample performance
in models with more factors.


5.2 Explaining the Cross-Section of Mutual Fund Returns
           The nonzero index alphas we document should matter most for performance evaluations
when comparisons are made between managers investing in different size or value categories. In this



24
  In unreported results, we find that most of the gains from switching to seven factors come from splitting
the value factor into large- and small-cap versions.
25
     See the Online Appendix for further description of these results.



                                                         22
section we examine how the choice of benchmark model affects conclusions about the skill of the
average mutual fund manager in different style categories.


5.2.1      Methodology

           To form groups among similar funds and to maximize cross-sectional differences across
groups, we create nine portfolios of funds from a two-dimensional sort on size and value. In particular,
we determine the fund groups from their holdings-inferred benchmark indices: the large-cap group
consists of funds that use the S&P 500, Russell 1000, Russell 3000, or Wilshire 5000 as their
benchmarks; the midcap indices are the S&P 400, Russell Midcap, and Wilshire 4500; the small-cap
indices are S&P 600 and Russell 2000; and the value and growth groups are determined from the
corresponding style indices. We use net fund returns (after fees and transaction costs), as is common
in the literature, though results would be similar (with small funds gaining a slight edge over large
funds) if expenses were added back to the net fund returns.

           We again examine both excess returns and benchmark-adjusted returns. First, the benchmark-
adjusted return is the performance measure that most mutual fund clients focus on, because their
natural investment alternative is a low-cost index fund that replicates the index return. It is also the
measure that fund managers focus on, because beating the index is their explicit self-declared
investment objective. Second, if a benchmark model gives very different results for excess returns and
benchmark-adjusted returns, it can only come from nonzero alphas assigned to the benchmark indices
themselves. Because we want to avoid attributing any skill to the passive benchmark index, a good
benchmark model should produce similar alphas for both excess returns and benchmark-adjusted
returns.


5.2.2      Results

           Table 10 shows the fund alphas across the Fama-French and Carhart models. The time period
is from 1996 to 2005 so that all indices are available over the entire sample. Each fund group
represents an equal-weighted portfolio of funds. We estimate betas and alphas from monthly returns
on these portfolios of funds and the benchmark factors. Fund returns are net returns, i.e., after all fees
and expenses. We use both excess returns and benchmark-adjusted returns on funds and show alphas
of the funds in the 3x3 sort on size and value.

           If we look at excess returns without any risk adjustments, as opposed to the risk-adjusted
alphas reported in the table, we find that small-cap funds beat large-cap funds by 2.79% per year and
value funds beat growth funds by 1.90% per year over this 10-year period. Controlling for the
benchmark index returns, the average fund lost to its benchmark by 0.80% per year, which is slightly
less than the average expenses charged by the funds. Furthermore, the benchmark adjustment



                                                     23
eliminates the return spread between growth and value funds, and it reduces the return spread between
small-cap and large-cap funds from 2.79% to 2.02%.

        The most interesting patterns in alphas occur for the Carhart model (Panel A). With excess
returns, the model shows alphas of small-cap funds are 2.13% (t = 1.88) below the large-cap fund
alphas, but with benchmark-adjusted returns, the small-cap fund alphas are 2.94% (t = 3.07) above the
large-cap fund alphas. The simple benchmark adjustment therefore changes the small- and large-cap
alphas by 5.07% for the Carhart model. This is a truly dramatic effect, especially in the context of
mutual fund alphas, which are very close to zero on average, and it is certainly large enough to
potentially reverse the conclusions of performance analysis. These numbers are also very similar to
those of the Fama-French model, and they can only come from nonzero alphas that the two models
assign to the benchmark indices. We argue that this finding casts severe doubt on the validity of the
standard Carhart alpha estimates when comparing across the size dimension. Across the value
dimension, effects vary in the three size categories.

        The next two panels present the results for modified Fama-French market, size, and value
factors. For excess returns in Panel B, we find that after the small modifications to the factors, large-
cap funds no longer significantly outperform small-cap stocks (difference in alpha across these groups
equals 0.98% with t = 0.97). However, these modifications have little impact on the alphas of
benchmark-adjusted returns since the benchmark index already captures most of the systematic risk
exposures of funds.

        Adding a midcap factor and separate value factors for small-, mid-, and large-cap stocks in
Panel C results in alphas for excess returns that are comparable to those in Panel B, except that the
alphas for benchmark-adjusted returns are now more in line with the alphas of the excess returns in the
value-growth direction (insignificant in both cases). The main difference remains that the alphas of
benchmark-adjusted returns suggest that small-cap funds strongly outperform large-cap funds
(difference in alpha of -2.01% with t = 2.22), whereas excess returns show the opposite (alpha
difference of 1.05% albeit with only t = 1.03).

        Panels D and E in Table 10 report the alphas from the index models. In contrast to the Carhart
model, now the fund alphas are very similar across excess returns and benchmark-adjusted returns,
especially with the seven-factor model in Panel E. This arises from the fact that the index models
produce exactly zero alphas for the constituent indices (by construction) and only small alphas for the
other indices. Like in the tracking error analysis, this has the important implication that the seven-
factor index model can be applied to the excess returns on all fund returns regardless of a fund’s style
or benchmark index. Furthermore, the finding that the seven-factor index model produces alphas that
are surprisingly similar to the benchmark-adjusted returns suggests that even the simple subtraction of




                                                        24
the benchmark index return may be a better benchmark model than the standard academic three- or
four-factor models.

        In terms of the magnitude of alphas, the seven-factor index model produces values that seem
relatively plausible ex-ante. The average fund underperformed by -0.88% using excess returns (t =
1.94), large-cap funds underperformed by -1.29% (t = 3.60), and small-cap funds actually slightly
outperformed by 0.37%, although without statistical significance. There is no statistically strong
pattern across value groups. The four-factor index model also produces alpha estimates that are
relatively similar across size and value groups, which is intuitively consistent with a competitive
equilibrium between actively managed mutual funds. (Note the contrast to the Carhart model, which
shows the average alpha across all small-fund funds being -3.20% per year.) In general, the four-factor
and seven-factor index models seem to perform the best among the models tested here.

        Finally, a possible concern about the index-based factors is that they include index
reconstitution effects, which reduces the performance of small-stock indices like the Russell 2000 and
allows a small-cap manager to earn an alpha by simply avoiding those effects. This could partly
explain our finding that small-cap managers have outperformed large-cap managers in terms of
benchmark-adjusted returns.


6 Conclusions
        The standard Fama-French and Carhart models, which have been widely adopted in academic
research for asset pricing and performance evaluation purposes, suffer from biases. The SMB factor
assigns disproportionate weight to value stocks, especially within large stocks, which in turn induces a
positive correlation in the SMB and HML betas of cap-weighted portfolios. The HML factor likewise
assigns disproportionate weight to small-cap stocks, which increases its returns due to the
outperformance of small-cap value in the commonly studied time period since 1980. Taken together,
these two effects cause the benchmarks provided by the Fama-French or Carhart models to be tough to
beat for small-cap managers (who have a positive beta on SMB) and easy to beat for large-cap
managers (who have a negative beta on SMB). Furthermore, the CRSP value-weighted market index,
which includes other securities besides U.S. stocks, contributes to a positive bias to all alpha estimates
for U.S. stocks.

        One of the most striking pieces of evidence for this bias comes from the four-factor Carhart
alphas of passive benchmark indices. The most common large-cap indices, S&P 500 and Russell
1000, have exhibited economically and statistically significant positive alphas of 0.82% and 0.47%
per year, respectively, from 1980 to 2005. The corresponding small-cap indices, Russell 2000 and
S&P 600, have earned significant negative alphas of -2.41% and -2.59% per year. Naturally, one



                                                     25
would expect passive benchmark indices to have zero alphas; in fact, one could even define alpha
relative to a set of passive indices, which are the low-cost alternatives to active management.

        As alternatives to the well-known three- and four-factor models, we test models with
modified versions of the Fama-French factors as well as models based on the common benchmark
indices. We analyze tracking error volatility across a broad cross-section of mutual funds to see which
models best explain the common variation in returns and thus most closely track the time series of
fund returns. The index-based models produce the lowest out-of-sample tracking error volatility, thus
outperforming the traditional Fama-French and Carhart models.

        When applied to the cross-section of average mutual fund returns, the index-based models
explain average returns well, producing alphas close to zero for all fund groups. The Carhart model
produces slightly larger negative alphas in general, but its biggest weakness is its sensitivity to a
seemingly innocuous adjustment: when comparing small-cap and large-cap funds, adjusting for the
benchmark index has a drastic 5% per year impact on their Carhart and Fama-French alphas, reversing
the conclusions about how average manager skill differs between small- and large-cap funds. The
index-based models do not exhibit similar sensitivity, as they do not produce significant nonzero
alphas for large-cap stocks and small-cap stocks in general.

        Overall, the results support the use of alternative models for performance evaluation. When
betas can be estimated with daily data, mutual fund returns are best explained by our seven-factor
index model, consisting of the S&P 500, Russell Midcap, and Russell 2000, separate value-minus-
growth factors for each index, and a momentum factor (UMD). When only monthly data is available,
economizing on the number of factors may improve performance, but an index-based four-factor
model with the S&P 500, Russell 2000, Russell 3000 Value-minus-Growth, and UMD still
outperforms the Carhart model.

        Some researchers may be reluctant to use index-based factors due to concerns about basing
academic research on proprietary indices that, in the case of S&P, involve subjective judgments in
their construction. Our index models do perform better, however, and arguably this should not be a
surprise. If co-movements in stocks within a given size or value category are partly produced by
changes in investors' appetites for stocks of a given style, and if these appetites get expressed via
investment vehicles that track benchmark indices, then the indices themselves should more precisely
track the resulting asset price changes than academic factors that approximate them (Roll 1992;
Stutzer 2003). Investors may also prefer to trade common indices due to lower transaction costs,
especially when shorting stocks.

        This raises the question of whether index-based factors would be more appropriate for asset
pricing as well as performance evaluation applications. In earlier versions of this paper, we presented
evidence that our index factor models outperformed both modified and unmodified FFC models in


                                                    26
explaining the cross-section of stock returns. We have opted to focus this paper entirely on
performance evaluation, but the question of whether using either indices or factors modified to be
more index-like in pricing models is worthy of investigation.

        Despite the clear improvements we accomplish with our alternative factor models, we do not
hold them out as “perfect” alternatives. Instead, our main contribution is to identify the sources of
index alphas and the pitfalls of certain methodological choices, thus paving the way for future
researchers to build even better models. While awaiting those models, we recommend researchers use
our index-based alternatives or at least make the small modifications we recommend to the FFC
factors. Given how widely the Fama-French and Carhart models are used to measure abnormal
portfolio performance, eliminating from future studies the biases we document seems worth the
modest effort required.




                                                   27
References
Barber, B.M. and J.D. Lyon, 1997, “Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: the empirical power
        and specification of test statistics,” Journal of Financial Economics 43, 341-372.

Boyer, B.H., 2006, “Comovement Among Stocks with Similar Book-to-Market Ratios,” working
        paper.

Carhart, M., 1997, “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Returns,” Journal of Finance 52-1, 57-82.

Chan, L.K.C., S.G. Dimmock, and J. Lakonishok, 2009, “Benchmarking money manager
        performance: Issues and evidence,” Review of Financial Studies 22-11, 4553-4599.

Cremers, K.J.M. and A. Petajisto, 2009, “How Active Is Your Fund Manager? A New Measure That
        Predicts Performance,” Review of Financial Studies 22-9, 3329-3365.

Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1997, “Measuring Mutual Fund Performance
        with Characteristic-Based Benchmarks,” Journal of Finance 52-3, 1035-1058.

Elton, E.J., M.J. Gruber, and C.R. Blake, 1999, “Common Factors in Active and Passive Portfolios,”
        European Finance Review 3, 53-78.

Fama, E.F. and K.R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,”
        Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Ferson, W.E. and R.W. Schadt, 1996, “Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in Changing
        Economic Conditions,” Journal of Finance 51, 425-461.

Goetzmann, W.N., Z. Ivkovic, and K.G. Rouwenhorst, 2001, “Day Trading International Mutual
        Funds: Evidence and Policy Solutions,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36-3,
        287-309.

Loughran, T., 1997, “Book-to-Market across Firm Size, Exchange, and Seasonality: Is There an
        Effect?” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 249-268.

Moor, L. De, and P. Sercu, 2006, “The Small Firm Anomaly: US and International Evidence,”
        working paper, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.

Pastor, L. and R.F. Stambaugh, 2002, “Mutual Fund Performance and Seemingly Unrelated Assets,”
        Journal of Financial Economics 63, 315-349.

Petajisto, A., 2011, “The Index Premium and Its Hidden Cost for Index Funds,” Journal of Empirical
        Finance 18, 271-288.

Ritter, J.R., 1991, “The Long-run Performance of Initial Public Offerings,” Journal of Finance 46, 3-
        28.

                                                   28
Roll, R., 1992, “A Mean-Variance Analysis of Tracking Error,” Journal of Portfolio Management 18,
        13-22.

Ross, S., 1976, “The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing,” Journal of Economic Theory 13,
        341-360.

Sharpe, W.F., 1992, “Asset Allocation: Management Style and Performance Measurement,” Journal
        of Portfolio Management 18-2, 7-19.

Stutzer, M., 2003, “Fund Managers May Cause Their Benchmarks to be Priced Risks,” Journal of
        Investment Management 1, 1-13.




                                                29
                             Table 1. The most common benchmark indices.
For each index, the second column is the number of actively managed U.S. all-equity mutual funds
reporting the index as their primary benchmark in January 2007. The last column is the sum of total net
assets across all such funds. The data source is Morningstar. Some funds have a missing primary
benchmark in the database.
                                                     Number of     Mutual fund assets
                  Index
                                                    mutual funds                 ($M)
                  S&P 500                                 1,318             2,130,000
                  Russell 2000                               251              214,712
                  Russell 1000 Growth                        180              162,710
                  Russell 1000 Value                         177              249,537
                  Russell 2000 Growth                        132               48,579
                  Russell Midcap Growth                      107               73,563
                  Russell 2000 Value                         106               65,066
                  S&P 400                                     74              102,241
                  Russell Midcap Value                        62               85,629
                  Russell 1000                                53               56,660
                  Russell 3000                                48               43,344
                  Russell Midcap                              35               23,260
                  Russell 3000 Growth                         31               67,130
                  S&P 600                                     27               14,326
                  Russell 3000 Value                          26               63,722
                  Wilshire 5000                               20              114,092
                  S&P 500 Value                                8                6,307
                  Wilshire 4500                                5               16,254
                  S&P 500 Growth                               5                  345
                  S&P 400 Value                                4               10,869
                  S&P 400 Growth                               3                  192
                  S&P 600 Value                                3                  181
                  S&P 600 Growth                               2                   57




                                                   30
                                   Table 2. Alphas of benchmark indices.
This table shows the Carhart four-factor alphas as well as the Fama-French three-factor alphas for common
benchmark indices. Alphas are computed from monthly data. The numbers shown are expressed in percent
per year, with heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses. The sample period is January 1980 to
December 2005, except for the following indices whose return data begin later: S&P 400 (2/1981),
Wilshire 4500 (1/1984), S&P 600 (3/1984), and the Growth and Value components of the Russell Midcap
(2/1986), S&P 400 (6/1991), and S&P 600 (1/1994). The variance-covariance matrix used in the joint
significance test allows for clustering of index returns within time periods.
                                                Carhart Alpha                    Fama‐French Alpha
Main index
                                      Growth           All      Value     Growth          All    Value
Russell 3000                             1.05         0.18       ‐0.58      1.13         0.04     ‐1.30
                                       (1.96)       (0.95)      (1.03)     (2.43)      (0.24)    (2.28)
     Russell 1000                       1.53         0.47        ‐0.48      1.60         0.33     ‐1.19
                                       (2.60)       (2.60)      (0.86)     (3.11)      (1.86)    (2.10)
          Russell Midcap                 1.61        0.17        ‐0.52       1.98        0.04     ‐1.29
                                       (1.39)       (0.19)      (0.62)     (1.65)      (0.06)    (1.36)
     Russell 2000                       ‐3.41        ‐2.41       ‐1.25      ‐3.27       ‐2.53     ‐2.09
                                       (3.95)       (3.21)      (1.23)     (3.81)      (3.60)    (2.11)
S&P 500                                 1.82         0.82        ‐0.35       2.40        0.72     ‐1.61
                                       (2.91)       (2.78)      (0.72)     (3.65)      (2.60)    (2.57)
S&P Midcap 400                           0.40        1.36         0.89      ‐0.94        1.41     2.41
                                       (0.20)       (1.31)      (0.46)     (0.44)      (1.34)    (1.13)
S&P Smallcap 600                        ‐3.09        ‐2.64       ‐1.61      ‐1.53       ‐2.62     ‐2.91
                                       (1.32)       (2.26)      (1.02)     (0.72)      (2.41)    (1.78)
Wilshire 5000                                         0.05                               0.05
                                                    (0.43)                             (0.41)
     Wilshire 4500                                   ‐0.96                              ‐0.49
                                                    (1.40)                             (0.75)
 P‐value of joint significance test               <.000001                           <.000001




                                                        31
                                                  Table 3. Four-factor alphas by CRSP share code, 1980–2005.
This table aggregates the share codes reported in CRSP into groups. The CRSP value-weighted index consists of all share codes except ADRs. The table reports
the average share of the CRSP-VW index accounted for by each group from 1980–2005, along with their four-factor alphas. The four-factor alpha of the CRSP
value-weighted index is, of course, zero by construction. The table also reports, based on December 2004 data, the case of each group’s capitalization that is a
member of three indices (the S&P 500, Russell 3000, and Wilshire 5000) and the share that is reported as holdings by U.S. equity mutual funds on SEC form
12D. T-statistics from robust standard errors are in parentheses.

                                                                                              Four factor alphas       Percent of capitalization held by:
                                                      Share codes
                                                   (descending order       Average share of   Percent                 S&P      Russell   Wilshire    Equity
   Group                                             of market cap)           CRSPVW          per year   t-stat       500       3000      5000       funds
   U.S. common stocks                                    11,10                 92.68%          0.23      (2.00)       77.4      97.0       98.9      10.12
      Subset included in FF portfolios                   11,10                 87.87%          0.51      (2.68)
      Subset not included in FF portfolios               11,10                  4.81%          -2.74     (1.66)
   All other securities in CRSP index                  See below                7.32%          -4.01     (2.67)       12.4      14.8       24.0       4.88
      Non-US stocks, units, and SBIs                   12, 72, 42               4.76%          -3.74     (2.00)       14.6       0.9       12.3       5.57
      Closed-end funds                             14, 44, 15, 74, 24           1.06%          -1.65     (1.02)       0.0        0.1       0.1        0.09
      REITs                                              18, 48                 0.74%          -0.75     (0.37)       21.3      97.2       99.8       8.35
      Other (certificates, SBIs, units)          71, 23, 73, 70, 41, 21,        0.76%          -3.39     (1.85)       0.0        0.5       12.4       0.79
                                                         40, 20

   CRSP value-weighted index                        All except ADRs             100%           0.00      (0.00)       69.6      87.0       89.8       9.49
      ADRs (excluded from CRSPVW)                        31, 30                 3.31%          4.25      (1.55)       0.0        0.0       0.0
              Table 4. Comparing actual portfolios with their Fama-French benchmarks.
This table shows the benchmark portfolio holdings implied by the three-factor Fama-French model. These
holdings are contrasted with the true holdings of the target portfolios we are trying to explain. As target
portfolios, we pick the FF size deciles 10 (large-cap stocks) and 4 (small-cap stocks) within the 100 FF
portfolios, because they represent the typical S&P 500 and Russell 2000 constituent stocks, respectively.
Panels A and B show the portfolio weights of the three FF factors, together with the excess return on the
2x3 portfolio components. Since the MktRf factor includes CRSP securities that are not part of the 2x3 FF
grid, we include these stocks in a separate “None” column. Panel C shows the true weights that each of the
two target portfolios (size deciles) have on the extended 2x4 grid, alongside the weights implied by the
three-factor model. The implied weights can be derived from the three-factor betas multiplied by the factor
portfolio weights; the regression betas are shown above the implied portfolio weights. The time period is
from 1980 to 2005.

                       Panel A: Market portfolio weights and component returns (%)

                   MktRf weights                                Average excess return per year
          None      Gro    Med      Val        All              None     Gro    Med      Val        All
 Big       7.8     42.6    25.5     11.1      86.9     Big      5.92    7.61    8.62    9.20       7.72
 Small     4.2      3.5     3.4      2.0      13.1     Small    6.47    4.85 11.77 13.21           8.29
 All      12.0     46.1    28.9     13.0     100.0     All      5.87    7.20    8.95 10.02         7.64

                            Panel B: Fama-French factor portfolio weights (%)

                         SMB                                                  HML
          None       Gro    Med      Val      All               None       Gro   Med      Val       All
 Big       0.0      -33.3 -33.3     -33.3   -100.0     Big       0.0      -50.0   0.0    50.0       0.0
 Small     0.0       33.3   33.3     33.3    100.0     Small     0.0      -50.0   0.0    50.0       0.0
 All       0.0       0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0      All       0.0     -100.0 0.0      100.0      0.0

              Panel C: Target portfolio weights vs. their three-factor benchmark weights (%)

                  Target portfolio:                                   Benchmark portfolio:
                   Size decile 10                          0.967 x MktRf - 0.318 x SMB - 0.086 x HML
          None      Gro    Med      Val       All               None       Gro     Med     Val      All
 Big       0.0      60.0   29.2     10.8     100.0     Big        7.5     56.1    35.2    17.0    115.8
 Small     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      Small     4.1       -2.9    -7.3  -13.0    -19.1
 All       0.0      60.0   29.2     10.8     100.0     All       11.6     53.2    27.9     4.0     96.7
                  Target portfolio:                                   Benchmark portfolio:
                   Size decile 4                           1.055 x MktRf + 0.799 x SMB + 0.226 x HML
          None      Gro    Med      Val       All                None      Gro     Med     Val      All
 Big       0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0      Big        8.2      7.0     0.3    -3.7    11.8
 Small     0.0     40.7    40.5     18.7     100.0     Small      4.5     19.1    30.2   40.0      93.8
 All       0.0     40.7    40.5     18.7     100.0     All       12.7     26.1    30.5   36.3     105.5
                                             Table 5, Panel A. Weights on 3x4 Size-BM portfolios implied by models – S&P 500.
The Carhart model is estimated for various versions of the SMB and HML factors, and the average implied weights the model places on each of the 3x4 Size-Book-to-Market
(BM) portfolios are calculated. This is compared with a flexible model in which the excess returns of the index are regressed on those of the 3x4 portfolios. Model 1 is the standard
Carhart model. Model 2 excludes share codes other than 10 and 11 (U.S. common stocks) from the CRSP-VW index. Model 3 replaces the equal-weighted SMB factor with one in
which the Small and Big portfolios value-weight their Low-, Medium-, and High-BM components. Model 4 includes the “No or Negative” BM components in Small and Big.
Model 5 calculates separate HML factors for Big and Small (e.g., BHML = Big_High - Big_Low). Model 6 splits SMB into “Mid minus Big” (deciles 6–8 minus deciles 9–10) and
“Small minus Mid.” T-statistics based on robust standard errors are in parentheses. The time period is from 1980 to 2005.
                                                                      (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)         (6)                Flexible   Actual    Average
                        Model                                     Carhart                            MOD4                  MOD7      Flexible    NNLS      weights   weights
                        Share codes in market factor             CRSPVW        10/11      10/11      10/11      10/11      10/11
                        SMB weighting                                EW          EW         VW         VW         VW         VW
                        SMB stocks included                       As in FF    As in FF   As in FF       All        All        All
                        Cutoff for Big stocks                     50th pct    50th pct   50th pct   50th pct   50th pct   80th pct
                        Size deciles included in BHML                N/A         N/A        N/A        N/A      Top 5      Top 2
                        Size deciles included in SHML                N/A         N/A        N/A        N/A      Btm 5      Btm 5
                        BM deciles included in H                   Top 3       Top 3      Top 3      Top 3      Top 3      Top 7
                        Obs                                          312         312        312        312        312        312       312        312        312        312
                        Adjusted R2                               0.9924      0.9934     0.9934     0.9939     0.9941     0.9957     0.9882     0.9882       N.M        N.M
                        Constant (% per year)                        0.82        0.59       0.33       0.32       0.11      0.21      0.07       0.16       0.35       0.04
                                                                   (2.78)      (2.12)     (1.23)     (1.24)     (0.43)     (0.91)    (0.20)     (0.47)     (1.79)     (0.10)
                        UMD                                         -0.02       -0.02      -0.02      -0.02      -0.02      -0.02     -0.02      -0.02      -0.01      -0.01
                                                                   (3.28)      (3.43)     (3.57)     (3.49)     (3.77)     (3.67)    (2.83)     (3.03)     (4.00)     (1.26)
                        MktRF                                       1.00        0.99       1.00       1.00       1.01       1.01
                                                                   (0.14)      (0.77)     (0.01)     (0.27)     (0.91)     (2.16)
                        SMB                                         -0.21       -0.19      -0.18      -0.19      -0.18
                                                                  (23.88)     (23.05)    (23.80)    (24.95)    (21.38)
                        Mid minus Big (MMB)                                                                                 -0.21
                                                                                                                          (22.45)
                        Small minus Mid (SMM)                                                                               -0.09
                                                                                                                           (6.68)
                        HML                                         0.01        0.02       0.06       0.05
                                                                   (0.69)      (1.87)     (5.07)     (4.54)
                        BHML                                                                                     0.00       -0.01
                                                                                                                (0.20)     (0.72)
                        SHML                                                                                     0.05       0.04
                                                                                                                (4.85)     (2.33)
                        MidHML                                                                                              0.04
                                                                                                                           (2.01)
                        Average weights on 3x4 portfolios implied by models                                                          Flexible    NNLS      Actual    Market
                        Large_Low - RF                              0.451     0.440      0.453      0.457      0.477      0.524       0.541      0.544     0.507     0.396
                        Large_Med - RF                              0.285     0.279      0.278      0.278      0.276      0.295       0.247      0.245     0.278     0.230
                        Large_High - RF                             0.153     0.152      0.139      0.136      0.116      0.125       0.122      0.130     0.112     0.098
                        Large_None - RF                             0.012     0.012      0.012      0.014      0.014      0.015       0.016      0.016     0.009     0.012
                        Mid_Low - RF                                0.083     0.081      0.083      0.084      0.087      -0.014      0.020      0.000     0.031     0.073
                        Mid_Med - RF                                0.081     0.079      0.079      0.079      0.078      0.045       0.015      0.000     0.035     0.065
                        Mid_High - RF                               0.055     0.054      0.050      0.049      0.041      0.024       0.008      0.014     0.020     0.035
                        Mid_None - RF                               0.012     0.012      0.012      0.014      0.014      0.004       0.032      0.030     0.002     0.012
                        Small_Low - RF                              -0.033    -0.033     -0.062     -0.045     -0.069     -0.025      -0.017     0.000     0.001     0.042
                        Small_Med - RF                              -0.033    -0.027     -0.030     -0.019     -0.016     0.037      -0.086      0.000     0.002     0.038
                        Small_High - RF                             -0.044    -0.032     0.011      0.013      0.042      0.022       0.066      0.000     0.002     0.023
                        Small_None - RF                             0.023     0.023      0.023      -0.011     -0.009     0.008       0.027      0.014     0.000     0.023
                                           Table 5, Panel B. Weights on 3x4 Size-BM portfolios implied by models – Russell 2000.
The Carhart model is estimated for various versions of the SMB and HML factors, and the average implied weights the model places on each of the 3x4 Size-Book-to-Market
(BM) portfolios are calculated. This is compared with a flexible model in which the excess returns of the index are regressed on those of the 3x4 portfolios. Model 1 is the standard
Carhart model. Model 2 excludes share codes other than 10 and 11 (U.S. common stocks) from the CRSP-VW index. Model 3 replaces the equal-weighted SMB factor with one
where the Small and Big portfolios value-weight their Low, Medium, and High BM components. Model 4 includes the “No or Negative” BM components in Small and Big. Model
5 calculates separate HML factors for Big and Small (e.g., BHML = Big_High - Big_Low). Model 6 splits SMB into “Mid minus Big” (deciles 6–8 minus deciles 9–10) and
“Small minus Mid.” T-statistics based on robust standard errors are in parentheses. The time period is from 1980 to 2005.
                                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)                Flexible   Actual    Average
                        Model                                     Carhart                            MOD4                  MOD7      Flexible    NNLS      weights   weights
                        Share codes in market factor             CRSPVW        10/11      10/11      10/11      10/11      10/11
                        SMB weighting                                EW          EW         VW         VW         VW         VW
                        SMB stocks included                       As in FF    As in FF   As in FF       All        All        All
                        Cutoff for Big stocks                     50th pct    50th pct   50th pct   50th pct   50th pct   80th pct
                        Size deciles included in BHML                N/A         N/A        N/A        N/A      Top 5      Top 2
                        Size deciles included in SHML                N/A         N/A        N/A        N/A      Btm 5      Btm 5
                        BM deciles included in H                   Top 3       Top 3      Top 3      Top 3      Top 3      Top 7
                        Obs                                          312         312        312        312        312        312       312        312        312        312
                        Adjusted R2                               0.9686      0.9695     0.9838     0.9796     0.9795     0.9819     0.9862     0.9859       N.M        N.M
                        Constant (% per year)                       -2.41       -2.66      -1.62      -1.53      -1.50      -1.61     -2.13      -2.17      -1.07      -1.23
                                                                   (3.21)      (3.64)     (2.92)     (2.44)     (2.36)     (2.83)    (4.12)     (4.16)     (2.50)     (2.40)
                        UMD                                         -0.01       -0.01      -0.01      -0.01      -0.01      -0.01     0.02       0.02       0.00       -0.01
                                                                   (0.28)      (0.33)     (0.46)     (0.50)     (0.49)     (0.43)    (2.17)     (1.84)     (0.29)     (0.88)
                        MktRF                                       1.06        1.06       1.03       1.02       1.02       1.02
                                                                   (4.34)      (4.18)     (2.97)     (2.02)     (1.88)     (1.31)
                        SMB                                         0.80        0.82       0.81       0.81       0.81
                                                                  (30.89)     (32.13)    (46.67)    (44.26)    (35.78)
                        Mid minus Big (MMB)                                                                                0.78
                                                                                                                          (26.10)
                        Small minus Mid (SMM)                                                                              0.70
                                                                                                                          (19.75)
                        HML                                         0.20        0.21       0.06       0.09
                                                                   (6.03)      (6.53)     (2.59)     (3.78)
                        BHML                                                                                     0.05       0.03
                                                                                                                (1.84)     (1.02)
                        SHML                                                                                     0.04       0.06
                                                                                                                (2.00)     (1.28)
                        MidHML                                                                                              0.02
                                                                                                                           (0.49)
                        Average weights on 3x4 portfolios implied by models                                                          Flexible    NNLS      Actual    Market
                        Large_Low - RF                              0.110     0.097       0.027      0.018      0.015     -0.043      -0.030     0.000     0.000     0.396
                        Large_Med - RF                              0.036     0.030       0.030      0.033      0.033     0.011      -0.045      0.000     0.000     0.230
                        Large_High - RF                             -0.020    -0.021      0.034      0.048      0.051     0.005       0.039      0.008     0.000     0.098
                        Large_None - RF                             0.012     0.012       0.012      0.002      0.002     0.000      -0.004      0.000     0.000     0.012
                        Mid_Low - RF                                0.020     0.018       0.005      0.003      0.003     0.082       0.120      0.062     0.040     0.073
                        Mid_Med - RF                                0.010     0.008       0.009      0.009      0.009     0.104       0.143      0.105     0.032     0.065
                        Mid_High - RF                               -0.007    -0.007      0.012      0.017      0.018     0.056      -0.008      0.000     0.010     0.035
                        Mid_None - RF                               0.013     0.013       0.012      0.002      0.002     0.017      -0.027      0.000     0.007     0.012
                        Small_Low - RF                              0.213     0.213       0.343      0.268      0.271     0.221       0.302      0.322     0.323     0.042
                        Small_Med - RF                              0.308     0.314       0.338      0.285      0.284     0.288       0.413      0.418     0.321     0.038
                        Small_High - RF                             0.391     0.403       0.233      0.218      0.213     0.173       0.092      0.116     0.173     0.023
                        Small_None - RF                             0.024     0.024       0.024      0.171      0.171     0.151       0.030      0.002     0.093     0.023
               Table 6. Alphas and sum-of-squared differences between weights on 3x4 portfolios produced by the models and those from the flexible model.
This table summarizes results from for multiple indices. For each model and index reported in Table 5, this table reports the alphas and the sum of the squared differences between
the actual average index holdings of the 3x4 portfolios and those implied by the model. For subsets of indices, the table also reports the sum-of-squared average alphas (Panel B),
the sum of sum-of-squared differences in the 3x4 portfolio weights (Panel C), and the Gibbons-Ross-Shanken test statistic and its small-sample p-value. The time period is from
1980 to 2005.
                                                                    (1)             (2)     (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)               Flexible   Actual    Average
                       Model                                      Carhart                            MOD4                  MOD7    Flexible    NNLS      weights   weights
                       Share codes in market factor              CRSPVW        10/11       10/11      10/11      10/11     10/11
                       SMB weighting                                EW          EW          VW         VW         VW        VW
                       SMB stocks included                        As in FF    As in FF    As in FF     All        All       All
                       Small-Big cutoff                           50th pct    50th pct    50th pct   50th pct   50th pct    N/A
                       Size deciles included in BHML                N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A       Top 5     Top 2
                       Size deciles included in SHML                N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A       Btm 5     Btm 5
                       BM deciles included in H                    Top 3       Top 3       Top 3      Top 3      Top 3     Top 7
                       Panel A: Alphas
                       S&P 500                                     0.82         0.59       0.33       0.32       0.11      0.21     0.07       0.16       0.35      0.04
                       S&P 500 Growth                              1.82          1.58      1.25        1.23      -0.01     -0.11    -0.13      -0.64      -0.53     -0.60
                       S&P 500 Value                               -0.35        -0.58      -0.76      -0.76      0.07      0.37      0.12       0.49      1.05      0.42
                       Russell 2000                                -2.41        -2.66      -1.62      -1.53      -1.50     -1.61    -2.13      -2.17      -1.07     -1.23
                       Russell 2000 Growth                         -3.41        -3.66      -2.51      -2.43      -1.09     -1.13    -1.77      -1.91      -1.34     -1.58
                       Russell 2000 Value                          -1.25        -1.50      -0.63      -0.54      -1.89     -1.80    -2.18      -1.61      -0.71     -0.62
                       Russell Midcap                              0.17         -0.08      0.21       0.24       0.30      0.45     -0.17      -0.09      0.86      0.52
                       Russell Midcap Growth                       1.61         1.56       1.95       1.97       2.79      1.34     0.43       -0.50      0.69      0.27
                       Russell Midcap Value                        -0.52        -0.62      -0.50      -0.48      -0.59     0.02     -0.64      0.09       1.11      0.59
                       Panel B: Sums of squared average alphas
                       All 9 indices                               26.00        28.71      15.68      14.91      15.29     9.29     13.11      11.90      7.41      5.64
                       Panel C: Sum of squared differences in 3x4 portfolio weights
                       S&P 500                                     0.016        0.016      0.015      0.012      0.014     0.005    0.017      0.006
                       S&P 500 Growth                              0.250        0.247      0.203      0.201      0.122     0.012    0.056      0.002
                       S&P 500 Value                               0.115        0.121      0.136      0.132      0.115     0.058    0.052      0.053
                       Russell 2000                                0.079        0.082      0.014      0.018      0.018     0.026    0.044      0.027
                       Russell 2000 Growth                         0.198        0.198      0.092      0.065      0.059     0.050    0.081      0.043
                       Russell 2000 Value                          0.130        0.134      0.098      0.129      0.173     0.103    0.095      0.039
                       Russell Midcap                              0.120        0.124      0.119      0.116      0.114     0.050    0.043      0.035
                       Russell Midcap Growth                       0.306        0.303      0.350      0.328      0.428     0.162    0.274      0.167
                       Russell Midcap Value                        0.307        0.319      0.293      0.297      0.311     0.178    0.088      0.064
                       All 9 indices avg                           0.169        0.172      0.147      0.144      0.150     0.071    0.083      0.048
                       Panel D: Gibbons-Ross-Shanken statistics for all 9 indices
                       GRS-statistic                               2.898        2.794      2.617      2.012      1.602     1.610
                       p-value                                     0.002        0.003      0.005      0.033      0.107     0.105
                                 Table 7. Alphas of size decile portfolios.
This table reports the annualized alphas (in percentages) using various models for size decile portfolios.
The size decile portfolios are value-weighted and formed based on market capitalization cutoffs from
Kenneth French’s website. FF3 is the Fama-French three-factor model, and Carhart is the four-factor
model. Models (4) and (6) are defined as in Table 5. T-statistics based on robust standard errors are in
parentheses. The p-value gives the probability that pricing errors would be this large if the model held
exactly. Results are shown for two samples: 1980 to 2005 and 1927 to 2005.
                             Alphas by model (1980-2005)               Alphas by model (1927-2005)
                                     (1)      (4)     (6)                      (1)      (4)     (6)
                            FF    Carhart MOD4       MOD7             FF    Carhart MOD4       MOD7
 Size decile portfolios
   10 (Large)               0.98      0.98      0.30      0.22        0.29      0.42      0.02      0.01
                          (2.71)    (2.63)    (0.86)    (0.90)      (1.51)    (2.01)    (0.13)    (0.08)
   9                        0.31      0.16      0.10      0.23       -0.01      0.20      0.20      0.26
                          (0.44)    (0.22)    (0.13)    (0.35)      (-0.03)   (0.48)    (0.48)    (0.68)
   8                        0.15      0.04      0.48      0.03       -0.03      0.19      0.48      0.42
                          (0.17)    (0.05)    (0.56)    (0.08)      (-0.06)   (0.37)    (0.95)    (1.68)
   7                        0.85      0.37      0.81      0.71       -0.54     -1.08     -0.61     -0.69
                          (1.13)    (0.46)    (1.02)    (1.67)      (-1.19)   (-2.32)   (-1.38)   (-2.02)
   6                       -0.69     -0.85     -0.16     -0.39       -0.59     -0.77     -0.08     -0.07
                          (-0.89)   (-1.08)   (-0.20)   (-0.67)     (-1.29)   (-1.66)   (-0.17)   (-0.18)
   5                       -0.90     -0.72      0.21      0.08       -1.28     -1.08     -0.16     -0.08
                          (1.15)    (0.88)    (0.29)    (0.12)      (2.90)    (2.23)    (0.41)    (0.20)
   4                       -0.97     -1.07      0.14      0.40       -1.01     -0.87      0.36      0.41
                          (1.37)    (1.40)    (0.21)    (0.62)      (2.12)    (1.61)    (0.85)    (0.98)
   3                       -0.90     -0.78      0.58      0.74       -1.87     -1.36      0.00     -0.14
                          (1.32)    (1.12)    (1.09)    (1.26)      (3.76)    (2.47)    (0.01)    (0.31)
   2                       -1.56     -1.48      0.17     -0.21       -2.85     -2.06     -0.31     -0.48
                          (1.86)    (1.58)    (0.18)    (0.26)      (4.37)    (2.89)    (0.46)    (0.76)
   1 (Small)               -0.04     -0.52      1.40      1.04       -1.95     -0.65      1.57      1.17
                          (0.03)    (0.32)    (0.83)    (0.68)      (1.77)    (0.51)    (1.24)    (0.98)
   GRS-stat for 10
   size deciles             3.23     2.28      1.83      1.79        4.08      3.36      0.83      1.63
   p-value                 0.06%    1.37%     5.47%     6.20%       0.00%     0.03%     59.87%    9.30%
                               Table 8. Russell 2000 alphas in June and July.
In this table regression models labeled Carhart, (4), and (6) from Table 5 are run including an indicator
variable for June and July. Only the constant and June-July coefficients are reported; the other coefficients
are very similar to those reported earlier (and a similar table for Russell 2000 Growth). T-statistics from
robust standard errors are in parentheses. The time period is from 1980 to 2005.
                                          Russell 2000                       Russell 2000 Growth
                                   (1)         (4)         (6)             (1)        (4)       (6)
  Model                         Carhart     MOD4         MOD7           Carhart     MOD4     MOD7
  Constant                      -0.106      -0.058       -0.064         -0.133      -0.080   -0.025
                                 (1.65)      (1.07)      (1.24)          (1.84)     (1.32)    (0.45)
  June-July dummy               -0.582      -0.422       -0.395         -0.923      -0.748   -0.515
                                 (3.86)      (3.52)      (3.46)          (4.84)     (4.75)    (4.05)
  Total alpha per year          -2.432      -1.542       -1.559         -3.440      -2.450   -1.331
                                    Table 9. Mutual fund tracking error across benchmark models.
           This table shows the out-of-sample tracking error volatility for U.S. all-equity mutual funds for 1996–2005.
           Whenever a fund reports its positions (semiannually or quarterly), its prior 12-month daily returns are regressed on
           each of the factor models to determine its betas. Using those betas, the fund’s monthly out-of-sample predicted
           return and the difference between the predicted and actual fund return are computed. Each fund’s tracking error is
           computed as the time-series volatility of that difference over the sample period. Each number in the table represents
           an equal-weighted average of those tracking errors across funds. Fund returns are expressed both as excess returns
           and benchmark-adjusted returns. Panel B uses only funds with low Active Share. Panel C shows the results for
           different lengths and sampling intervals of the estimation period.
Tracking error volatility (% per year)
                                                            Panel A: All funds
Model                               None      CAPM            FF           Carhart       MOD4       MOD7          IDX4    IDX7
Excess return                       17.35      8.28          6.50           6.44          6.40       6.15         6.15    5.80
Benchmark-adjusted                  6.91       6.58          6.18           6.14          6.12       5.99         6.03    5.71

                                                    Panel B: Active Share < median
Model                               None      CAPM            FF          Carhart        MOD4       MOD7          IDX4    IDX7
Excess return                       16.02      6.53          5.19          5.20           5.20       4.95         4.73    4.49
Benchmark-adjusted                  5.33       5.13          4.78          4.75           4.73       4.61         4.62    4.36

                                            Panel C: All funds, alternative estimation periods
                                                          Daily data, 6 months
Model                               None      CAPM            FF          Carhart        MOD4       MOD7          IDX4    IDX7
Excess return                       17.35      8.23         6.49           6.48           6.49       6.21         6.19    5.85
Benchmark-adjusted                  6.91       6.55         6.18           6.21           6.18       6.08         6.02    5.75
                                                          Monthly data, 3 years
Model                               None      CAPM            FF          Carhart        MOD4       MOD7          IDX4    IDX7
Excess return                       17.35      8.77         6.82           6.82           6.76       6.94         6.48    6.57
Benchmark-adjusted                  6.91       6.87         6.74           6.78           6.76       7.18         6.80    7.05
                                                          Monthly data, 5 years
Model                               None      CAPM           FF           Carhart        MOD4       MOD7          IDX4    IDX7
Excess return                       17.35      8.64         6.90           6.86           6.75       6.77         6.42    6.45
Benchmark-adjusted                  6.91       6.83         6.74           6.75           6.71       6.96         6.71    6.85

  None     -                                                MOD4       MKT2, SMB2, HML, UMD
 CAPM      MKT                                              MOD7       MKT2, MMB, SMM, BHML, MHML, SHML, UMD
   FF      MKT, SMB, HML                                     IDX4      S5, R2-S5, R3V-R3G, UMD
 Carhart   MKT, SMB, HML, UMD                                IDX7      S5, RM-S5, R2-RM, S5V-S5G, RMV-RMG, R2V-R2G, UMD




                                                                             39
                                       Table 10. Mutual fund alphas.
This table shows the alphas of net return for U.S. all-equity mutual funds 1996-2005. Funds are sorted into
groups based on their estimated benchmark indices: the size groups represent small, mid, and large-cap stocks,
and the value groups represent growth, core, and value stocks. Alphas are computed with excess return or
benchmark-adjusted return as left-hand-side variables and various benchmark models on the right-hand side.
The numbers show the annualized alpha, with t-statistics in parentheses below. Panels A, B, C, D, and E show
the models labeled Carhart, MOD4, MOD7, IDX4, and IDX7 in Table 9, respectively.
                       Excess return                                                   Benchmark-adjusted return
  Size                       Value group                               Size                       Value group
 group       1         2         3              All     High-Low      group         1        2        3            All   High-Low
                                               Panel A: Carhart (MKT, SMB, HML, UMD)
   3        -1.24     -1.01       -1.30       -1.07       -0.06         3        -3.28     -1.81    -0.92        -2.26     2.36
           (-1.51)   (-2.33)     (-1.26)     (-2.06)     (-0.04)                (-3.31)   (-4.42)  (-1.31)     (-3.99)    (1.83)
   2        -2.37     -1.69       -0.53       -1.69        1.84         2        -3.35     -2.22    -0.31        -2.58     3.04
           (-1.24)   (-1.23)     (-0.37)     (-1.14)     (0.85)                 (-3.03)   (-2.46)  (-0.34)     (-3.18)    (2.32)
   1        -3.99     -3.09       -1.20       -3.20        2.79         1         1.69     -0.73    1.06         0.68      -0.63
           (-2.06)   (-2.15)     (-0.91)     (-2.26)     (1.39)                 (1.39)    (-0.79)  (0.91)      (0.82)     (-0.42)
   All      -2.08     -1.75       -1.27       -1.69        0.81         All      -2.34     -1.60    -0.43        -1.70     1.91
           (-1.83)   (-2.56)     (-1.20)     (-2.21)     (0.53)                 (-3.09)   (-4.47)  (-0.70)     (-3.68)    (1.95)
High-Low    2.75       2.08       -0.10        2.13                 High-Low     -4.97     -1.09    -1.98        -2.94
           (1.70)    (1.64)      (-0.10)     (1.88)                             (-3.24)   (-1.08)  (-1.56)     (-3.07)
                                               Panel B: MOD4 (MKT2, SMB2, HML, UMD)
   3        -1.21     -1.10       -1.34       -1.12       -0.14         3        -2.98     -1.65    -0.74        -2.04     2.24
           (-1.44)   (-2.73)     (-1.35)     (-2.19)     (-0.10)                (-3.23)   (-4.11)  (-1.05)     (-3.82)    (1.79)
   2        -1.58     -0.98       -0.16       -0.99        1.43         2        -3.27     -2.01    -0.12        -2.45     3.15
           (-0.84)   (-0.75)     (-0.11)     (-0.69)     (0.66)                 (-3.02)   (-2.29)  (-0.13)     (-3.12)    (2.39)
   1        -2.74     -2.03       -0.19       -2.10        2.54         1         1.55     -0.84    0.96         0.55      -0.59
           (-1.57)   (-1.49)     (-0.15)     (-1.62)     (1.31)                 (1.27)    (-0.94)  (0.85)      (0.67)     (-0.39)
   All      -1.61     -1.45       -1.05       -1.35        0.56         All      -2.18     -1.50    -0.31        -1.57     1.87
           (-1.41)   (-2.19)     (-1.05)     (-1.82)     (0.37)                 (-3.07)   (-4.37)  (-0.51)     (-3.63)    (1.96)
High-Low    1.53       0.94       -1.15        0.98                 High-Low     -4.53     -0.81    -1.71        -2.59
           (1.15)    (0.78)      (-0.97)     (0.97)                             (-3.05)   (-0.81)  (-1.35)     (-2.78)
                                    Panel C: MOD7 (MKT2, MMB, SMM, BHML, MHML, SHML, UMD)
   3        -1.48     -1.16       -0.47       -1.00        1.01         3        -1.77     -1.31    -1.05        -1.47     0.72
           (-1.95)   (-2.88)     (-0.64)     (-2.06)     (0.94)                 (-2.37)   (-4.35)  (-1.60)     (-3.75)    (0.63)
   2        -0.45     -0.64       0.19        -0.08        0.64         2        -2.69     -1.89    -0.65        -2.15     2.03
           (-0.31)   (-0.56)     (0.15)      (-0.07)     (0.36)                 (-2.43)   (-2.24)  (-0.73)     (-2.83)    (1.56)
   1        -1.54     -2.53       -1.39       -2.05        0.15         1         0.81     -0.16    1.16         0.54      0.35
           (-1.00)   (-1.82)     (-1.13)     (-1.62)     (0.09)                 (0.63)    (-0.18)  (0.95)      (0.64)     (0.22)
   All      -1.39     -1.57       -0.66       -1.17        0.73         All      -1.52     -1.11    -0.54        -1.18     0.98
           (-1.44)   (-2.33)     (-0.80)     (-1.69)     (0.61)                 (-2.46)   (-3.48)  (-0.86)     (-3.15)    (1.08)
High-Low    0.06       1.36       0.92         1.05                 High-Low     -2.58     -1.16    -2.22        -2.01
           (0.05)    (1.10)      (0.90)      (1.03)                             (-1.75)   (-1.19)  (-1.79)     (-2.22)
                                              Panel D: IDX4 (S5, R2-S5, R3V-R3G, UMD)
   3        -1.52     -1.22       -0.51       -1.10        1.01         3        -2.02     -1.23    -0.22        -1.38     1.81
           (-2.05)   (-3.57)     (-0.87)     (-2.32)     (1.28)                 (-2.63)   (-3.69)  (-0.35)     (-3.22)    (1.63)
   2        -0.64      0.92       1.90         0.36        2.55         2        -2.82     -1.67    -0.06        -2.09     2.75
           (-0.39)   (0.81)      (1.67)      (0.28)      (1.36)                 (-2.64)   (-1.97)  (-0.07)     (-2.63)    (2.25)
   1        -0.74      0.75       3.24         0.46        3.98         1         1.55     -0.95    0.74         0.44      -0.80
           (-0.49)   (0.71)      (2.68)      (0.48)      (1.93)                 (1.31)    (-1.11)  (0.68)      (0.58)     (-0.52)
   All      -1.15     -0.58       0.45        -0.54        1.59         All      -1.54     -1.21    0.01         -1.13     1.55
           (-1.18)   (-1.13)     (0.68)      (-0.88)     (1.47)                 (-2.41)   (-3.77)  (0.01)      (-2.85)    (1.87)
High-Low    -0.78     -1.97       -3.76       -1.56                 High-Low     -3.57     -0.27    -0.96        -1.82
           (-0.62)   (-1.94)     (-3.15)     (-1.87)                            (-2.75)   (-0.30)  (-0.79)     (-2.34)
                               Panel E: IDX7 (S5, RM-S5, R2-RM, S5V-S5G, RMV-RMG, R2V-R2G, UMD)
   3        -1.93     -1.45       -0.66       -1.29        1.27         3        -1.71     -1.44    -0.84        -1.44     0.87
           (-3.32)   (-5.44)     (-1.16)     (-3.60)     (1.55)                 (-3.40)   (-5.46)  (-1.64)     (-4.40)    (1.22)
   2        -1.40     -0.14       0.70        -0.41        2.11         2        -1.44     -0.67    0.66         -0.90     2.11
           (-1.61)   (-0.16)     (0.78)      (-0.55)     (1.89)                 (-1.73)   (-0.71)  (0.76)      (-1.45)    (1.89)
   1        0.29       0.12       1.64         0.37        1.35         1         0.29     -0.38    1.64         0.32      1.35
           (0.23)    (0.11)      (1.53)      (0.39)      (0.92)                 (0.24)    (-0.45)  (1.59)      (0.41)     (0.92)
   All      -1.51     -1.07       -0.11       -0.88        1.39         All      -1.30     -1.07    -0.16        -0.99     1.15
           (-2.46)   (-2.26)     (-0.20)     (-1.94)     (1.78)                 (-2.17)   (-3.41)  (-0.30)     (-2.66)    (1.47)
High-Low    -2.22     -1.57       -2.29       -1.66                 High-Low     -2.00     -1.06    -2.48        -1.76
           (-1.89)   (-1.51)     (-2.06)     (-1.93)                            (-1.79)   (-1.19)  (-2.34)     (-2.32)



                                                                     40
                                                                                                     Panel A. S&P 500 and subindices
                                                                                                            S&P 500            S&P 500 Growth            S&P 500 Value

                                                                     50




                                                                     40



                 Cumulative alpha in percent (index: Dec 1979 = 0)

                                                                     30




                                                                     20




                                                                     10




                                                                      0
                                                                      Jan‐61    Jan‐66      Jan‐71          Jan‐76             Jan‐81           Jan‐86            Jan‐91          Jan‐96   Jan‐01



                                                                     ‐10




                                                                     ‐20
                                                                                                                                        Date




                                                                                                  Panel B. Russell 2000 and subindices
                                                                                                      Russell 2000         Russell 2000 Growth               Russell 2000 Value

                                                                      20




                                                                       0
                                                                       Dec‐79            Jan‐85                       Jan‐90                        Jan‐95                        Jan‐00            Jan‐05
               Cumulative alpha in percent (index: Dec 1979 = 0)




                                                                      ‐20




                                                                      ‐40




                                                                      ‐60




                                                                      ‐80




                                                                     ‐100
                                                                                                                                        Date




                           Figure 1. Abnormal returns of S&P 500 and Russell 2000.
This figure plots the cumulative abnormal alpha from the Carhart model, estimated in-sample for the time period
1980–2005 (except for the S&P 500, which is 1961–2005). Cumulative alphas are expressed in log percentage
points and normalized to zero at the beginning of 1980.




                                                                                                                                               41
