                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOUSE PRICE MOMENTS IN BOOM-BUST CYCLES

                                             Todd M. Sinai

                                         Working Paper 18059
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18059


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2012




This paper was prepared for the NBER’s Housing and the Financial Crisis conference on November
17 and18, 2011. I am grateful to Karl Case, Ed Glaeser, Charles Himmelberg, and the conference participants
for their helpful comments and to Gordon MacDonald for his excellent research assistance. The Research
Sponsors’ Program of the Zell-Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton and the Smith- Richardson Foundation
provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Todd M. Sinai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
House Price Moments in Boom-Bust Cycles
Todd M. Sinai
NBER Working Paper No. 18059
May 2012
JEL No. G12,R12,R21,R3,Y1

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper describes six stylized patterns among housing markets in the United States that potential
explanations of the housing boom and bust should seek to explain. First, individual housing markets
in the U.S. experienced considerable heterogeneity in the amplitudes of their cycles. Second, the areas
with the biggest boom-bust cycles in the 2000s also had the largest boom-busts in the 1980s and 1990s,
with a few telling exceptions. Third, the timing of the cycles differed across housing markets. Fourth,
the largest booms and busts, and their timing, seem to be clustered geographically. Fifth, the cross
sectional variance of annual house price changes rises in booms and declines in busts. Finally, these
stylized facts are robust to controlling for housing demand fundamentals – namely, rents, incomes,
or employment – although changes in fundamentals are correlated with changes in prices.


Todd M. Sinai
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
1465 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu
          The United States experienced a remarkable boom and bust in house prices in the 2000s.
According to the Fiserv Case-Shiller 10-city index, house prices grew by 125 percent in real terms
from their trough in 1996 to their peak in 2006 and subsequently fell by 38 percent over the next
five years. The impacts of this house price cycle have been wide-ranging and severe.
          Explaining the causes of this episode of house price growth and decline and its effects on
the rest of the banking sector and the real economy is the subject of much current research, some
of which is collected in this volume. Potential explanations of the boom and bust in house prices
include changing interest rates, subprime lending, irrational exuberance on the part of home
buyers, a shift to speculative investment in housing, contagion and fads, and international capital
flows.1
          The goal of this paper is to describe a set of patterns in house prices among housing
markets in the United States and to compile a set of empirical facts that potential explanations of
the housing boom and bust should seek to explain. While some of the empirical relationships
detailed here have been discussed to varying degrees in prior research, this paper seeks to
assemble a broad collection of empirical facts. A unified theory of housing booms and busts
would presumably be able to explain the entire set of facts. Of course, it is possible that there is
no single mechanism that generated all the economic fluctuations that were experienced, and that a
combination of causes needs to be explored.
          For this paper, I consider only house price dynamics. Evaluating the many potential
determinants of these housing market dynamics is generally outside the scope of this paper.
However, the role of demand fundamentals, such as rents, income, and employment, is lightly
addressed. Other potentially important contributors to housing market dynamics are the purview
of other authors in this volume, such as Haughwought et al’s chapter on the supply side of housing
markets, Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko’s chapter on interest rates, and Keys et al’s chapter on
housing finance. In addition, I broadly define housing markets as metropolitan statistical areas

1
 A complete set of references for the potential causes of the house price boom in the 2000s is beyond the scope of this
article. However, an interested reader might find the following citations of use. For discussions of the explanatory
potential of interest rates, see Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010); Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005); Mayer
and Sinai (2007); and Campbell et al (2009). For subprime lending, see Pavlov and Wachter (2009); Mian and Sufi
(2009); Wheaton and Nechayev (2008); and Lai and Van Order (2010). Arguments in favor of irrational bubbles can
be found in Case and Shiller (2003) and Shiller (2005, 2006). Barlevy and Fisher (2011); Bayer, Geissler, and
Roberts (2011); and Robinson and Todd (2010) examine the issue of speculative investment demand contributing to
house price booms. Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) consider contagion (“social dynamics”) and fads.
Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010) show that foreign capital flows into the U.S. could, in general
equilibrium, lead to increases in the price-to-rent ratio for owner-occupied houses that match the aggregate U.S. time
series.

                                                          1
(MSAs), intended to correspond to labor market areas that workers are willing to commute
amongst. During the boom-bust, there were also important within-MSA house price dynamics.
These dynamics are addressed by Genesove and Han in this volume as well as Ferreira and
Gyourko (2011) and Bayer, Geissler, and Roberts (2011).2
        I highlight six stylized facts. First, despite the sizeable boom-bust pattern in house prices
at the national level, individual housing markets in the U.S. experienced considerable
heterogeneity in the amplitudes of their cycles. The 75th percentile MSA experienced 111 percent
trough-to-peak growth in real house prices in the 1990s and 2000s (using Federal Housing Finance
Agency (FHFA) data), whereas the 25th percentile MSA had only 32 percent trough-to-peak real
house price growth.
        Second, the boom-bust of the 2000s bears remarkable similarities – as well as some
differences – to the boom-bust of the 1980s. We observe two types of MSAs in the data. One set
experienced house price cycles in both the 1980s and the 2000s whereas the other set experienced
a boom-bust only in the 2000s. The MSA-level correlation in trough-to-peak real house price
growth in the late 1980s and the early 2000s for all MSAs is quite high at 0.45 and would be
higher still if those MSAs that did not experience a 1980s cycle at all were excluded.
        Third, housing markets also experienced differences in the timing of their cycles. Most
MSAs in the 1990s saw their house prices bottom either between 1990 and 1993 or between 1996
and 1997, and house prices generally peaked in 2006 and 2007. In the 1980s, house prices peaked
between 1986 and 1990. Potential explanations for housing booms, therefore, need to generate
both differences in the amplitude and timing of price changes across MSAs.
        Fourth, the largest booms and busts, and their timing, seem to be clustered geographically.
The largest amplitude cycles in the boom/bust of the 1990s and 2000s occurred in coastal MSAs
and in Florida. These geographic concentrations also had price peaks and troughs that started at
similar times and at distinct times from the rest of the country.
        Fifth, other interesting patterns emerge when one considers annual house price growth,
rather than house price changes from trough to peak and back again. In particular, the cross
sectional variance of annual house price changes increases in booms and decreases in busts.
        Lastly, these five patterns remain even when house prices are purged of demand
fundamentals such as rents, incomes, or employment. Although changes in fundamentals are

2
 I also limit my attention to U.S. housing markets. Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) document house price
dynamics in 18 OECD countries.

                                                       2
correlated with changes in house prices, cycles in these fundamentals do not have the same
amplitude as price cycles and the time pattern of the growth in fundamentals does not match the
timing of the growth in house prices. In fact, controlling for demand fundamentals makes the
remaining boom-bust patterns in house prices even starker.
       Collectively, these facts limit the possible explanations of the housing boom and bust. The
fact that changing demand fundamentals cannot match the boom/bust pattern of house prices
indicates that the house price cycles were due to changes in the price of owning a home rather than
changes in the underlying demand for a place to live. However, the factors that are commonly
believed to determine asset prices – the cost or availability of credit, changing growth
expectations, or time-varying risk premia – often vary over time only at the national level and thus
cannot account for the different magnitudes of the booms and busts across metropolitan areas.
Some have postulated that a national factor, such as the availability of subprime mortgages, might
interact with local characteristics, such as the elasticity of housing supply, to create different-sized
booms across MSAs. However, those explanations do not address why the booms would start at
different times in different MSAs. Another set of explanations postulate that idiosyncratic MSA-
specific conditions, such as an influx of speculators or excessive optimism, led to booms in a
subset of MSAs. However, the remarkable similarity between the location and size of the booms
of the 1980s and 2000s implies that, for this to be explanation, those same conditions must have
reoccurred in the same MSAs.
       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. I first describe the data used in the paper
and the algorithm for identifying peaks and troughs in each MSA’s time series. In section 2, I
describe the aggregate national patterns in house price dynamics. Section 3 makes the point that
MSAs can vary considerably from the national average and documents heterogeneity in the
amplitude of the housing boom/bust of the 1990s and 2000s. It also shows that house price booms
were typically followed by house price busts. The similarities and differences between the
housing boom of the 1980s and the boom of the 2000s is discussed in Section 4. The next section
documents the fact that MSA-level house prices hit their troughs and peaks in different years.
Section 6 shows that MSAs with similar amplitudes and timing in their housing booms and busts
are clustered near each other geographically. Section 7 moves from the trough-to-peak house
price growth concept to consider annual growth in house prices and the distribution of that growth
rate across MSAs. I briefly discuss housing demand fundamentals in Section 8, finding that house


                                                   3
price cycles remain even conditional on cycles in housing fundamentals. Finally, Section 9 briefly
concludes.


1.     Data
       The primary source of data is the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)’s quarterly
house price index from data on repeat sales of homes. By comparing repeat transactions on
houses that sell multiple times, the index controls for the size or quality of the house to the extent
that the house is not renovated. The most significant benefit of the data is that it is available over
a very long time (it is reliable as early as 1980) and for a large number of MSAs. However, to be
included in the index’s sample, the houses need to actually transact -- and multiple times at that –
and have conforming mortgages securitized by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. This sample of
houses may not be representative of the overall housing stock and may not reflect the full
volatility of the underlying housing market. In addition, the FHFA indexes are normalized within
each MSA and thus cannot be used for cross-MSA house price comparisons. The FHFA data
contains 344 MSAs with data between 1990 and 2010 and 163 MSAs with data covering 1980
through 2010. I annualize the data by averaging the index over the four quarters in a calendar year
and convert the price indexes from nominal to real terms by deflating using the CPI (all urban
consumers).
       The FHFA repeat sales index is augmented with rent data from REIS, Inc. REIS surveys
“class A” apartment buildings, which are typically among the nicest in a given market, and adjusts
the rents for concessions, such as months of free rent, to calculate a measure of effective rent.
This is the rent concept we use as a proxy for rental values of owner-occupied houses. Because
the REIS and FHFA indexes measure two different quantities of housing – the housing stock
comprised by the apartment buildings in the REIS data can be quite different than the housing
stock in the single family detached houses in the FHFA data – I will not try to interpret the
differences in house price levels versus rents in a given MSA. Instead, in section 8, I will compare
the growth in FHFA prices to the growth in REIS rents, which merely requires that the growth in
rents for apartments tracks the growth in (unobserved) rental value of houses.
       As an alternative to using apartment rents as a proxy for housing demand, one could use
demand fundamentals. For that reason, I collect data on median per capita income by MSA and




                                                   4
employment by MSA from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Income is converted into real
dollars using the CPI.
        Much of the analysis in this paper concerns the peaks and troughs of housing cycles. The
algorithm to determine those troughs and peaks starts by determining the peak of house prices in
the 2000s. For each MSA, that peak is defined by first finding all the local maxima – years where
the average annual real house price exceeds that of the adjacent years – in the 1999 through 2010
period and then choosing the local maximum with the highest real house price. After that, the
algorithm works backward in time: It finds the local minimum – a year where house prices are
lower than in the adjacent years – in the period prior to the 2000s peak year that is closest in time
to the 2000s peak year and calls it the 1990s trough. The next preceding local maximum is labeled
the 1990s peak, and the local minimum that precedes it is called the 1980s trough. Some MSAs
do not have cyclical enough house prices for there to be local maxima and minima for all possible
peaks and troughs. In those cases, the algorithm defines only those peaks and troughs it can
identify. In addition, the trough in house prices in the 2000s is defined as the lowest real house
price subsequent to the 2000s peak. However, that so-called trough often occurs in 2010, the last
year of the data, and thus may not reflect the actual bottom in house prices. The peak/trough
algorithm is repeated for all the MSA-level economic variables in the data set – house prices,
apartment rents, median incomes, and MSA employment – as well as the ratios of house prices to
rents, incomes, and employment.3


2.      National patterns
        The history of national average house prices in the U.S. is by now well-known. According
to data from the FHFA, real house prices rose more than 55 percent between the mid-1990s and
the end of 2006 and had declined by almost 17 percent by late 2010. A national boom-bust in
house prices also was experienced in the 1980s, with real prices rising nearly 15 percent between
the mid-1980s and late 1989 and subsequently falling by 8 percent. This data is plotted in Figure



3
  Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) apply a related algorithm to house price data for 18 countries. Two
differences are that they smooth quarterly house price growth using a five-quarter moving average and they require
the price change in a run-up to exceed a minimum bound before calling it a boom. Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) apply
a more rigorous econometric procedure to identify house price troughs across U.S. metropolitan areas and Census
tracts from structural breaks in house price growth. Davidoff (2012) identifies house price peaks by choosing the date
that minimizes the standard deviation in annual house price growth rates before and after the peak and estimates
trough-to-peak house price growth by assuming fixed dates for the troughs.

                                                          5
1. The dashed line, labeled “HPI”, corresponds to the FHFA national series, deflated by the CPI,
and is normalized so that it equals one in 1990.4
        Another index, Fiserv Case-Shiller, uses a similar repeat-sales methodology but, unlike the
FHFA index, is not limited to housing transactions with conforming mortgages and does not
exclude sales of foreclosed homes. The real Fiserv Case-Shiller index is plotted in Figure 1, in the
dotted line, for comparison with the FHFA index. The Fiserv Case-Shiller index demonstrates
substantially more volatility than the national FHFA index, more than doubling between 1997 and
2007 and subsequently falling by about one-third. However, the Fiserv Case-Shiller index in this
figure is a composite of just 10 cities, and it turns out that the differences in volatility between the
FHFA index and the Case-Shiller index is more a function of the composition of cities that make
up the index than of the composition of housing transactions within a city.5 To show this, we plot
(with a dash-dot line) a composite real FHFA index for the same 10 cities that are in the Fiserv
Case-Shiller 10-city composite index. The two 10-city indexes are quite similar, with the Fiserv
Case-Shiller index exhibiting slightly more volatility. This paper uses the FHFA series because
the data covers a longer time span – for many MSAs, it starts (reliably) in 1980 rather than Fiserv
Case-Shiller’s 1987 – and because it covers more metropolitan areas. However, based on Figure
1, the results should be similar if other house price indexes are used.


3.      Heterogeneity in amplitude
        The national pattern of house price dynamics masks considerable heterogeneity within the
United States. One way to see this cross-MSA variation is to consider the amplitude of the
trough-to-peak and peak-to-trough cycles in house prices experienced across various housing
markets. Appendix Table A reports these statistics for each MSA in the data. In the 1990s and
2000s, most MSAs did not experience nearly the price growth reflected in the national average.
However, a number of MSAs experienced considerably more growth, skewing the distribution of
house price growth. The dispersion in the cumulative real price growth from each MSA’s trough
to peak is graphed in Figure 2. For instance, the solid line plots a kernel estimate of the
distribution of total real price growth for the entire set of MSAs available in the FHFA data,
weighting each MSA equally. Most MSAs, 57 percent, experienced real house price growth

4
  These sorts of aggregate house price dynamics were initially modeled in a stock-flow framework, such as
DiPasquale and Wheaton (1994).
5
  The Fiserv Case-Shiller index is also publicly available as a 20-city composite index.

                                                         6
below the national average growth of 55 percent. Indeed, the mode of the distribution is below 50
percent. However, the right tail of the price growth distribution is skewed, with a number of
MSAs experiencing a doubling or more in their real house prices over the period.
        The skewness across MSAs in trough-to-peak real house price growth is accentuated when
the MSA observations are weighted by their 1990 population of households. This result can be
seen in the dashed line in Figure 2. The peak of the distribution is reduced, with the mass
redistributed to the right. This change implies that the highest trough-to-peak house price growth
in the 1990s and 200s was experienced by larger cities, so weighting by the number of households
reduces the emphasis at the low-growth portion of the distribution and shifts out the right tail of
the distribution.
        Most of the skewness in house price growth in the 1990s and 2000s arises from exceeding
the prior house price peak of the 1980s/1990s rather than from recovering to the prior high-price-
level after the trough of the 1990s. Evidence can be found in the dashed-dotted line, which is a
kernel density estimate of the real house price growth between the real house price peak in the
2000s and the prior peak in house prices, which typically occurred in the late 1980s. That
distribution, which is unweighted, looks very similar to the unweighted distribution of trough-to-
peak real house price growth, but shifted a bit to the left.
        Finally, the heterogeneity in trough-to-peak growth is not due to differences in the length
of the boom. Even over a fixed time span there is considerable heterogeneity and skewness in real
house price growth. This fact can be seen in the dotted line, which corresponds to house price
growth over the fixed 2000 through 2005 period, rather than over the trough-to-peak period
window that can vary in length. Although the mass of low-growth MSAs is greater under this
fixed-time period measure, there is still considerable skewness. This pattern indicates that house
prices in some MSAs grew at a higher average rate, not just for a longer period. Another potential
fixed-duration measure of growth would be to compute house price growth over the five years
subsequent to each MSA’s trough of the 1990s, rather than using 2000 as a base year for all
MSAs. The distribution generated by that approach looks very similar to the 2000-2005
distribution plotted in Figure 2.
        That the skewness in the distribution of MSA house price growth during the 1990s/2000s
boom is not due to differences in the length of the boom is especially evident in Figure 3, which
plots the kernel density estimate of the geometric average trough-to-peak growth rate. Most of the


                                                   7
MSAs averaged between 0 and 5 percent real house price growth during their run-ups. However,
there is a sizeable tail of MSAs with annualized house price growth rates ranging between 5 and
15 percent. That tail is larger when we weight by each MSA’s population of housing units,
depicted by the dashed line, indicating that larger cities experienced higher average house price
growth rates during the most recent boom.
         A similar degree of heterogeneity across MSAs can be observed in the house price declines
from the peak of the 2000s through 2010, graphed in the solid line in Figure 4. In this chart, a
larger positive number corresponds to a greater decline in real house prices after the peak in the
mid-2000s. Most MSAs experienced price declines, as measured by the FHFA data, of well less
than the 17 percent national average. The modal decline in house prices is less than 10 percent.
However, many MSAs experienced 30, 40, or even 50 percent price declines. While these MSAs
are atypical, they nonetheless constitute a sizeable tail. However, it is worth emphasizing that
while the sample period ends in 2010, the housing collapse did not. The data do not yet allow us
to compute a complete peak-to-trough measure.6
         Even within the truncated time period, the most populous MSAs, on average, experienced
larger real house price declines after their peaks. This can be seen in the dashed line, which
weights each MSA observation by its number of households. The density is shifted to the right.
         The dotted line in Figure 4 graphs the distribution of house price declines between 2005
and 2010 for comparison to the 2000-2005 distribution in Figure 2. A positive number indicates
that house prices fell between 2005 and 2010. Some MSAs had negative declines – which
correspond to increases in house prices between 2005 and 2010 – because most MSAs’ house
prices peaked between 2006 and 2008 and so 2005-2010 spans a period of price growth and
subsequent decline. In many MSAs, the growth in prices between 2005 and the peak was greater
than the decline from the peak to 2010, which yields a point to the left of zero. Still other MSAs
had a larger house price collapse than run-up.
         It is typically the case that those MSAs that experienced the greatest run-up in house prices
in the 1990s and 2000s also faced the largest subsequent house price declines, even recognizing
that house prices still might continue to decline after 2010.7 This pattern can be seen in Figure 5,

6
  Just as there are a host of possible explanations for the run-up in house prices, there are many possible contributors
to the bust. One potentially exacerbating factor is foreclosures, discussed in Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak
(forthcoming).
7
  Glaeser et al (2011) highlight a similar phenomenon over 1980-1990s time period, that U.S. housing markets exhibit
long run mean reversion and short run serial correlation in house price growth. They use a fixed time window rather

                                                           8
which plots for 249 of the MSAs in the FHFA data the decline in log real house prices after the
peak of the 2000s on the vertical axis, and the growth in log real house prices from the 1990s
trough to the 2000s peak on the horizontal axis. The dashed line is the fitted bivariate regression
line where each MSA is weighted equally. The upward slope (0.641 with a standard error of
0.034) indicates that the magnitudes of the price run-ups and run-downs are correlated. The dotted
line weights the MSAs by the population of housing units and yields a slightly lower slope (0.518
with a standard error of 0.031). This indicates that larger MSAs had busts that were less
correlated with their preceding booms.
        The MSAs furthest away from the origin in Figure 5 experienced boom-bust cycles with
the greatest amplitudes. These mainly include a number of MSAs in Florida, such as Naples with
a 173 percent real price run-up, Miami (160 percent), and Fort Lauderdale (142 percent), and
others in California, such as Salinas (165 percent), Santa Barbara (162 percent), Riverside/San
Bernardino (158 percent), and Modesto (141 percent).
        However, the decline in real house prices is not (yet) equal to the prior increase. The solid
45-degree line in Figure 5 demarcates the decline in log house prices that would be necessary to
undo all the price growth from the 1990s trough to the house price peak of the 2000s. Nearly all
of the MSAs lie below this line, indicating that their real house prices at their lowest point after the
peak of the 2000s were still above where they were in the prior trough of the 1990s. This is not
surprising since, in most MSAs in 2010, the economic fundamentals that contribute to housing
demand had not reverted to mid-1990s levels. Even so, some MSAs that have notably been
suffering from a secular economic decline have real house prices in the late 2000s that were lower
than what they were in the mid-1990s. These include many rust-belt MSAs, such as Detroit,
Warren, and Flint, Michigan, Fort Wayne, Indiana, and parts of Ohio. Other MSAs whose real
prices fell more than they rose in the latest boom include some “bubble” MSAs, such as Las
Vegas, Nevada, and Merced, California. 8
        The heterogeneity across MSAs in the boom-bust cycle of house prices can be seen more
clearly in Figure 6, which reports the same trough-peak-trough price cycle as Figure 5, but which
restricts the sample of MSAs to those also covered by the REIS data. These 43 MSAs are among

than MSA-specific peaks and troughs, but the idea is the same. This evidence is extended in Glaeser, Gyourko, and
Saiz (2008). They, too, use the same endpoint dates for all MSAs when defining booms: 1982-1989, 1989-1996, and
1996-2006. We also observe a correlation in house price booms and subsequent busts in the 1980s-1990s period. It is
not graphed, but the bivariate regression coefficient is reported in Table 1.
8
  Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008) note that new house construction during booms could cause house prices to fall
below their level in prior troughs because housing supply could increase more than demand fundamentals.

                                                        9
the largest in the U.S. The MSAs furthest from the origin – those with the largest price increases
and decreases include most of California and South Florida, plus Phoenix, Arizona. Texas cities,
such as Houston, Dallas, and Fort Worth had negligible price cycles and are close to the origin.
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Seattle, New York, and Boston are in the middle. Only Cleveland and
Detroit are above the 45-degree line, where their post-boom real house prices are below the level
of their prior trough.
        Those MSAs that are below the dashed and dotted fitted regression lines experienced a
greater ratio of price increase to subsequent decrease than did the cities above the regression line.
Some MSAs in close proximity experienced similar trough-to-peak price growth but dissimilar
price declines. For example, as reported in Appendix Table A, both Los Angeles and San
Bernardino/Riverside experienced 157 percent price growth between 1997 and 2006. However,
prices in Los Angeles fell “just” 34 percent subsequently, compared to 48 percent in San
Bernardino. In San Francisco, prices rose 129 percent from trough to peak and 124 percent in
nearby Sacramento. But real prices have fallen by 44 percent from the peak in Sacramento and
only 24 percent in San Francisco. However, it is worth repeating that none of these cities have
necessarily yet reached their new price trough and so judgments about price declines should be
tempered.
        This heterogeneity across MSAs has important implications for the possible explanations
of the housing boom and subsequent bust. In particular, the many explanations that postulate a
single common national factor, such as a change in overall credit market conditions or widespread
optimism about house price growth, cannot generate different price dynamics across housing
markets. To account for the heterogeneity across MSAs, a change in a national factor, such as the
cost of mortgage credit, would have to interact with a MSA-specific characteristic, such as the
elasticity of supply, in order to generate housing cycles of different magnitudes across MSAs.9
        Another possibility is that some precipitating factor for the boom and bust might simply
have varied differentially across metropolitan areas over time. For example, if subprime credit
availability increased in some MSAs, as in Mian and Sufi (2009), and subprime loans were
capitalized into higher house prices (Pavlov and Wachter (2009)), then some of the house price
boom potentially could have been caused by local variation in credit supply. However, in order to
be the sole explanation of the heterogeneity in the data, the growth in subprime credit would have

9
 Examples of this approach include Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005) for interest rates and Brunnermeier and
Julliard (2008) for money illusion.

                                                       10
to be largest in the MSAs with the most extreme booms, and subprime credit would have to be
commensurately withdrawn during the bust. Of course, even if differences across MSAs in the
housing boom could be explained by idiosyncratic differences in some precipitating factor, such as
subprime lending or housing speculation (Bayer et al 2011), it begs the question of why that factor
would be more prevalent in particular MSAs. It could be the case that subprime lending or
speculative investing happened to be located in particular MSAs for reasons that were based on
exogenous characteristics. Or, perhaps, the growth in those activities was based on features of or
expectations about the local housing market. In either case, lending or speculation may be a
symptom rather than the true underlying cause. Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011)
propose a model of fads to explain this sort of housing market heterogeneity that appears to be
unrelated to any observable underlying factor.


4.     Similarity with the 1980s
       The same MSA-level heterogeneity in house price growth rates that characterized the
boom-bust cycle that peaked in the 2000s also was present in the preceding house price cycle that
peaked in the late 1980s. Figure 7 compares the unweighted distribution of real house price
growth rates from the 1990s trough to the 2000s peak, as computed in Figure 2, to the distribution
of real house price growth rates from the 1980s trough to the peak of the late 1980s/early 1990s.
Both boom-bust cycles demonstrated considerable dispersion across MSAs in trough-to-peak
house price growth. A large fraction of the distribution of MSA house price growth during the
1990s boom, which is described by the solid line, is below 25 percent. However, the tail extends
to growth of more than 100 percent. The dashed line, which corresponds to the boom that peaked
in the 2000s, shows that the mass of the distribution of price growth in that run-up was shifted
slightly more to the right than in the prior boom, up to about 50 percent increases in real house
prices. The 2000 boom also had a thicker right tail, extending to more than 150 percent
cumulative growth.
       Both periods also exhibited dispersion in house price declines after their respective peaks.
In Figure 8, the kernel density of the decline in real house prices after the peak of the late 1980s
(the solid line) is nearly the same as the density of real house price declines after the peak of the
late 2000s (the dashed line). The more recent housing bust reveals a somewhat larger house price
collapse across most MSAs as the distribution of house price declines is shifted to the right. On


                                                  11
top of that, the extent of the house price declines in the most recent bust is not yet fully known
whereas the 1990s bust is complete. That suggests that the most recent bust promises to be even
more sizeable than the house price collapse of the 1990s.
       In addition, the MSAs that boomed in the 2000s largely were the same MSAs that boomed
in the 1980s, with a few notable exceptions. This relationship can be seen in Figure 9, which plots
each MSA’s trough-to-peak change in log real house prices during the cycle that peaked in the
2000s against trough-to-peak log house price changes during the 1980s cycle. Every MSA that
had a 1980s cycle – even if it was small – is included in the sample, yielding 124 MSAs. On
average, there is a positive relationship between house price growth in the two cycles, with higher
trough-to-peak price growth in the 1980s predicting greater trough-to-peak price growth in the
more recent cycle. This pattern can be seen in the dashed and dotted lines, which correspond to
the unweighted and population-weighted bivariate regression lines, respectively. MSAs that
experienced considerable volatility in the 2000s, such as Boston, New York, and San Francisco,
also had large house price run-ups in the 1980s, and thus can be found away from the origin on the
right side of the chart. Other MSAs, such as Nashville, Austin, and Minneapolis, had relatively
low amounts of house price growth in both cycles and are close to the origin. Nearly all cities,
however, experienced more house price growth in the 2000s cycle than in the 1990s and thus are
above the solid 45-degree line. Rather, those that experienced above-average high price growth in
the 1980s typically also had above-average house price growth in the 2000s. An exception to this
rule is the group of declining MSAs, such as Rochester NY, Fort Wayne IN, and Dayton OH that
had little house price growth in both the 1980s and the 2000s.
       There is one significant group of outliers to this general pattern. A cohort of MSAs
experienced outsized house price growth in the 2000s but relatively little price growth in the
1980s. This set of MSAs is located in the upper left of the graph, close to the Y-axis and far from
the X-axis. This group includes many MSAs that were poster children for the recent housing
bubble – Miami and much of South Florida, Phoenix AZ, Las Vegas NV, and Riverside/San
Bernardino CA – as well as others that were less visible, such as Salt Lake City.
       For legibility, Figure 10 graphs the same information for the smaller sample of MSAs that
also have data available from REIS. The outliers in the upper left quadrant, such as south Florida
and Phoenix, are more evident in this figure. The California MSAs of San Bernardino, Orange




                                                  12
County, San Diego, and Oakland also lie above the regression line but, unlike the Florida MSAs,
they did exhibit a cycle in the 1980s, albeit a muted one.
         The parallel between the 1980s and the 2000s presents a challenge for popular theories of
the housing boom. Many of the commonly raised culprits for the most recent boom were simply
not factors in the 1980s. For example, the subprime lending boom was an innovation of the
2000s. Thus, while Mian and Sufi (2009) attribute 40 percent of the 2002-2005 increase in house
prices to the growth of subprime lending, it could not also have caused the house price cycle two
decades earlier. It seems more likely that some recurring cause induced both housing booms than
that two different factors separated by more than two decades caused matching housing booms
across MSAs. The similarities between the 1980s and the 2000s also are hard for the Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) theory of fads to explain. It is hard to believe that fads randomly
happened to recur, with similar degrees of intensity, in the same U.S. housing markets. By
contrast, the European data in Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo does not exhibit the same
repeated housing cycles as the U.S. data, making their theory more appropriate for that context.
         Another challenge raised in this section is how to explain the aberrant MSAs. While most
MSAs have regular housing booms and busts of varying magnitudes, others such as Phoenix, Las
Vegas, the Inland Empire of California, and much of South Florida, clearly experienced an
unusual event in the boom of the 2000s. A key task for an explanation of the housing boom is to
distinguish these MSAs that underwent an unusual event from the remainder. Did something
different take place in the handful of MSAs that experienced house price swings only in the
2000s?


5.       Heterogeneity in timing
         Popular discussion tends to refer to the start and end of the housing “bubble” as if there
were a particular point in time in which price growth began in all MSAs and another date at which
the bubble ended. In practice, those dates varied widely across MSAs. Figure 11 charts the
distribution of trough and peak dates for the house price peak of the 1980s (in gray), the trough of
the 1990s (in black), and the peak of the 2000s (speckled). (Appendix Table A reports these dates
for each MSA in the data.) Each distribution spans a number of years. For most MSAs, the 1980s
peak in real house prices occurred between 1986 and 1990. However, some MSAs peaked in the
early 1980s and others peaked well into the 1990s. The early dates typically correspond to MSAs


                                                   13
whose house prices peaked in the early 1980s, declined through the early-1990s, and then rose
until the mid-2000s. For example, Denver’s real house price peaked in 1983, reached a trough in
1991, and peaked again in 2005. The MSAs with the latest peaks typically did not experience a
1980s cycle at all. Rather, their house prices fell until the late 1980s, then rose steadily until the
late 2000s. However, Portland, Oregon, for example, experienced a slight house price dip after the
tech boom of the late 1990s, and so the algorithm characterized that period as a local house price
maximum. Leaving aside the extreme outliers in the dates of the peak, considerable heterogeneity
remains over the five years spanning 1986 through 1990.
        The dates of the subsequent trough in house prices are bimodal. One concentration occurs
in the early 1990s, between 1990 and 1993, with a large number of MSAs hitting their troughs in
1991. The other concentration takes place around 1996 and 1997. About 30 MSAs have troughs
in 2000 or 2001. These MSAs typically experienced a small dip in house prices after a run-up in
the late 1990s, before their house prices continued their climb through the late 2000s. The
algorithm counts the small hiccup in house price growth as a local minimum and identifies it as a
trough even if, like in Scranton, PA, house prices reach a nadir again in the mid-1990s. Again,
leaving aside the outliers, there is considerable dispersion across dates of the trough of house
prices.10
        By contrast, the peak of house prices in the 2000s was much more concentrated than either
the previous trough or peak. MSA-level house prices topped out primarily in 2006 and 2007, with
about 40 MSAs reaching their house price peaks in 2005. Despite this relatively high
concentration, there is still considerable heterogeneity. House prices in 26 MSAs peaked before
2005 and a comparable number of MSAs had peaks in 2009.11
        This heterogeneity in timing presents another hurdle for theories that attribute the housing
boom(s) and bust(s) to a common national factor. Even if that factor interacts with MSA-level
characteristics to induce different amplitudes of the housing market boom across MSAs, the
timing of the start, peak, and end of the house price cycle should be similar. For example, the
decline in interest rates in the 2000s applied to all MSAs in the U.S. Even if those MSAs varied in
their elasticities of housing supply or expectations of future house price appreciation – both of

10
   Independently, Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) have estimated the starting date of the boom of the 2000s at the MSA
level using a quarterly MSA-level house price index of their own construction and a more rigorous econometric
procedure. They also find considerable dispersion in starting dates.
11
   Davidoff (2012) finds that most MSAs house prices peak around Q2 of 2007 and, for those that do not, the
difference between their house prices in Q2 of 2007 and house prices at their actual peaks is small.

                                                        14
which could induce a differential effect of interest rates on house prices – to the extent house
prices increased when interest rates fell, it should have occurred simultaneously across MSAs.


6.      Geographic clustering
        Although MSAs differ in the timing and amplitude of their house price cycles, MSAs with
similar house price cycles tend to be located near each other. This pattern is especially evident in
the trough-to-peak and peak-to-trough house price growth around the boom-bust of the
1990s/2000s. Figure 12 maps the growth in real house prices between the 1990s trough and the
2000s peak, by MSA. Lighter-shaded MSAs had less trough-to-peak house price growth and
darker-shaded MSAs experienced more. The darkest-shaded MSAs, those with 70 percent or
more growth in house prices, were mainly located on the west coast of the U.S., the Northeast
Corridor (Washington D.C./Philadelphia/New York/Boston), and in the state of Florida. Most of
the rest of the U.S. is shaded light grey, indicating relatively lower house price growth, with the
exception of the areas around Denver, Salt Lake City, and Casper, Wyoming. (House prices in the
latter city more than doubled between 1989 and 2007.) Even among the dark-shaded subset of
MSAs, the coastal MSAs experienced more growth in prices than did the slightly more inland
MSAs. For example, central Florida had less trough-to-peak real house price growth than did
coastal Florida. In addition, major cities had greater house price growth during this period than
did neighboring areas. For example, the Portland, OR MSA had more price growth than the areas
just to its south, and the Boston area experienced more house price growth than the areas to its
west.
        Since the MSAs that had house price booms also tended to have house price busts, it
follows that the house price declines of the late 2000s are also spatially concentrated. This pattern
can be seen in Figure 13. The west coast of the U.S., the northeast, and Florida experienced the
largest concentrations of house price declines. However, the pattern within those areas is partially
reversed from the prior house price run-up. The coastal MSAs and large cities experienced
relatively less of a house price collapse by 2010 than did the more inland MSAs or the areas
around the cities. However, house prices in those coastal MSAs still fell by more than in the
MSAs in the middle of the country, reflecting the fact that they also experienced a greater house
price rise.




                                                  15
         Similar geographic clustering can also be seen in the starting date of the boom of the
2000s. This information is mapped in Figure 14, with a darker shade for MSAs that had a later
start date for the boom. The same areas that experienced the largest booms/busts appear to have
started their cycles later. By contrast, in Figure 15, the dates of the peak of the 2000s house price
boom are much more uniformly distributed across the country.12
         This geographic clustering might provide an opportunity to uncover the source of the
housing boom. It is possible that neighboring MSAs have similar observable or unobservable
characteristics that made them more susceptible to house price cycles. Or, perhaps housing booms
propagate –by wealth transmission, or contagion of market information or sentiment – causing an
MSA’s housing market to follow its neighbor’s.


7.       Annual house price growth
         Up to this point, the paper has considered the distribution of trough-to-peak and peak-to-
trough growth rates. However, the distribution of annual growth rates in MSA-level house price
indexes also reveals some interesting patterns.
         First, the cross-sectional distribution of one-year MSA-level house price growth rates
widens considerably during housing booms and contracts during housing busts. That is, when
house prices are highest, there is more dispersion across MSAs in the amount of house price
growth. This pattern can be seen in Figure 16, which plots the standard deviation of real house
price growth over time. The standard deviation is computed across MSAs at a point in time. For
example, the line in Figure 16 starts in 1981. That year, the standard deviation across MSAs of
their house price growth between 1980 and 1981 was just under 5 percent. During the next
decade, as average house prices rose, the standard deviation of house prices also grew. By 1990,
the peak of the boom, that standard deviation had grown to nearly 7 percent, indicating that the
variation among MSAs in the amount of house price growth was greater at the top of the cycle. In
the mid-1990s, as house prices slumped, the cross-sectional variance also fell. But, in the boom of
the 2000s, the standard deviation rose steadily with house prices to a peak of more than 8 percent.
         While the standard deviation of house price growth rose in both the 1980s and the 2000s,
there was one interesting difference between the two booms: In the 1980s boom, some MSAs

12
  Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) independently document similar MSA-level geographic clustering in the start of the
boom. Their research emphasizes the initial jump in house prices at the start of the house price boom. Interestingly,
they do not find geographic clustering at the MSA level in the magnitude of those initial price jumps.

                                                          16
experienced house price growth whereas others saw house prices decline. However, in the 2000s
boom, almost all MSAs enjoyed house price increases. Figure 17 plots the distribution of annual
house price growth by year. Within each year, there are 159 unweighted MSA-level observations
on real house prices. The horizontal white line in the middle of each vertical black bar
corresponds to the median MSA-level house price growth between the prior year and the current
one. The median growth is positive between 1983 and 1989, reflecting the house price boom of
that period. The cross-section dispersion increases towards the peak of the boom, in 1987, 1988,
and 1989. As house prices fall through the late-1990s, the cross-sectional dispersion declines.
However, during the entire 1983 to 1997 period, despite covering a significant aggregate house
price boom and bust, the interquartile range (from the bottom to the top of the black bar) spanned
zero. That is, some MSAs experienced real price declines in the same year that other MSAs
experienced price growth. By 1998, that pattern was over, and during every year of the house
price boom of the 2000s, with the exception of the post-Internet boom year of 2000, at least 75
percent of the MSAs (and often more) in each year experienced positive house price growth. In
2007, this was no longer true. Then, in every year between 2008 and 2010, more than 75 percent
of MSAs faced house price declines.13
         These patterns in annual growth rates highlight that something different was going on in
the boom of the 2000s: house prices rose in all metropolitan areas, differing only by how much.
But they also emphasize some important similarities across the housing booms. The increasing
dispersion in annual house price growth indicates that some MSAs grew more rapidly than others,
not that some just grew for a longer period of time. The cycle in dispersion also shows that there
was not an equal shock to house price growth across MSAs; had there been, the entire distribution
of house price growth would have shifted rather than expanding.


8.       House price cycles remain after controlling for demand fundamentals
         Up to this point, the paper has focused on house prices alone. But, as is widely recognized,
there are two components that determine house prices. The first is the fundamental value of the
housing service flow, rent. The rental value of housing is determined by factors that affect the
demand for living in a particular location – income, household demographics such as marital
status, and local amenities or wage levels – as well as the elasticity of housing supply. The second

13
  This pattern is consistent with Cotter, Gabriel, and Roll’s (2011) finding of increased integration in MSA-level
house prices in the 2000s.

                                                          17
component is an asset pricing relationship that capitalizes a stream of future rental value into a
current price.14
         If the rental value of owner-occupied housing could be measured directly, housing cycles
could be decomposed into cycles in the value of the housing service flow and cycles due to
changes in asset pricing. Of course, owner-occupied houses are by definition not rented, and thus
the econometrician does not observe the rental value of that set of houses. The prior literature
takes three approaches to surmount that problem. One approach is to compare the rental value and
prices for a set of matched rental and owner-occupied houses, as in Smith and Smith (2009).
Another strategy is to assume that the growth rate in apartment rents, which are observed, is a
good proxy for the growth rate in the unobserved rental value of owner-occupied housing, as in
Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005) or Campbell et al (2009). A third tactic is to use demand
shifters, such as household income, to estimate rental value within the context of an economic
model, as in Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko’s chapter in this volume.
         In this section, I control for various measures of the underlying rental value of owner-
occupied housing in each MSA to isolate the asset pricing component. Doing this makes the
cyclical pattern of house prices, if anything, stronger.
         One main reason for this outcome is that, while there are cycles in fundamentals, cycles in
house prices are much larger. This can be seen clearly in Figure 18, which plots the distribution of
trough-to-peak growth in the 2000 boom for four MSA-level variables: Real house prices, real
rent, real income, and employment.15 House price growth, the solid line, has considerably more
dispersion than any of the three measures of fundamentals.16 A sizeable fraction of MSAs
experienced trough-to-peak real house price growth between 50 and 200 percent. However very
few MSAs experienced more than 50 percent trough to peak growth in housing demand
fundamentals, and none experienced more than 100 percent growth.17
         Not only are the run-ups in fundamental values muted relative to house prices, the
relationship between trough-to-peak growth and the subsequent peak-to-trough decline is


14
   See, for example, Meese and Wallace (1994) for an early exposition of this present value relationship for housing.
The intuition is robust to an even more complete house pricing model, such as Ortalo-Magne and Prat (2010).
15
   McCarthy and Peach (2004) show that the early stages of the house price boom of the 2000s may have been due to
growth in demand fundamentals.
16
   Haughwout et al (2011) shows that house price growth is correlated with growth in the price of raw land.
17
   Figure 18 uses different trough and peak dates for each variable, thus the trough-to-peak growth is calculated over a
different sample window. However, it makes little difference in this figure if we instead compute trough-to-peak
growth for each demand fundamental using the trough and peak dates for the real house price index.

                                                          18
attenuated. Figure 19 plots a cycle in real apartment rents. Each MSA’s troughs and peaks in real
rent are computed using the same algorithm that was applied to house prices. Then, Figure 19
graphs the peak-to-trough change in log real apartment rents in the 2000s against the trough-to-
peak log change in the 1990s and 2000s for the subset of 43 MSAs for which we have rent data.
Most MSAs experienced less than a 40 log point trough-to-peak growth in rent and less than a 20
point decline from their rent peak through 2010. However, a handful of MSAs – including the San
Francisco Bay area, Denver, and New York – experienced much larger rent cycles. Most MSAs
lie below the solid 45-degree line, indicating that rents have not fallen as much as they rose during
their booms. All the exceptions are rust-belt MSAs with very little rent growth, such as Detroit,
Milwaukee, and Pittsburgh. The dashed line corresponds to the unweighted bivariate regression
and shows that, on average, MSAs that enjoyed more rent growth during their booms also
experienced greater percentage rent declines through 2010. (The estimated coefficient on the
trough-to-peak change in log real rent is 0.276 with a standard error of 0.079.) However, when
each MSA is weighted by its number of housing units, displayed in the dotted line, we do not
obtain a statistically significant correlation. (The estimated coefficient is 0.098 with a standard
error of 0.070.)
       In fact, all bivariate relationships discussed in this paper are stronger for house prices than
for housing demand fundamentals. This fact can be seen in Table 1. The top panel of Table 1
uses the subsample of MSAs for which we have rent data from REIS. Each row corresponds to a
different bivariate regression where the unit of observation is an MSA and each observation is
weighted by the MSA’s number of households. For a given variable, the first row regresses the
peak-to-trough change in the log of that variable after the peak in the 2000s on the preceding
trough-to-peak log change. The second row repeats the strategy for the boom/bust of the 1980s
and 1990s. The third row regresses trough-to-peak log differences over the boom of the 2000s on
trough-to-peak log differences over the preceding boom. The bottom panel repeats the regressions
using the full FHFA sample of MSAs.
       Each column of Table 1 corresponds to a different variable of interest, and the estimated
slope coefficient from the bivariate regression is reported in the cell. Cells are empty when there
is not enough data for an estimate. For example, there is no rent variable in the FHFA data set, so
columns 2 and 5 of the bottom panel are empty. Likewise, columns 2, 3, 6, and 7 of the top row of




                                                  19
each panel are empty because the income and employment data do not extend far enough to allow
an estimate of how much they changed after the peak of the 2000s.
       In the first row and column of Table 1, peak-to-trough real house price declines subsequent
to the peak of the 2000s were 4.7 log points larger for every additional 10 log point increase in
house price growth. (The estimated coefficient is 0.471 with a standard error of 0.072.) The
analogous coefficient from the previous boom is just half that magnitude, at 0.220 (0.110). But
house price growth is highly correlated between the two booms. The estimated coefficient of
0.598 shows that an MSA with 10 log points more trough-to-peak house price growth in the 80s
and 90s on average experienced nearly 6 log points more house price growth in the 2000s boom.
The bottom panel, which uses the full sample, finds similar estimated coefficients.
       The second column repeats the same analyses with MSA-level real rent, the third column
with real income, and the fourth column with MSA employment. In none of these columns are the
estimated coefficients as large as the corresponding ones for real house prices. In addition, in
most cases in the top panel they are not statistically distinguishable from zero.
       Another way to see the contribution of swings in asset prices net of fundamentals to
housing booms and busts is to normalize by a measure of fundamentals. Figure 20 plots the
trough-to-peak distribution of growth between the trough of the 1990s and the peak of the 2000s
in the price-to-rent, price-to-income, and price-to-employment ratios. The price-to-rent multiple
should reflect the influence of factors that potentially affect housing asset pricing, such as interest
rates, credit availability, expected future growth in the value of the housing service flow,
adjustments for the relative riskiness of owning versus renting, and any mispricing in the housing
market, while conditioning out differences across MSAs in current supply/demand fundamentals.
The price-to-income and price-to-employment ratios are alternative measures that normalize by
demand shifters in case rent growth for apartments does not parallel the growth in the implicit
rental value of owner-occupied houses. Growth in the price-to-rent ratio exhibits nearly as much
dispersion over the boom as growth in prices alone, ranging from zero to 150 percent. Growth in
the price-to-income and price-to-employment ratios are more concentrated below 50 percent, but
this is due to differences in the composition of MSAs that make up the full sample and the MSAs
for which we have rent data. The REIS MSAs simply had more house price growth during this
boom. When we plot all three series using the same subset of MSAs that are in the REIS sample,
all three distributions look quite similar. The price-to-income and price-to-employment growth


                                                  20
distributions parallel the shape of the price-to-rent distribution, but are shifted to the left by about
10 percentage points of growth.
        Even though there is not much evidence of cycles in underlying demand fundamentals in
this simple analysis, after controlling for the influence of fundamentals the boom-bust
relationships documented in this paper get stronger. Figure 21 plots the peak-to-trough decline
after the 2000s peak in the log price-to-rent ratio against the trough-to-peak growth. There is a
strong positive relationship – those MSAs that experienced the largest run-ups in their price-to-
rent ratios also experienced the largest subsequent declines – and it is a tighter cyclical
relationship than in the analogous chart for house prices alone (Figure 6, which uses the same
sample of MSAs). The MSAs lie closer to the regression line – the adjusted R-squared that
corresponds to the weighted bivariate regression line is 0.81 in Figure 20 and just 0.53 in Figure 6.
In addition, the regression line is closer to the 45-degree line that signifies the point where the
price-to-rent ratio has reverted to its prior trough levels.
        The last three columns of Table 1 report the estimated coefficients for the set of bivariate
regressions on the price-to-rent, price-to-income, and price-to-employment ratios. There is a
stronger boom-bust pattern in price-to-rent ratios than in house prices alone in the booms of the
2000s and the 1980s/1990s (the first two rows). However the link between the run-up of the
1980s and the run-up in the 1990s/2000s was stronger in house prices than in price-to-rent ratios.
This pattern does not persist with our other two measures of fundamentals. For price/income, the
boom-bust relationship is tighter during the 1980s/1990s cycle and the 1980s booms are more
correlated with the 1990s/2000s booms. By contrast, price-to-employment does not exhibit much
any boom/bust cycle in the 1980s, but MSAs with high growth in price-to-employment in the
1990s/2000s were also likely to experience high growth in the same ratio in the 1980s boom.
        Turning back to annual growth rates, the growth in housing demand fundamentals does not
show the same increases in cross-sectional dispersion during booms as we saw in house prices.
Figure 22 plots the standard deviation (across MSAs) in each year’s growth in rents, income, and
employment, between 1981 and 2010 for rent and between 1981 and 2008 for income and
employment. The cross sectional dispersion in income and employment growth – the dashed and
dotted lines, respectively – is relatively constant over the sample period. The standard deviation in
rent growth, by contrast, is higher in the mid- to late-1980s and in the early 2000s, ahead of the
house price peaks in the two booms in our sample period.


                                                    21
         The variation in rent growth over the cycles is small relative to the variation in house
prices and thus the standard deviation in house prices shown in Figure 16 must be largely due to
changes in the asset pricing of houses across MSAs. In fact, because the increase in variation in
rents leads the increase in variation in house prices, purging rent growth from house price growth
reveals an even starker pattern of greater dispersion in the changes in asset pricing of houses
during booms. To demonstrate this, we regressed real house price growth on real rent growth and
graphed the standard deviation of the residual by year in the dashed line in Figure 23.18 The solid
line repeats the standard deviation of real house price growth from Figure 16. The standard
deviation of annual house price growth net of rent growth increases in house price booms, rises
steadily to the house price peaks, and is low in the troughs. It is evident from Figure 23 that the
volatility of house price growth outside of housing booms was due to growth in rents or correlated
housing demand fundamentals, whereas the volatility of house price growth inside of housing
booms can be attributed to asset pricing factors.
         It is worth noting that these patterns cannot be due merely to some MSAs experiencing
house price growth in booms and others not. Since the standard deviation increases through the
booms, Figure 23 implies that house price growth must accelerate throughout the boom. Figures
24 and 25 provide evidence that the entire distribution of house price growth expands in booms.
Figure 24 plots the distribution of real rent growth by year. The largest dispersion can be found in
the mid-1980s and the late 1990s. In the 1983 through 1986 and the 1995 through 2000 periods,
the top 75 percent of MSAs nearly always had positive rent growth. But in the height of the
booms of the late 1980s and the mid 2000s, more than 75 percent of MSAs experienced real rent
declines. Figure 25 plots the distribution of the residuals from the regression of real house price
growth on real rent growth. Here, the dispersion was the largest during the booms of the late
1980s and mid-2000s. However, during the peak of the 1980s boom, house price growth
conditional on rent growth was much more equally likely to be negative as positive. By contrast,
in the run-up to the peak of the 2000s, almost all MSAs in every year between 2001 and 2005
experienced positive house price growth even conditional on rent growth. And, in the subsequent
bust, between 2008 and 2010, almost all MSAs experienced declines in the house price growth
residual.

18
  We obtain similar results if we plot the standard deviation of growth in the price-to-rent ratio rather than the
residual from the price vs. rent regression. The estimated coefficient on rent growth in the bivariate regression of real
house price growth on real rent growth is 0.750 with a standard error of 0.054.

                                                           22
        The fact that the stylized facts established in this paper are even more pronounced once
demand fundamentals are accounted for suggests that the significant contributor to housing cycles
comes from factors that affect the asset pricing of houses. If house price growth and declines were
due to a changing desire for having a place to live, or an increase in the amount of housing
demanded by households, it would be reflected in rents or incomes. Instead, the cycles must be
due to waxing and waning of the taste for owning a house. Potential explanations that are
compatible with changing taste for home ownership include credit market factors, such as changes
in interest rates, or changing expectations, such as optimism about house price growth. However,
given the empirical patterns documented earlier in this chapter, some of these possibilities are
unlikely.


9.      Conclusion
        This paper has documented several empirical patterns in real house prices in the U.S. over
the last three decades. During that span, many housing markets experienced two boom-bust
periods in house prices. However, that pattern was far from universal. A large fraction of housing
markets had no booms or busts, or just one. Even among cyclical housing markets, the amplitude
of house price increases or decreases varied greatly, and the start dates and end dates of each boom
were widely dispersed. In addition, during the house price boom-bust of the 1990s and 2000s,
nearly all MSAs experienced house price growth during the boom and nearly all MSAs faced
house price declines in the bust. In the prior housing cycle, many MSAs faced real house price
declines even during the boom and many MSAs experienced real house price growth during the
bust.
        Despite these differences across metropolitan areas and between the two housing cycles,
there were also considerable similarities along these same dimensions. Housing markets that
enjoyed the largest house price booms also faced the largest subsequent price declines. Those
MSAs that had the largest boom/bust cycle in the 1980s also typically had the largest cycles in the
most recent housing episode, though much of Florida and Phoenix, Arizona are exceptions to that
pattern. Neighboring MSAs experienced similar timing and magnitudes of their cycles in the
1990s/2000s, but not so much in the 1980s.




                                                 23
        In addition to these facts about trough-to-peak and peak-to-trough growth rates, annual
house price changes became more widely dispersed near the peak of the national house price cycle
in both the 1980s and 2000s cycles.
        Finally, these patterns persist even when demand fundamentals such as rents, median
incomes, or MSA-level employment, are netted out of prices. Indeed, controlling for growth in
apartment rents makes the boom-bust cycle in house price growth even clearer.
        This paper has been agnostic about the possible causes of house price cycles. However,
the accumulation of empirical facts limits the set of feasible explanations. Common national
factors cannot easily generate differences in the amplitude of house price cycles across MSAs
unless they interact with MSA-specific characteristics and, even then, are hard to reconcile with
the variation across MSAs in the start or end date of booms and busts. Potential explanations that
depend solely on differences across MSAs in the amount of new housing construction are at odds
with the fact that cycles in price-to-rent ratios exhibit the same MSA-level heterogeneity as prices.
Even if new construction attenuates house price growth in a given MSA, that new housing supply
should also reduce the clearing rent, leaving price-to-rent ratios high.19 Other models that
emphasize how differences in initial conditions can yield variation in booms and busts across
MSAs need to also explain how the cycles in house prices or price-to-rent ratios can repeat over
decades within MSAs and why MSAs with similar cycles are located in geographically
concentrated clusters.20 While much progress has been made on understanding the phenomena of
house price booms and busts, it is clear that much work remains to be done.




19
   Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz’s (2008) model sidesteps this issue by incorporating adaptive expectations, so
differences across MSAs in the elasticity of supply lead to differences in short run growth expectations. Those
expectations should be capitalized into the price-to-rent ratio, though their model does not make that explicit.
20
   This category of explanations includes “fads”, such as Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) and subprime
mortgages, such as Mian and Sufi (2009), since subprime mortgages were not prevalent in the 1980s. By contrast,
Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) speculate that contagion could spread local housing booms to other areas.

                                                        24
References:

Barlevy, Gadi and Jonas Fisher. (2011) “Mortgage Choices and Housing Speculation,” Federal
       Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2010-12, June 15.

Bayer, Patrick, Christopher Geissler, and James Roberts (2011), “Speculators and Middlemen:
       The Role of Flippers in the Housing Market.” NBER Working Paper 16784, February.

Brunnermeier, Markus and Christian Julliard. 2008. “Money Illusion and Housing Frenzies.”
      Review of Financial Studies. Oxford University Press for Society for Financial Studies,
      vol. 21(1), pages 135-180, January.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “Understanding Booms and Busts
       in Housing Markets”, NBER Working Paper No. 16734, January.

Campbell, John, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. (forthcoming) “Forced Sales and House
     Prices,” American Economic Review.

Campbell, Sean, Morris Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert Martin (2009). “What Moves Housing
     Markets: A Variance Decomposition of the Rent-Price Ratio,” Journal of Urban
     Economics, vol. 66, pp. 90-102.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller (2003), “Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 2:299-342, Fall.

Cotter, John, Stuart Gabriel, and Richard Roll (2011), “Integration and Contagion in US Housing
        Markets,” Working Paper, October 12, 2011.

Davidoff, Tom (2012), “Supply Elasticity and the Housing Cycle of the 2000s,” Real Estate
      Economics, forthcoming.

DiPasquale, Denise and William Wheaton, (1994). “Housing Market Dynamics and the Future of
      House Prices”, Journal of Urban Economics, 35.2, 1-27.

Favilukis, Jack, Sydney Ludvigson and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. “Macroeconomic Implications of
       Housing Wealth, Housing Finance and Limited Risk Sharing in Equilibrium”, NYU Stern
       Working Paper, January 2011.

Glaeser, Edward, Joshua Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko. (2010) . “Can Cheap Credit Explain the
       Housing Boom?” Mimeo, November 15.

Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles Nathanson. 2011. “Housing
       Dynamics,” Mimeo, May 20.

Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz. (2008). “Housing Supply and Housing
       Bubbles,” Journal of Urban Economics, 64, 198-217.


                                               25
Haughwout, Andrew, Richard Peach, John Sporn, and Joseph Tracy (2011), “The Supply Side of
     the Housing Boom and Bust of the 2000s,” FRBNY Working Paper, November 6.

Himmelberg, Charles, Chris Mayer and Todd Sinai. (2005). “Assessing High House Prices:
     Bubbles, Fundamentals, and Misperceptions”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19,
     no. 4 (Fall): 67-92.

Lai, Rose and Robert Van Order. (2010) “Momentum and House Price Growth in the United
       States: Anatomy of a Bubble”, Real Estate Economics, Vol. 38, no. 4: 753-773.

Mayer, Christopher and Todd Sinai (2009), “U.S. House Price Dynamics and Behavioral
       Finance.” In Christopher L. Foote, Lorenz Goette and Stephan Meier, eds., Policy Making
       Insights from Behavioral Economics. Boston, Mass: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, ch.
       5.

McCarthy, Jonathan and Richard Peach (2004), “Are Home Prices the Next ‘Bubble’?” FRBNY
      Economic Policy Review (December), pp. 1-17.

Meese, Richard and Nancy Wallace. 1994. ‘Testing the Present Value Relation for Housing
       Prices: Should I Leave my House in San Francisco?,’ Journal of Urban Economics, 35,
       245-266.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Expansion: Evidence from the
       U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 124, no. 4
       (November): 1449-96.

Ortalo-Magné, Francois and Andrea Prat. 2010. ‘Spatial Asset Pricing: A First Step,’ mimeo.

Pavlov, Andrey and Susan Wachter, (2009). “Subprime Lending and Real Estate Prices,” Real
       Estate Economics, vol. 39, pp. 1-17.

Robinson, Breck and Richard Todd, (2010), “The Role of Non-Owner-Occupied Homes in the
      Current Housing and Foreclosure Cycle.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working
      Paper No. 10-11 (May).

Shiller, Robert. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005 (2nd
        edition).

Shiller, Robert (2006), “Long-Term Perspectives on the Current Boom in Home Prices.” The
        Economists’ Voice, 3(4):4.

Smith, Gary and Margaret Hwang Smith. 2006. “Bubble, Bubble, Where's the Housing Bubble?”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp. 1-63.

Wheaton, William and Gleb Nechayev. 2008. “The 1998-2005 Housing ‘Bubble’ and the Current
      ‘Correction’: What’s Different This Time?”, Journal of Real Estate Research, Vol. 30, no.
      1: 1-26.

                                                26
                                    Figure 1: National Real House Price Indexes
                     2




                 1.5




                     1




                     .5
                          1980                           1990                           2000                     2010

                                            Price/Rent                                      HPI
                                            Case-Shiller 10-City Index                      FHFA 10-City Index
                           Note: Indices are normalized to their 1990 price.




   Figure 2: Distribution of 1990s/2000s Trough to Peak Cumulative Real House Price Growth
                 3




                 2




                 1




                 0
                      -.5                    0                  .5                  1             1.5             2

                                            Unweighted                         Weighted by 1990 housing units
                                            2000-2005                          Peak to Peak


Note: Figure plots the distribution of MSA cumulative real house price growth between (a) the
house price trough of (typically) the 1990s and the house price peak of (typically) the mid-2000s;
(b) 2000 and 2005; (c) the house price peak of the late 1980s/early 1990s and the peak of the mid-
2000s. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI.




                                                                       27
    Figure 3: Distribution of 1990s/2000s Trough to Peak Average Real House Price Growth
                                     20




                                     15
                 Geometric Average


                                     10




                                     5




                                     0
                                          0                 .05                    .1                    .15

                                               Unweighted               Weighted by 1990 housing units


Note: Figure plots the distribution of MSA average real house price growth between the house
price trough of (typically) the 1990s and the house price peak of (typically) the mid-2000s. Data
comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI.


      Figure 4: Distribution of 2000s Peak to Trough Cumulative Real House Price Declines

                       4



                       3



                       2



                       1



                       0
                                     -1         -.5                0                    .5                1

                                              Unweighted               Weighted by 1990 housing units
                                              2005-2010


Note: Figure plots the distribution of MSA cumulative real house price growth between (a) the
house price peak of (typically) the mid-2000s and the subsequent house price trough, often 2010;
(b) 2005 and 2010. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI.



                                                                  28
             Figure 5: Real House Price Growth and Decline, 1990s-2000s, by MSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Merced, CA
                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Modesto, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Stockton, CA




                 dLog Price Peak to Trough 2000s
                                                   .8                                                                                                                                 Las Vegas-Paradise, NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Port St. Lucie, FL    Vallejo-Fairfield, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Salinas, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Naples-


                                                                                                                                                                              Reno-Sparks, NV                      Yuba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bakersfield-Delano,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City, CA         CA      Riverside-San Ber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Punta Gorda, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL
                                                   .6                                                                                                                                                                            WestFt.Palm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lauderdale-Pompano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fresno, CABeach-Ormond
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAPhoenix-Mesa-Glendale,
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Deltona-Daytona
                                                                                                                                                                                                Visalia-Porterville,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Beach-Boca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Beach, FLRaton-Bo

                                                                                                                                            Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI (MSAD)                                                                   Miami-Miami Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Santa Barbara-
                                                                                                                             Flint, MI                                                          Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                                                                                                                                                    Lakeland-Winter
                                                                                                                                                                          Ocala, FL Haven,Redding,
                                                                                                                                                                                             FL     CA      Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oakland-Fremont-Hayward,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             San Diego-Carlsbad-San
                                                                                                                                                                                            Chico, CA
                                                   .4                                                                                                          Yuma, AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                Tucson,
                                                                                                                                         Boise City-Nampa, ID Hagerstown-Martinsburg,    AZ      Panama City-LynnSanta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Los  Angeles-Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cruz-Watsonville,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Haven-Panama
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ana-Anah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Luis Obispo-Paso  Roble
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Beach,
                                                                                                                                                                                      MD-WV
                                                                                                                      Lansing-East Ann Arbor,
                                                                                                                                   Lansing, MIMI                               Jacksonville, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Flagstaff, AZ-UT
                                                                                                                                                               Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent, FL                     San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa   Clara,(M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                Saginaw-Saginaw Township North, MI                                                Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV
                                                                                                        Kokomo, INGrand Rapids-Wyoming, MI                                    MyrtleTacoma, Gainesville,
                                                                                                                                                                                       Minneapolis-St.
                                                                                                                                                                                              WA (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                                      Beach-North        FL Beach-Conway,MN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Myrtle                   SC       San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood Ci
                                                                                                                         Mansfield, OH                                                       CO Poughkeepsie-Newburgh-Middletown,
                                                                                                                                                                                  Greeley,
                                                                                                                                                         Chicago-Joliet-Naperville,
                                                                                                                                                                   Tallahassee, FL ILBremerton-Silverdale,
                                                                                                                                                                                        (MSAD)               Provo-Orem,   UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Atlantic City-Hammonton,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA (MSAD) NJNY
                                                                                                              Toledo, OH                                                                                      WA                Nassau-Suffolk, NY (MSAD)
                                                                     Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH                                                     Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA Baltimore-Towson, MD                                   Ocean City, NJ
                                                   .2              Akron, OH
                                                                                                                              Salem, OR Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers,
                                                                                                                      Canton-Massillon,
                                                                                                                           Kalamazoo-Portage,   Eugene-Springfield,
                                                                                                                       Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA
                                                                                                                                                   Santa   Fe, NM
                                                                                                                                                                       OR
                                                                                                                                                                 Olympia,
                                                                                                                                                                         St.
                                                                                                                                                                                  AR-MO
                                                                                                                                                OH MIDover, DE Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton,
                                                                                                                                                                             Cloud,
                                                                                                                                                                          WA DE-MD-NJ
                                                                                                                                                     Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton,
                                                                                                                                                                   Wilmington,
                                                                                                                                                                                     MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wilmington,
                                                                                                                                                                                      Trenton-Ewing, NJNJ
                                                                                                                                                                                              Newark-Union,     NCYork-White
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NJ-PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              New      (MSAD)Salt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Plains-Wayne,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lake City, UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NY-NJ (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Charleston-North Charleston-Summerville, SC
                                                                                                                                                                                       Gulfport-Biloxi, MS
                                                                                                                                                                                      PA-NJ  (MSAD)
                                                                              Dayton, OH                Youngstown-Warren-Boardman,                  OH-PA      Richmond, VA                 Virginia
                                                                                                                                                                                     Savannah,    GA Beach-Norfolk-Newport     News, VA-NC
                                                                        Fort Wayne, IN                                           Rochester,      MN
                                                                                                                                                 Janesville,
                                                                                                                                        Green Bay,            WI
                                                                                                                                                        WIAlbuquerque,
                                                                                                                                                  Spokane,   WA          NM            Charlottesville,
                                                                                                                                                                          Bellingham, WA                 VA
                                                            Lafayette, IN                             Columbus, OH                      Las
                                                                                          Rockford,
                                                                                     Memphis,         IL OH
                                                                                                  Cincinnati-Middletown,
                                                                                                  TN-MS-AR
                                                                                                  Lima,
                                                                                               Elkhart-Goshen,        IN Kansas          City,Cruces,
                                                                                                                                York-Hanover,
                                                                                                                                  OH-KY-IN      MO-KSPANM Harbor, MI
                                                                                                                                               Niles-Benton
                                                                                                                                                   Pueblo,              Colorado
                                                                                                                                                                        New       Springs,   Denver-Aurora-Broomfield,
                                                                                                                                                                                       Fort(MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                                            Collins-Loveland,
                                                                                                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                                                                                              Orleans-Metairie-Kenner,
                                                                                                                                                             CO WI Philadelphia,     PA                   LA CO           CO
                                                                                 Indianapolis-Carmel,      IN                    St. Louis,
                                                                                                                               Corvallis,
                                                                                                                               Reading,      OR
                                                                                                                                            PA MO-IL
                                                                                                                                                   Sheboygan,
                                                                              RockyIN
                                                                                    Mount,
                                                                                    Macon,
                                                                             Jackson, TN     NC
                                                                                     Kankakee-Bradley,          Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock
                                                                                                               ILLincoln,
                                                                                              GASouth Bend-Mishawaka,
                                                                                                              Appleton,      NE
                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                     Columbus,
                                                                                                                       Omaha-Council
                                                                                                                      Des           IN-MI
                                                                                                                                      GA-AL
                                                                                                                            Moines-West
                                                                                                                                 Athens-Clarke     Hill,
                                                                                                                                      Auburn-Opelika,
                                                                                                                                              Mobile,
                                                                                                                                              Bluffs,
                                                                                                                                                Des      NC-SC
                                                                                                                                                         AL
                                                                                                                                                       NE-IA
                                                                                                                                                     County,AL IA KS Madison, WI
                                                                                                                                                      Moines,
                                                                                                                                                       Lawrence,                         Asheville, NC
                                                                             Gary,     (MSAD)
                                                                                 Montgomery,    AL Springfield,
                                                                                                        Evansville,MO       Birmingham-Hoover,
                                                                                                                        IN-KY                            AL GA                                    Duluth, MN-WI
                                                                                              Albany,
                                                                                     Greenville,
                                                                                Greensboro-High   NC    GA
                                                                                                        Dothan,
                                                                                                     Point,   NC    AL    El Paso,
                                                                                                                          Knoxville,   TXTN    Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,
                                                                                                                                         Hattiesburg,
                                                                                                                                         Roanoke,         MS       Eau Claire, Casper,
                                                                                                                                                                               WI
                                                                                                                                                      VAAlbany-Schenectady-Troy,         WY      TN
                                                                                                     Joplin,
                                                                                            Owensboro,Pocatello,
                                                                                             Sherman-Denison,
                                                                                              Jackson,
                                                                               McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, MS
                                                                                                      Cedar  KY MO
                                                                                                                 TXLancaster,
                                                                                                     Augusta-RichmondIDTX
                                                                                                                Columbia,
                                                                                                                Rapids,
                                                                                                            Corpus                 PA
                                                                                                                          Louisville-Jefferson
                                                                                                                                  St.
                                                                                                                         Chattanooga,
                                                                                                              Raleigh-Cary,IA MO
                                                                                                                       Christi,        Joseph,
                                                                                                                                     Lynchburg,
                                                                                                                                 County,
                                                                                                                                  NC
                                                                                                                                  TX         GA-SC
                                                                                                                                             TN-GA MO-KS
                                                                                                                                                      County,
                                                                                                                                                     VA        KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                             Odessa,   TX             NY                  Boulder, CO
                                                                                               Bloomington-Normal,
                                                                                               Topeka,   Champaign-Urbana,
                                                                                                          KS
                                                                                                        Harrisburg-Carlisle,IL
                                                                                                             Lexington-Fayette,
                                                                                                      Hickory-Lenoir-Morganton,
                                                                                                    Columbia,    Iowa
                                                                                                                   SC    City,
                                                                                                        Scranton-Wilkes-Barre,  IA   PA IL
                                                                                                                                         KY  NC
                                                                                                                                          PA Braunfels,
                                                               Springfield, IL Decatur,
                                                                        Rochester,       Yakima,
                                                                                            Erie,
                                                                                             Wichita
                                                                                                  PAWA
                                                                                         ILDallas-Plano-Irving,
                                                                                    NY Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                  Fort  Little
                                                                                                       Smith,
                                                                                                    Florence,
                                                                                                      Falls,    Rock-North
                                                                                                               TX AR-OK
                                                                                                                  SC
                                                                                                                SiouxSan
                                                                                                                     TX          Little Rock-Conway,
                                                                                                                           Antonio-New
                                                                                                                        City,  IA-NE-SD
                                                                                                                           (MSAD)                           AR
                                                                                                                                                       La Crosse,
                                                                                                                                                            TX     WI-MN
                                                                                   Fort  Killeen-Temple-Fort
                                                                                                       Tyler,
                                                                                  Brownsville-Harlingen,     TX TX
                                                                                                       Lafayette,
                                                                                                              TX   (MSAD)
                                                                                                     Greenville-Mouldin-Easley,
                                                                                                                    Hood,
                                                                                                                   San
                                                                                                                     LALake Sioux
                                                                                                                             TX
                                                                                                                         Angelo,
                                                                                                         Parkersburg-Marietta-Vienna, Falls,
                                                                                                                                     TX
                                                                                                                                 Charles,   SC
                                                                                                                                             SD   Baton      Cheyenne,
                                                                                                                                                          Rouge,  LA     WY
                                                                                     Wichita,
                                                                                  Decatur,
                                                                                                Syracuse,
                                                                                        Pittsburgh,
                                                                                           Huntsville,
                                                                                             Charleston,
                                                                                             ALKS
                                                                                  Fayetteville, Waco,   AL     NY
                                                                                                     Beaumont-Port
                                                                                                     PA             Fargo,
                                                                                                                Oklahoma
                                                                                                         Bloomington,
                                                                                                         TX
                                                                                   Kennewick-Pasco-Richland,
                                                                                      Lubbock,   NC
                                                                                                  TX
                                                                                                   Tulsa,   WV
                                                                                                            OK          WA
                                                                                                                           Arthur,
                                                                                                                             ND-MN
                                                                                                                                Dubuque,
                                                                                                                         Houston-Sugar
                                                                                                                             Amarillo,
                                                                                                                             IN
                                                                                                                      Utica-Rome,
                                                                                                                  Abilene,   TX
                                                                                                                   Shreveport-Bossier
                                                                                                                Huntington-Ashland,
                                                                                                                    Longview,
                                                                                                                    State
                                                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                              Binghamton,
                                                                                                                               City,   OK
                                                                                                                                    TXLA
                                                                                                                             College,     TXLA
                                                                                                                                       Alexandria,
                                                                                                                                    GrandNY
                                                                                                                                          PA
                                                                                                                                               IA  WV-OH
                                                                                                                                              Forks,
                                                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                                                                               City,
                                                                                                                                             WV-KY-OH
                                                                                                                                                      LA
                                                                                                                                                      ND-MN
                                                                                                                                               Land-Baytown,
                                                                                                                                                     LA          TX       Austin-Round
                                                                                                                                                                          Houma-BayouRock-San         Marcos, LA
                                                                                                                                                                                            Cane-Thibodaux,    TX
                                                                                  Buffalo-Niagara    Falls,   NY          Monroe,             Bismarck,    ND
                                                   0


                                                        0                                   .2                       .4            .6                                                                              .8                                      1
                                                                                                             dLog Price Trough to Peak 2000s

Note: Figure plots the change in log MSA real house prices between the house price trough of
(typically) the 1990s and the house price peak of (typically) the mid-2000s against the subsequent
house price decline. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI. The solid line demarcates the
decline in log house prices that would exactly undo the prior growth in log prices. The straight
lines are the fitted bivariate regression lines; the dashed one uses unweighted observations and the
dotted one uses observations weighted by 1990 housing units.

     Figure 6: Real House Price Growth and Decline, 1990s-2000s, by REIS Subset of MSAs
                                                   1
                 dLog Price Peak to Trough 2000s




                                                   .8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside-San Ber


                                                   .6                                                                                                                                                                        WestFt.Palm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lauderdale-Pompano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Beach-Boca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale, AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Raton-Bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA
                                                                                                                                            Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI (MSAD)                                                               Miami-Miami Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oakland-Fremont-Hayward,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             San Diego-Carlsbad-San
                                                   .4                                                                                                                                                                                              Los Angeles-Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Santa Ana-Anah


                                                                                                                                                                                           Jacksonville, FL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,         Clara,(M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DC-VA-MD-WV    C

                                                                                                                                                                    Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI    San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood Ci
                                                                                                                                       Chicago-Joliet-Naperville, IL (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                               Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA (MSAD)
                                                                     Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH                                    Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA Baltimore-Towson, MD
                                                   .2                                                         Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA
                                                                                                                                                                                         New York-White Plains-Wayne, NY-NJ (MSAD)

                                                                                                                                              Richmond, VA               Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC
                                                                                                  Columbus, OH
                                                                                               Cincinnati-Middletown,
                                                                                    Memphis, TN-MS-AR             Kansas
                                                                                                                       OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                           City, MO-KS                                   Denver-Aurora-Broomfield, CO
                                                                                Indianapolis-Carmel,  IN              St. Louis, MO-IL              Philadelphia, PA (MSAD)
                                                                                                         Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC
                                                                                                                                Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin, TN
                                                                                                        Raleigh-Cary, NC
                                                                                         Dallas-Plano-Irving,
                                                                                 Fort Worth-Arlington,        TX (MSAD)
                                                                                                        TX (MSAD)
                                                                                      Pittsburgh, PA            Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown, TX          Austin-Round Rock-San Marcos, TX
                                                   0
                                                        0                                   .2                       .4            .6                                                                              .8                                      1
                                                                                                             dLog Price Trough to Peak 2000s

Note: See the notes to Figure 5. This Figure uses the subset of MSAs that also are in the REIS
sample.


                                                                                                                                             29
   Figure 7: Distribution of 1980s-1990s Trough to Peak Cumulative Real House Price Growth

                  2.5


                      2


                  1.5


                      1


                      .5


                      0
                               0           .5                 1             1.5     2
                                                  Real House Price Growth

                                                1990s Peak             2000s Peak


Note: Figure plots the distribution of MSA cumulative real house price growth between the house
price trough of (typically) the 1980s and the house price peak of (typically) the late 1980s to early-
1990s. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI.

  Figure 8: Distribution of 1990s-2000s Peak to Trough Cumulative Real House Price Declines

                  4



                  3



                  2



                  1



                  0
                           0          .2                    .4              .6      .8
                                                 Real House Price Growth

                                                1990s Peak            2000s Peak


Note: Figure plots the distribution of MSA cumulative real house price declines between the house
price peak of (typically) the late 1980s to early-1990s and the house price trough of (typically) the
mid-1990s. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI.




                                                         30
           Figure 9: Real House Price Growth, 1980s-1990s vs. 1990s-2000s, by MSA
                                                   1                                   Naples-Marco Island, FL
                                                                                                                                                             Salinas, CA
                                                                Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL (MSAD)                                                     Santa
                                                                                                                                                       Santa    Barbara-Santa Maria-Goleta,
                                                                                                                                                             Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA (MSAD)  CA
                                                                                                                                Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA    Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA (MSAD)

                                                                                                               Merced, CA                          San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA
                                                                                                                                Vallejo-Fairfield, CA
                                                                                                                                                            Oakland-Fremont-Hayward,  CAObispo-Paso
                                                                                                                                                                                San Luis  (MSAD)      Robles, CA
                                                                                                                                           Stockton,  CA CA
                                                                                                                                                  Modesto,
                                                             West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Boynton Beach, FL (MSAD)                                                             Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                 SanCruz-Watsonville, CA Clara, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                     Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa




                 dLog Price Trough to Peak 2000s
                                                                           Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL                                                                                            San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                 Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA
                                                   .8                        Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale,
                                                                 Port St. Lucie,
                                                            Bakersfield-Delano,
                                                            Salt Lake City, UT CA
                                                                                 FL Fresno, CA      AZ                                            Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA

                                                                                                        Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL
                                                                                                                                        Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV (MSAD)
                                                                                   Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                                                              Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL Redding, CA
                                                                                                                                        Atlantic City-Hammonton, NJ                                                                           New York-White Plains
                                                              Provo-Orem, UT               Visalia-Porterville, CA
                                                                               Boulder,
                                                                                    Tucson,COAZ
                                                                                         Jacksonville, FL
                                                                                                                                                      Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA (MSAD)                               Poughkeepsie-Newburgh-Middletown, NY
                                                                       Duluth, MN-WI
                                                                                                                                 Baltimore-Towson, MD                                                                          Newark-Union, NJ-PA (MSAD)
                                                   .6               Denver-Aurora-Broomfield, CO
                                                            Lakeland-Winter
                                                            Reno-Sparks,    NVHaven, FL
                                                                      Minneapolis-St.             Charlottesville,
                                                                                          Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                  Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC
                                                                                                            CO MN-WIVA
                                                                Yuma,   AZ Fort Collins-Loveland,                                      Bremerton-Silverdale, WA
                                                                                                                                  Tacoma, WA (MSAD)                                                                    Trenton-Ewing, NJ
                                                                                                                                        Casper, WY
                                                                                                                Austin-Round Rock-San Marcos, TX                                    Bellingham, WA
                                                                                 Colorado Springs, CO
                                                            Madison, WI                                                                                                             Philadelphia, PA (MSAD)
                                                                Eau Claire, WI                                                                                       Wilmington, DE-MD-NJ (MSAD)
                                                                                             Richmond, VA                                         Olympia, WA
                                                                   Odessa, TX  Cheyenne, WY
                                                                             Albuquerque, NM                                                                                                                   Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY
                                                             Lawrence, KS                                                Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn,     MI (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                   Chicago-Joliet-Naperville,    IL (MSAD)
                                                   .4       Sheboygan,
                                                            BatonPueblo,
                                                               Janesville,
                                                                          WI
                                                                   Rouge,CO LA
                                                                            WI
                                                                       Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers,
                                                                     Mobile,   AL                             AR-MO
                                                                                                                                      Santa
                                                                                                                             Ann Arbor,    MIFe, NM
                                                                                                                                        Spokane,
                                                                                                                  Niles-Benton Harbor, MI
                                                                                                                                                   WA
                                                                                                         Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,      TN
                                                                                                                                                                              Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton,    PA-NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Eugene-Springfield, OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OR-WA

                                                                                                                                  Roanoke, VA
                                                             Auburn-Opelika,  Flint,
                                                                                 AL MI
                                                                 Dubuque, IA                           St. Louis, MO-IL                Reading, PA                                                         Corvallis, OR
                                                                  Amarillo,
                                                                    Kansas  TXCity,Louisville-Jefferson
                                                                                     MO-KS
                                                                                     Birmingham-Hoover,       AL                                                                   Salem, OR
                                                                          Kalamazoo-Portage,
                                                                        Knoxville,
                                                                   Mansfield,  OH TNChattanooga,
                                                                        Houston-Sugar                MI TN-GA
                                                                                            Land-Baytown,   County,
                                                                                                              TX KY-IN
                                                            Omaha-Council      Bluffs,
                                                                 Canton-Massillon,
                                                                    DesTXMoines-West    NE-IA      Grand
                                                                                           Atlanta-Sandy
                                                                                        OHDes    Moines,   Rapids-Wyoming,
                                                                                                           IASprings-Marietta,MIGA
                                                             Saginaw-Saginaw
                                                             Longview,
                                                             Shreveport-Bossier
                                                                San Angelo,    TX Township
                                                                                     City, LA North, MI               Lancaster, PA
                                                             Lincoln, NE
                                                                      Iowa City,
                                                            Huntington-Ashland,     IA
                                                                                Oklahoma
                                                                                     WV-KY-OH City, OK  Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock
                                                                       Toledo,   OH
                                                                            Lexington-Fayette,
                                                                                 Corpus Christi, KY  TX        Raleigh-Cary, NC Hill, NC-SC
                                                                Evansville,
                                                                  Youngstown-Warren-Boardman, Harrisburg-Carlisle,   PA Pocatello,
                                                                     Cedar Little
                                                              Beaumont-Port
                                                                             IN-KY
                                                                             Rapids,Rock-North
                                                                 Hickory-Lenoir-Morganton,
                                                                                     Columbus,
                                                                                       IATXSC OH
                                                                                  Augusta-Richmond
                                                                                Arthur,
                                                                             Columbia,
                                                                                                  Little
                                                                                                  NC Rock-Conway,
                                                                                                          OH-PA
                                                                                                           County, GA-SC
                                                                                                                         AR          ID
                                                             Florence,  SC OH
                                                   .2       Albany,
                                                                      Tulsa,
                                                                     Lima,
                                                                 Topeka,
                                                                     GA KY
                                                            Owensboro,
                                                                          KS MS
                                                                    Jackson,
                                                            Sherman-Denison,
                                                                               OK   Cincinnati-Middletown,
                                                                              Erie,TX
                                                                                     South Bend-Mishawaka,
                                                                                     PA
                                                                             Dallas-Plano-Irving,     TX (MSAD)
                                                                                                                OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                  IN-MI                   Syracuse, NY
                                                                Rockford, IL                                                                                  Yakima, WA
                                                                Wichita, KS Macon, GA          Pittsburgh,    PA
                                                                                                    Memphis, TN-MS-AR
                                                                    Fort AL
                                                                Decatur,  Worth-Arlington,     TX   (MSAD)
                                                                                   Indianapolis-Carmel,      IN                          Buffalo-Niagara    Falls,Kennewick-Pasco-Richland,
                                                                                                                                                                   NY                         WA
                                                                Decatur,
                                                                    McAllen-Edinburg-Mission,
                                                                         IL                           Greensboro-High
                                                                                                      TX                  Point, NC
                                                                                                          Dayton, OH        Gary, IN (MSAD)
                                                                                             Fort Wayne, IN                            Rochester, NY
                                                                                                                           Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH
                                                                                                                                         Akron, OH


                                                   0
                                                        0                                               .2                   .4               .6                                                                                                      .8
                                                                                                              dLog Price Trough to Peak 1980s

Note: Figure plots the cumulative change in MSA log real house prices between the house price
trough of (typically) the 1990s and the house price peak of (typically) the mid-2000s against the
trough-to-peak change in log house prices in the boom of the 1990s. Data comes from FHFA,
deflated by the CPI. The solid 45-degree line demarcates the log point increase in 2000s prices
that would exactly equal the increase in 1980s prices. The straight lines are the fitted bivariate
regression lines; the dashed one uses unweighted observations and the dotted one uses
observations weighted by 1990 housing units.

  Figure 10: Real House Price Growth, 1980s-1990s vs. 1990s-2000s, by REIS Subset of MSAs
                                                   1
                                                                Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL (MSAD)                                                   Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA  Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA (MSAD)

                                                                                                                                                 San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA
                                                                                                                                                          Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA (MSAD)
                                                             West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Boynton Beach, FL (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                                    San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA (MSAD)
                 dLog Price Trough to Peak 2000s




                                                   .8                        Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale, AZ                                           Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA

                                                                                                                                                  Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV (MSAD)
                                                                                   Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                                                             Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          New York-White Plains

                                                                                     Jacksonville, FL
                                                                                                                                            Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA (MSAD)
                                                                                                                          Baltimore-Towson, MD
                                                   .6              Denver-Aurora-Broomfield, CO
                                                                     Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI
                                                                                                             Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC




                                                                                                          Austin-Round Rock-San Marcos, TX
                                                                                                                                                                            Philadelphia, PA (MSAD)
                                                                                         Richmond, VA

                                                                                                                   Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI (MSAD)
                                                                                                                            Chicago-Joliet-Naperville, IL (MSAD)
                                                   .4                                              Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin, TN
                                                                                                                                                                                           Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA



                                                                                             St. Louis, MO-IL
                                                                    Kansas City, MO-KS
                                                                      Houston-Sugar Atlanta-Sandy
                                                                                     Land-Baytown,Springs-Marietta,
                                                                                                    TX              GA
                                                                                                  Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock
                                                                                                       Raleigh-Cary, NC Hill, NC-SC
                                                                                 Columbus, OH
                                                   .2                            Cincinnati-Middletown, OH-KY-IN
                                                                          Dallas-Plano-Irving, TX (MSAD)
                                                                                          Pittsburgh, PA
                                                                                              Memphis, TN-MS-AR
                                                                    Fort Worth-Arlington, TX (MSAD)IN
                                                                               Indianapolis-Carmel,


                                                                                                                     Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH


                                                   0
                                                        0                                               .2                   .4               .6                                                                                                      .8
                                                                                                              dLog Price Trough to Peak 1980s

Note: See the notes to Figure 9. This Figure uses the subset of MSAs that also are in the REIS
sample.

                                                                                                                                            31
                    Figure 11: Peak and Trough Years for Real House Prices
              100



              90



              80



              70



              60


                                                                              1980s peak
              50
                                                                              1990s trough
                                                                              2000s peak
              40



              30



              20



              10



                0




Note: Figure plots the histogram of peak and trough years for real house price cycles. See Section
1 for details on the data construction.


        Figure 12: Geography of Trough to Peak House Price Growth, 1990s to the 2000s




                                                                                   Legend


                                                                                      0-20%
                                                                                      20-30%
                                                                                      30-50%
                                                                                      50-70%
                                                                                      70-100%
                                                                                      100-135%
                                                                                      >135%




Note: Figure maps the MSA cumulative real house price growth between the house price trough of
(typically) the 1990s and the house price peak of (typically) the mid-2000s. Data comes from
FHFA, deflated by the CPI.



                                                32
              Figure 13: Geography of Peak to Trough House Price Growth, 2000s




                                                                               Legend


                                                                                 0-5%
                                                                                 5-10%
                                                                                 10-15%
                                                                                 15-20%
                                                                                 20-30%
                                                                                 30-40%
                                                                                 >40%




Note: Figure maps the MSA cumulative real house price declines between the house price peak of
(typically) the mid-2000s and the subsequent trough. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the
CPI.


                        Figure 14: Starting date of the 1990s/2000s boom




                                                                              Legend


                                                                                1990
                                                                                1991
                                                                                1992
                                                                                1993
                                                                                1994
                                                                                1995
                                                                                1996
                                                                                1997
                                                                                1998 - 2001




Note: Figure maps the date of the house price trough of (typically) the 1990s. Data comes from
FHFA, deflated by the CPI.




                                               33
                                                     Figure 15: Date of the peak of the 1990s/2000s boom




                                                                                                             Legend


                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                               2007
                                                                                                               2008 - 2009




Note: Figure maps the date of the house price peak of the mid-2000s. Data comes from FHFA,
deflated by the CPI.



 Figure 16: The Standard Deviation of MSA-level Annual Real House Price Growth, 1981-2010
                                 .08
                SD Real Annual House Price Growth
                      .04        .02 .06




                                                    1980             1990               2000               2010
                                                                               date



Note: Figure graphs the standard deviation of annual real house price growth across MSAs in each
year. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI.




                                                                             34
            Figure 17: The Distribution of Annual Real House Price Growth, by Year




                                 .3
                 Real Annual House Price Growth
                 -.2    -.1    0 -.3  .1     .2

                                                    1981
                                                    1982
                                                    1983
                                                    1984
                                                    1985
                                                    1986
                                                    1987
                                                    1988
                                                    1989
                                                    1990
                                                    1991
                                                    1992
                                                    1993
                                                    1994
                                                    1995
                                                    1996
                                                    1997
                                                    1998
                                                    1999
                                                    2000
                                                    2001
                                                    2002
                                                    2003
                                                    2004
                                                    2005
                                                    2006
                                                    2007
                                                    2008
                                                    2009
                                                    2010
                                                  excludes outside values


Note: Figure plots the distribution of annual real house price growth across MSAs in each year.
The black bar runs from the 25th to the 75th percentiles. The horizontal white line corresponds to
the median. Data comes from FHFA, deflated by the CPI.


  Figure 18: Trough to Peak Growth in Real House Prices and Housing Demand Fundamentals,
                                        1990s-2000
                   4



                   3



                   2



                   1



                   0
                                                   0                        .5             1       1.5             2

                                                                 Real house price growth       Real rent growth
                                                                 Real income growth            Employment growth


Note: Figure graphs the distribution of cumulative growth in real house prices, real rents, real
MSA income, and MSA employment from each variable’s trough in the 1990s to its peak in the
2000s. Data comes from FHFA, REIS, and BLS.


                                                                                    35
        Figure 19: Real Rent Growth and Decline, 1990s-2000s, by REIS Subset of MSAs
                                                  .6




                 dLog Rent Peak to Trough 2000s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Jose-Su




                                                  .4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Francisco-San Mateo




                                                                                                                                                                               Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA (MSAD)
                                                  .2
                                                                                                                Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA
                                                                                                               Raleigh-Cary, NC
                                                                       Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI (MSAD)
                                                                                                                     Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC                           Denver-Aurora-Broomfield, CO
                                                                          Indianapolis-Carmel, IN
                                                               Milwaukee-Waukesha-West      Allis, WI
                                                                         Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,               Seattle-Bellevue-Everett,
                                                                                                          Minneapolis-St.
                                                                                                        OR-WA               Paul-Bloomington, WA
                                                                                                                                               MN-WI(MSAD)
                                                                             Columbus, OH Kansas City, MO-KS      Fort Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                            Dallas-Plano-Irving,
                                                                                                                                        TX (MSAD)TX (MSAD)
                                                                                                                            Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale,   AZ
                                                                     Cincinnati-Middletown,  OH-KY-IN Memphis,      TN-MS-AR               Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA
                                                                                     Chicago-Joliet-Naperville, IL (MSAD)Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL (MSAD)
                                                                                                         West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Boynton Beach, FLRiverside-San
                                                                                      St. Louis, MO-IL Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,                             (MSAD)      Bernardino-Ontario, CA
                                                                                                         Jacksonville,  FL            FL                        Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA (MSAD)
                                                              Pittsburgh, PA                              Ft. Lauderdale-Pompano     Bch.-Deerfield Bch., FL(MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA (MSAD)             New York-White Plains-Wayne, NY-N
                                                                                                         Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                                                                                      Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown, TX
                                                                                                Richmond, VA
                                                           Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,
                                                                                    OH                                                                             San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA
                                                                                               Philadelphia, PA Baltimore-Towson,
                                                                                                                 (MSAD)          TNMD
                                                                                                                      Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC
                                                  0                                                                                                          Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV (MSAD)



                                                       0                                                    .2                     .4                                                                                                .6
                                                                                                         dLog Rent Trough to Peak 2000s

Note: Figure plots the MSA cumulative change in real log rents between the rent trough of
(typically) the 1990s and the rent peak of (typically) the mid-2000s against the subsequent rent
decline. Data comes from REIS, deflated by the CPI. The solid 45-degree line demarcates the log
point decline in rents that would exactly undo the prior growth in rents. The straight lines are the
fitted bivariate regression lines; the dashed one uses unweighted observations and the dotted one
uses observations weighted by 1990 housing units.

         Figure 20: Trough to Peak Growth in Price-to-Fundamentals Ratios, 1990s-2000

                                                  2



                             1.5



                                                  1



                                              .5



                                                  0
                                                             0                                                    .5                                                     1                                                  1.5

                                                                             Price-to-rent growth                                                                              Price-to-income growth
                                                                             Price-to-employment growth


Note: Figure graphs the distribution of cumulative growth in the price-to-rent, price-to-income,
and price-to-employment ratios from each variable’s trough in the 1990s to its peak in the 2000s.
Data comes from FHFA, REIS, and BLS.

                                                                                                                                    36
Figure 21: Price-to-Rent Ratio Growth and Decline, 1990s-2000s, by REIS Subset of MSAs


                                                            .8



                 dLog Price-to-Rent Peak to Trough 2000s    .6                                                                                                                         Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ft. Lauderdale-Pompano
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale,   AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            West Palm Beach-Boca    Raton
                                                                                                                                                                                  Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL      Miami-Miami Beach-Kenda
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, C
                                                                                                                                                                                  Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater,
                                                                                                                                                                                     San Diego-Carlsbad-San        FL CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Marcos,

                                                            .4                                                                                                                                   Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                                         Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                                        Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV (MSAD)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Jos
                                                                                                                                                                           Jacksonville, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                        San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood C

                                                                                                                                                      Minneapolis-St.ILPaul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                           Chicago-Joliet-Naperville,   (MSAD)           MN-WI
                                                                                                                                                   Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA
                                                                                                                                                       Baltimore-Towson,Seattle-Bellevue-Everett,
                                                                                                                                                                          MD                      WA (MSAD)
                                                                                                                                                     New York-White Plains-Wayne, NY-NJ (MSAD)
                                                            .2
                                                                                                                                                 Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC
                                                                                                                       Atlanta-SandyRichmond,
                                                                                                                                        Springs-Marietta,
                                                                                                                                                  VA      GA
                                                                                                                                            Philadelphia, PA (MSAD)
                                                                                                      Columbus,   OH City, MO-KS
                                                                                                              Kansas
                                                                         Memphis, TN-MS-AR            Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock
                                                                                                      Cincinnati-Middletown,     Hill, NC-SC
                                                                                                                              OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                             St. Louis, MO-IL Denver-Aurora-Broomfield, CO
                                                                                   Indianapolis-Carmel, IN
                                                                                                                         Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin, TN
                                                                                     Dallas-Plano-Irving, TX (MSAD)
                                                                                                     Raleigh-Cary, NC Austin-Round Rock-San Marcos, TX
                                                                                   Fort Worth-Arlington, TX (MSAD)
                                                                                               Houston-Sugar   Land-Baytown, TX
                                                                                       Pittsburgh, PA
                                                             0

                                                                  0                     .2               .4              .6                                                                                      .8
                                                                                         dLog Price-to-Rent Trough to Peak 2000s

Note: Figure plots the MSA cumulative change in the log price-to-rent ratio between the R/P
trough of (typically) the 1990s and the R/P peak of (typically) the mid-2000s against the
subsequent R/P decline. Data comes from REIS and FHFA. The solid line demarcates the log
point decline in R/P that would exactly undo the prior growth in R/P. The straight lines are the
fitted bivariate regression lines; the dashed one uses unweighted observations and the dotted one
uses observations weighted by 1990 housing units.

   Figure 22: The Standard Deviation of MSA-level Annual Growth in Demand Fundamentals
                                                           .05
                                                           .04
                           SD Growth
                              .03                          .02
                                                           .01




                                                                 1980                                 1990                                                       2000                                                         2010
                                                                                                                                    date

                                                                        Std dev of real rent growth                                                               Std dev of real income growth
                                                                        Std dev of employment growth


Note: Figure graphs the standard deviations of annual real rent, real income, and employment
growth across MSAs in each year. Data comes from REIS and BLS, deflated by the CPI.


                                                                                                                               37
  Figure 23: Standard Deviations of Conditional and Unconditional Annual House Price Growth




                      .1
                      .08
                 SD Growth
                    .06
                      .04
                      .02




                                  1980                               1990                  2000                      2010
                                                                               date

                                                    Std dev of real house price growth   Std dev of residual of real HPI grow


Note: Figure graphs the standard deviations of real house prices and the residuals from a MSA-
level regression of real house price growth on real rent growth. Data comes from REIS and
FHFA, deflated by the CPI.

                Figure 24: The Distribution of Annual Real Rent Growth, by Year
                             .2
                 Real Annual Rent Growth
                 -.1       0 -.2      .1

                                             1981
                                             1982
                                             1983
                                             1984
                                             1985
                                             1986
                                             1987
                                             1988
                                             1989
                                             1990
                                             1991
                                             1992
                                             1993
                                             1994
                                             1995
                                             1996
                                             1997
                                             1998
                                             1999
                                             2000
                                             2001
                                             2002
                                             2003
                                             2004
                                             2005
                                             2006
                                             2007
                                             2008
                                             2009
                                             2010




                                           excludes outside values


Note: Figure plots the distribution of annual rent growth across MSAs in each year. The black bar
runs from the 25th to the 75th percentiles. The horizontal white line corresponds to the median.
Data comes from REIS, deflated by the CPI.




                                                                             38
      Figure 25: The Distribution of Conditional Annual Real House Price Growth, by Year




                 Residual of HPI growth regressed on Rent growth
                   -.2       -.1     0        .1      .2

                                                                     1981
                                                                     1982
                                                                     1983
                                                                     1984
                                                                     1985
                                                                     1986
                                                                     1987
                                                                     1988
                                                                     1989
                                                                     1990
                                                                     1991
                                                                     1992
                                                                     1993
                                                                     1994
                                                                     1995
                                                                     1996
                                                                     1997
                                                                     1998
                                                                     1999
                                                                     2000
                                                                     2001
                                                                     2002
                                                                     2003
                                                                     2004
                                                                     2005
                                                                     2006
                                                                     2007
                                                                     2008
                                                                     2009
                                                                     2010
                                                                   excludes outside values


Note: Figure graphs the distributions of the residuals from a MSA-level regression of real house
price growth on real rent growth. The black bar runs from the 25th to the 75th percentiles. The
horizontal white line corresponds to the median. Data comes from REIS and FHFA, deflated by
the CPI.




                                                                                             39
                                                     Table 1: Bivariate Regression Results

                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)
                                              Real house                        Real     Employ-
                                                prices       Real rent        income      ment            P/R        P/Income        P/Emp

 REIS sample
Regress peak-to-trough log changes in the
                                                 0.471         0.098                                     0.783
2000s on trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                (0.072)       (0.070)                                   (0.060)
1990s/2000s (N=43/43/././33/./.)1
Regress peak-to-trough log changes in the
                                                 0.220        -0.153          -0.158         -0.084      0.608         0.306        -0.108
1990s on trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                (0.110)       (0.155)         (0.065)        (0.051)    (0.120)       (0.140)       (0.180)
1980s/1990s (N=42/41/30/27/33/43/38)
Regress trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                 0.598         0.318          -0.303          0.195      0.381         0.866         0.660
2000s on trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                (0.185)       (0.307)         (0.226)        (0.173)    (0.177)       (0.163)       (0.180)
1980s/1990s (N=42/41/30/30/33/43/38)

 Full FHFA sample
Regress peak-to-trough log changes in the
                                                 0.518
2000s on trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                (0.031)
1990s/2000s (N=249)
Regress peak-to-trough log changes in the
                                                 0.233                        -0.068         -0.090                    0.378        -0.026
1990s on trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                (0.053)                       (0.032)        (0.022)                  (0.067)       (0.088)
1980s/1990s (N=165/./147/92/./203/189)
Regress trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                 0.598                      -0.117         0.167                        0.968         0.772
2000s on trough-to-peak log changes in the
                                                (0.094)                     (0.094)       (0.097)                      (0.080)       (0.086)
1980s/1990s (N=165/./137/81/./203/189)
Notes:
1
  Income and employment data are available only through 2008, not enough time to assess peak-to-trough growth after the boom of the 2000s.




                                                                         40
                      Appendix Table A: Real House Price Trough and Peak Dates and Cumulative Growth Rates, by MSA

                                                                                           1980s     1990s      1990s
                                                                                          Trough    Peak to    Trough     2000s
                                                1980s    1990s     1990s      2000s      to 1990s    1990s    to 2000s   Peak to
                      MSA                      Trough    Peak     Trough      Peak         Peak     Trough      Peak      2010
Abilene, TX                                                          1990       2009                               30%        2%
Akron, OH                                        1984      1999      2000       2005         34%        1%          5%       17%
Albany, GA                                       1992      1993      1994       2007          0%        1%         20%        8%
Albany‐Schenectady‐Troy, NY                      1982      1989      2000       2007         81%       25%         52%        6%
Albuquerque, NM                                  1982      1986      1991       2007          7%       15%         54%       13%
Alexandria, LA                                                       1991       2009                               41%        3%
Allentown‐Bethlehem‐Easton, PA‐NJ                1983      1989      2000       2007         56%       24%         50%       16%
Amarillo, TX                                     1982      1984      1990       2007          3%       31%         36%        2%
Ann Arbor, MI                                    1985      1989      1993       2005         29%        3%         48%       30%
Appleton, WI                                               1986      1991       2005                    5%         29%       10%
Asheville, NC                                              1987      1991       2007                    3%         79%       10%
Athens‐Clarke County, GA                                   1986      1993       2007                    8%         38%        9%
Atlanta‐Sandy Springs‐Marietta, GA               1982      1987      1994       2006         13%       12%         33%       17%
Atlantic City‐Hammonton, NJ                      1984      1989      1996       2006         34%       22%        101%       22%
Auburn‐Opelika, AL                               1989      1990      1991       2007          1%        3%         41%       10%
Augusta‐Richmond County, GA‐SC                   1983      1987      1997       2007          9%       13%         24%        6%
Austin‐Round Rock‐San Marcos, TX                 1981      1985      1990       2009         22%       38%         67%        2%
Bakersfield‐Delano, CA                           1985      1986      2000       2006          1%       24%        120%       48%
Baltimore‐Towson, MD                             1982      1989      1997       2006         30%       11%         86%       19%
Baton Rouge, LA                                  1981      1982      1991       2007          0%       34%         48%        3%
Beaumont‐Port Arthur, TX                         1982      1983      1990       2009          1%       30%         24%        3%
Bellingham, WA                                   1987      1995      2000       2007         60%        2%         67%       13%
Billings, MT                                                                    2007                                          3%
Binghamton, NY                                             1987        1997     2009                   35%        37%         2%
Birmingham‐Hoover, AL                            1982      1987        1991     2007         10%        7%        36%         9%
Bismarck, ND                                               1987        1991     2009                   13%        45%         1%

                                                                  41
Bloomington, IN                                   1989        1990   2006          3%    27%    2%
Bloomington‐Normal, IL                            1987        1991   2004          8%    21%    6%
Boise City‐Nampa, ID                              1981        1996   2007          7%    53%   31%
Boulder, CO                                1981   1982        1990   2005    8%   15%    95%    6%
Bremerton‐Silverdale, WA                   1988   1994        1997   2007   33%    2%    77%   21%
Brownsville‐Harlingen, TX                                     1991   2007                13%    3%
Buffalo‐Niagara Falls, NY                  1983   1992        2000   2009   35%   15%    14%    1%
Canton‐Massillon, OH                       1985   1989        1990   2003    3%    0%    33%   18%
Cape Coral‐Fort Myers, FL                  1985   1989        1996   2006    7%   11%   128%   54%
Casper, WY                                 1989   1996        1997   2007   34%    0%    71%    7%
Cedar Rapids, IA                           1985   1989        1990   2005    4%    1%    24%    6%
Champaign‐Urbana, IL                              1987        1993   2006         10%    26%    6%
Charleston, WV                                                1990   2007                19%    2%
Charleston‐North Charleston‐Summerville,          1982        1995   2007         17%    94%   17%
Charlotte‐Gastonia‐Rock Hill, NC‐SC        1983   1989        1993   2007   18%    7%    29%   10%
Charlottesville, VA                        1985   1989        1996   2007   16%    5%    78%   14%
Chattanooga, TN‐GA                         1984   1988        1991   2007   11%    9%    34%    6%
Cheyenne, WY                               1982   1983        1991   2006    8%   22%    56%    3%
Chicago‐Joliet‐Naperville, IL (MSAD)       1982   1990        1991   2006   31%    1%    52%   22%
Chico, CA                                         1981        1997   2006         13%   107%   34%
Cincinnati‐Middletown, OH‐KY‐IN            1985   1989        1991   2005   10%    2%    22%   12%
Cleveland‐Elyria‐Mentor, OH                1985   1999        2000   2004   27%    0%     6%   20%
College Station‐Bryan, TX
Colorado Springs, CO                       1981   1986        1991   2006   9%    20%   65%    11%
Columbia, MO                                                  1993   2006               29%     6%
Columbia, SC                               1984   1987        1995   2007   7%     7%   24%     5%
Columbus, GA‐AL                                   1987        1991   2007         12%   32%     9%
Columbus, OH                               1985   1988        1991   2005   10%    2%   25%    13%
Corpus Christi, TX                         1981   1982        1991   2007    9%   35%   28%     6%
Corvallis, OR                              1988   1998        2000   2007   77%    4%   37%    10%
Dallas‐Plano‐Irving, TX (MSAD)             1982   1986        1995   2003    7%   32%   18%     4%

                                                         42
Davenport‐Moline‐Rock Island, IA‐IL                                  2005                       4%
Dayton, OH                                 1982   1988        1991   2005   19%    2%    11%   14%
Decatur, AL                                1991   1993        1996   2009    2%    4%    14%    2%
Decatur, IL                                1988   1989        1991   2005    2%    2%    12%    4%
Deltona‐Daytona Beach‐Ormond Beach, FL     1981   1987        1997   2006   22%   13%   113%   44%
Denver‐Aurora‐Broomfield, CO               1981   1983        1991   2005    4%   25%    83%   12%
Des Moines‐West Des Moines, IA             1982   1983        1991   2005    4%    7%    33%    9%
Detroit‐Livonia‐Dearborn, MI (MSAD)        1984   1990        1991   2004   26%    0%    52%   42%
Dothan, AL                                                    1991   2007                25%    7%
Dover, DE                                         1990        2000   2007         10%    54%   19%
Dubuque, IA                                1987   1989        1990   2006    2%    2%    38%    3%
Duluth, MN‐WI                              1987   1989        1990   2006    5%    0%    88%    8%
Eau Claire, WI                             1987   1988        1991   2005    2%    5%    61%    7%
El Paso, TX                                       1983        2000   2007         28%    35%    7%
Elkhart‐Goshen, IN                                1986        1991   2005         10%    21%   11%
Erie, PA                                   1985   1989        1990   2005    7%    1%    19%    4%
Eugene‐Springfield, OR                     1986   1999        2000   2007   70%    2%    47%   18%
Evansville, IN‐KY                          1985   1986        1991   2004    2%   14%    26%    8%
Fargo, ND‐MN                                                  1991   2006                31%    3%
Fayetteville, NC                                              1991   2009                14%    1%
Fayetteville‐Springdale‐Rogers, AR‐MO      1981   1982        1991   2006    5%   12%    46%   19%
Flagstaff, AZ‐UT                                  1987        1990   2006          7%   128%   28%
Flint, MI                                  1984   1992        1993   2005    7%    0%    41%   38%
Florence, SC                               1987   1988        1991   2009    1%    3%    23%    4%
Fort Collins‐Loveland, CO                  1982   1983        1991   2005   8%    15%    78%   11%
Fort Smith, AR‐OK                                             1991   2009                22%    4%
Fort Wayne, IN                             1984   1987        1994   2002   13%   11%     8%   13%
Fort Worth‐Arlington, TX (MSAD)            1982   1986        1996   2003    4%   30%    14%    4%
Fresno, CA                                 1988   1992        1997   2006   11%   16%   121%   45%
Ft. Lauderdale‐Pompano Bch.‐Deerfield Bc          1981        1997   2006         15%   142%   45%
Gainesville, FL                                   1986        1993   2007         14%    82%   24%

                                                         43
Gary, IN (MSAD)                  1987   1998        2000   2007   28%   2%    11%    9%
Grand Forks, ND‐MN                                  1991   2007               40%    3%
Grand Junction, CO                                         2007                     15%
Grand Rapids‐Wyoming, MI         1984   1989        1993   2005   16%    3%   34%   24%
Greeley, CO                             1986        1991   2003         19%   74%   22%
Green Bay, WI                           1986        1991   2005          5%   42%   13%
Greensboro‐High Point, NC        1983   1988        1993   2005   17%    9%   12%    7%
Greenville, NC                          1987        1993   2007         10%   15%    7%
Greenville‐Mouldin‐Easley, SC           1981        1991   2009          8%   24%    4%
Gulfport‐Biloxi, MS                     1988        1991   2007         16%   78%   17%
Hagerstown‐Martinsburg, MD‐WV           1990        1996   2006          6%   74%   30%
Harrisburg‐Carlisle, PA          1984   1989        1991   2007   14%    2%   26%    6%
Hattiesburg, MS                                     1992   2007               43%    8%
Hickory‐Lenoir‐Morganton, NC     1987   1989        1991   2007   3%    1%    25%    5%
Houma‐Bayou Cane‐Thibodaux, LA                      1990   2009               68%    2%
Houston‐Sugar Land‐Baytown, TX   1981   1982        1997   2009   5%    40%   34%    2%
Huntington‐Ashland, WV‐KY‐OH     1989   1990        1991   2009   0%     4%   29%    1%
Huntsville, AL                          1987        1997   2009         15%   18%    2%
Indianapolis‐Carmel, IN          1985   1988        1991   2003   9%     2%   13%   11%
Iowa City, IA                    1988   1989        1990   2005   5%     1%   30%    5%
Jackson, MI                                                2005                     29%
Jackson, MS                      1982   1986        1991   2007   4%    20%   20%    6%
Jackson, TN                                         1992   2006               10%    9%
Jacksonville, FL                 1981   1986        1995   2006   11%   15%   93%   29%
Janesville, WI                   1988   1989        1990   2006    2%    0%   47%   14%
Joplin, MO                                          1992   2006               24%    7%
Kalamazoo‐Portage, MI            1985   1988        1991   2005   6%     1%   35%   17%
Kankakee‐Bradley, IL                    1998        2000   2007          2%   16%    9%
Kansas City, MO‐KS               1984   1987        1993   2005    4%   14%   36%   12%
Kennewick‐Pasco‐Richland, WA     1988   1994        1997   2006   48%   11%   14%    1%
Killeen‐Temple‐Fort Hood, TX                        1991   2007               18%    3%

                                               44
Knoxville, TN                              1985   1987        1991   2007   5%    6%    35%     7%
Kokomo, IN                                                    1991   2002               26%    24%
La Crosse, WI‐MN                                  1986        1991   2006         11%   51%     4%
Lafayette, IN                                     1999        2000   2002          1%    1%    13%
Lafayette, LA                                     1982        2000   2009         36%   25%     3%
Lake Charles, LA                                              1992   2009               34%     3%
Lake County‐Kenosha County, IL‐WI (MSAD                              2006                      21%
Lakeland‐Winter Haven, FL                  1985   1986        1996   2006    0%   14%    81%   38%
Lancaster, PA                              1984   1990        2000   2007   25%    8%    31%    7%
Lansing‐East Lansing, MI                          1981        1993   2005         14%    37%   29%
Las Cruces, NM                                    1986        1991   2007         14%    42%   12%
Las Vegas‐Paradise, NV                            1982        1997   2006         19%    89%   55%
Lawrence, KS                               1988   1989        1991   2005    1%    6%    51%    9%
Lexington‐Fayette, KY                      1982   1983        1993   2006    7%   13%    28%    5%
Lima, OH                                   1985   1988        1993   2005    4%    4%    22%   12%
Lincoln, NE                                1985   1986        1991   2005    1%    6%    30%   10%
Little Rock‐North Little Rock‐Conway, AR   1982   1986        1991   2007    7%   19%    25%    4%
Longview, TX                               1985   1986        1992   2009    1%   20%    32%    1%
Los Angeles‐Long Beach‐Glendale, CA (MS    1984   1990        1997   2006   61%   34%   158%   34%
Louisville‐Jefferson County, KY‐IN         1984   1989        1991   2005    9%    2%    35%    7%
Lubbock, TX                                       1981        1991   2009         28%    16%    1%
Lynchburg, VA                                     1988        1991   2007          2%    40%    6%
Macon, GA                                  1984   1987        1992   2007   8%    10%    15%   10%
Madison, WI                                1981   1982        1990   2006   0%     4%    64%    9%
Mansfield, OH                              1987   1988        1991   2004   3%     4%    34%   23%
McAllen‐Edinburg‐Mission, TX               1990   1994        2000   2007   4%     6%    12%    6%
Medford, OR                                                          2006                      35%
Memphis, TN‐MS‐AR                          1984   1987        1994   2006   16%   12%    16%   12%
Merced, CA                                 1985   1991        1997   2006   24%   20%   148%   64%
Miami‐Miami Beach‐Kendall, FL (MSAD)       1981   1982        1991   2007    2%   13%   160%   42%
Milwaukee‐Waukesha‐West Allis, WI                                    2006                      13%

                                                         45
Minneapolis‐St. Paul‐Bloomington, MN‐WI    1985   1987        1992   2005    4%    7%    78%    23%
Missoula, MT                                                         2007                        8%
Mobile, AL                                 1985   1986        1991   2007    4%    17%    45%   10%
Modesto, CA                                1984   1990        1997   2006   43%    27%   141%   58%
Monroe, LA                                                    1991   2009                 35%    1%
Montgomery, AL                                                1991   2007                 13%    9%
Myrtle Beach‐North Myrtle Beach‐Conway,                       1994   2007                 71%   23%
Naples‐Marco Island, FL                    1985   1990        1996   2006   12%     8%   173%   51%
Nashville‐Davidson‐‐Murfreesboro‐‐Frankl   1982   1987        1992   2007   18%    15%    46%    8%
Nassau‐Suffolk, NY (MSAD)                         1988        1996   2006          28%   120%   20%
New Orleans‐Metairie‐Kenner, LA                               1991   2007                 65%   11%
New York‐White Plains‐Wayne, NY‐NJ (MSA    1982   1988        1997   2006   108%   28%   100%   18%
Newark‐Union, NJ‐PA (MSAD)                 1982   1988        1997   2006    93%   28%    85%   19%
Niles‐Benton Harbor, MI                    1985   1990        1991   2007    23%    1%    46%   11%
Oakland‐Fremont‐Hayward, CA (MSAD)         1984   1990        1996   2006    50%   24%   144%   36%
Ocala, FL                                                     1996   2006                 88%   37%
Ocean City, NJ                                    1989        1997   2006          18%   142%   20%
Odessa, TX                                 1991   1992        2001   2009    3%     8%    56%    6%
Oklahoma City, OK                          1981   1983        1991   2007    8%    42%    30%    2%
Olympia, WA                                1988   1995        1996   2007   39%     1%    59%   16%
Omaha‐Council Bluffs, NE‐IA                1982   1983        1991   2005    0%    13%    33%    9%
Orlando‐Kissimmee‐Sanford, FL              1981   1986        1996   2006    8%    15%   104%   42%
Owensboro, KY                              1988   1989        1992   2002    0%     8%    19%    6%
Palm Bay‐Melbourne‐Titusville, FL                 1981        1997   2006          25%   113%   47%
Panama City‐Lynn Haven‐Panama City Beach                      1991   2006                113%   31%
Parkersburg‐Marietta‐Vienna, WV‐OH                            1991   2006                 26%    3%
Pensacola‐Ferry Pass‐Brent, FL                    1986        1991   2006          16%    76%   27%
Peoria, IL                                                           2007                        3%
Philadelphia, PA (MSAD)                    1982   1989        1997   2006   60%    19%    64%   11%
Phoenix‐Mesa‐Glendale, AZ                  1982   1986        1993   2006    8%    23%   123%   45%
Pittsburgh, PA                             1982   1993        1997   2005   14%     2%    17%    3%

                                                         46
Pocatello, ID                              1989   1998        2000   2007   26%    4%    25%    7%
Port St. Lucie, FL                         1983   1984        1997   2006    2%   18%   121%   53%
Portland‐Vancouver‐Hillsboro, OR‐WA        1988   1999        2000   2007   70%    1%    50%   20%
Poughkeepsie‐Newburgh‐Middletown, NY       1983   1988        1997   2006   86%   32%    90%   23%
Provo‐Orem, UT                             1985   1986        1990   2007    1%   12%    98%   22%
Pueblo, CO                                 1982   1983        1991   2006    2%   15%    49%   11%
Punta Gorda, FL                                   1989        1997   2006         17%   117%   48%
Racine, WI                                                           2006                      16%
Raleigh‐Cary, NC                           1982   1986        1992   2007   21%   12%    28%    6%
Reading, PA                                1982   1989        2000   2007   33%   18%    37%   10%
Redding, CA                                1987   1991        1997   2006   25%   15%   105%   38%
Reno‐Sparks, NV                            1982   1983        2000   2006    0%    5%    81%   48%
Richmond, VA                               1982   1989        1996   2007   14%    8%    58%   15%
Riverside‐San Bernardino‐Ontario, CA       1984   1990        1997   2006   33%   33%   157%   48%
Roanoke, VA                                1982   1988        1991   2007   31%    3%    42%    7%
Rochester, MN                                     1985        1995   2005          8%    38%   14%
Rochester, NY                              1982   1988        2000   2005   33%   22%     8%    4%
Rockford, IL                               1985   1987        1990   2007    2%    0%    18%   12%
Rocky Mount, NC                                   1986        1993   2003         11%    11%   10%
Sacramento‐Arden‐Arcade‐Roseville, CA      1984   1991        1997   2005   43%   26%   124%   44%
Saginaw‐Saginaw Township North, MI         1983   1984        1991   2004    1%    1%    32%   26%
Salem, OR                                  1987   1999        2000   2007   59%    1%    37%   18%
Salinas, CA                                1982   1990        1997   2006   53%   17%   165%   51%
Salt Lake City, UT                         1985   1986        1990   2007    1%   17%   118%   18%
San Angelo, TX                             1991   1993        1997   2009    2%    3%    31%    3%
San Antonio‐New Braunfels, TX                     1984        1991   2007         36%    32%    4%
San Diego‐Carlsbad‐San Marcos, CA          1983   1990        1996   2005   43%   25%   148%   34%
San Francisco‐San Mateo‐Redwood City, CA   1982   1989        1996   2006   79%   24%   129%   24%
San Jose‐Sunnyvale‐Santa Clara, CA         1983   1989        1995   2006   66%   23%   134%   27%
San Luis Obispo‐Paso Robles, CA            1981   1990        1996   2006   65%   30%   142%   33%
Santa Ana‐Anaheim‐Irvine, CA (MSAD)        1985   1989        1997   2006   49%   31%   160%   33%

                                                         47
Santa Barbara‐Santa Maria‐Goleta, CA   1983   1990        1996   2006   50%   25%   162%   40%
Santa Cruz‐Watsonville, CA             1984   1990        1996   2006   63%   20%   135%   32%
Santa Fe, NM                           1988   1995        1997   2007   32%    4%    49%   16%
Santa Rosa‐Petaluma, CA                1984   1990        1996   2006   53%   19%   127%   38%
Savannah, GA                                  1986        1991   2007         13%    77%   15%
Scranton‐Wilkes‐Barre, PA                     1993        2000   2007          6%    26%    5%
Seattle‐Bellevue‐Everett, WA (MSAD)    1985   1990        1995   2007   41%    3%    90%   21%
Sheboygan, WI                          1989   1990        1991   2006    0%    0%    49%   11%
Sherman‐Denison, TX                    1991   1992        1994   2006    0%    1%    20%    6%
Shreveport‐Bossier City, LA            1985   1986        1991   2007    1%   29%    31%    2%
Sioux City, IA‐NE‐SD                                      1990   2003                29%    4%
Sioux Falls, SD                                           1990   2007                36%    3%
South Bend‐Mishawaka, IN‐MI            1984   1988        1991   2005   10%    5%    22%    9%
Spokane, WA                            1988   1995        2000   2007   34%    6%    48%   13%
Springfield, IL                               1987        1990   2005          2%     3%    4%
Springfield, MO                               1986        1991   2007         14%    24%    8%
St. Cloud, MN                                             1991   2006                66%   17%
St. Joseph, MO‐KS                             1987        1991   2005          2%    39%    7%
St. Louis, MO‐IL                       1982   1987        1993   2006   17%   12%    38%   11%
State College, PA                                         1990   2009                32%    1%
Stockton, CA                           1984   1990        1997   2006   40%   26%   141%   57%
Syracuse, NY                           1982   1988        1997   2006   35%   25%    22%    3%
Tacoma, WA (MSAD)                      1988   1995        1996   2007   31%    1%    75%   23%
Tallahassee, FL                               1983        1994   2007         13%    61%   21%
Tampa‐St. Petersburg‐Clearwater, FL    1981   1986        1995   2006   10%   15%   111%   39%
Toledo, OH                             1985   1989        1991   2004    5%    3%    29%   21%
Topeka, KS                             1982   1984        1993   2005    2%   17%    21%    6%
Trenton‐Ewing, NJ                      1982   1988        1997   2006   86%   31%    77%   18%
Tucson, AZ                             1982   1986        1991   2006    9%   13%    95%   31%
Tulsa, OK                              1981   1983        1992   2009    5%   35%    23%    1%
Tyler, TX                                                 1991   2007                25%    3%

                                                     48
Utica‐Rome, NY                                    1989        1997   2009         25%    33%    2%
Vallejo‐Fairfield, CA                      1984   1990        1997   2006   33%   24%   147%   53%
Vineland‐Millville‐Bridgeton, NJ                  1989        2000   2007         16%    63%   19%
Virginia Beach‐Norfolk‐Newport News, VA‐   1982   1988        1997   2007   23%   13%    84%   15%
Visalia‐Porterville, CA                    1988   1992        2000   2006   13%   16%    98%   44%
Waco, TX                                                      1991   2009                22%    2%
Washington‐Arlington‐Alexandria, DC‐VA‐M   1982   1989        1997   2006   44%   20%   113%   26%
Waterloo‐Cedar Falls, IA                                             2006                       3%
Wausau, WI                                                           2005                       8%
West Palm Beach‐Boca Raton‐Boynton Beach   1982   1983        1997   2006   1%    17%   136%   45%
Wichita Falls, TX                                             1991   2007                19%    4%
Wichita, KS                                1985   1986        1991   2009    2%   19%    16%    2%
Wilmington, DE‐MD‐NJ (MSAD)                1981   1989        1997   2006   49%   16%    61%   15%
Wilmington, NC                                    1987        1991   2007          4%    89%   19%
Yakima, WA                                 1989   1998        2000   2007   46%    3%    18%    5%
York‐Hanover, PA                                  1989        2000   2007          7%    38%   12%
Youngstown‐Warren‐Boardman, OH‐PA          1987   1989        1990   2004   3%     3%    26%   14%
Yuba City, CA                                     1991        1997   2006         19%   117%   48%
Yuma, AZ                                   1994   1995        1997   2006   2%     2%    76%   33%




                                                         49
