                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    EVIDENCE ON THE IMPACT OF R&D AND ICT INVESTMENT ON INNOVATION
                   AND PRODUCTIVITY IN ITALIAN FIRMS

                                           Bronwyn H. Hall
                                            Francesca Lotti
                                           Jacques Mairesse

                                         Working Paper 18053
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18053


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2012




Some of the research reported in this paper was supported by the Bank of Italy. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Francesca Lotti, and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evidence on the Impact of R&D and ICT Investment on Innovation and Productivity in Italian
Firms
Bronwyn H. Hall, Francesca Lotti, and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 18053
May 2012, Revised May 2012
JEL No. L60,O31,O33

                                             ABSTRACT

Both Research and Development (R&D) and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) investment
have been identified as sources of relative innovation underperformance in Europe vis-à-vis the United
States. In this paper we investigate R&D and ICT investment at the firm level in an effort to assess
their relative importance and to what extent they are complements or substitutes. We use data on a
large unbalanced panel data sample of Italian manufacturing firms constructed from four consecutive
waves of a survey of manufacturing firms, together with a version of the CDM model (Crepon et al.,
1998) that has been modified to include ICT investment and R&D as the two main inputs into innovation
and productivity. We find that R&D and ICT are both strongly associated with innovation and productivity,
with R&D being more important for innovation, and ICT investment being more important for productivity.
For the median firm, rates of return to both investments are so high that they suggest considerably
underinvestment in both these activities.


Bronwyn H. Hall                                     Jacques Mairesse
DepDUWPHQt of Economics                             CREST-INSEE
549 Evans Hall                                      15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
UC Berkeley                                         92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                             FRANCE
and NBER                                            and UNU-MERIT (Maastricht University)
bhhall@nber.org                                     and also NBER
                                                    mairesse@ensae.fr
Francesca Lotti
Structural Economic Analysis Department
Bank of Italy
via Nazionale 91, 00184 Rome (IT)
francesca.lotti@gmail.com
1.    Introduction

Both Research and Development (R&D) and Information and Communication
Technology      (ICT)     investment      have    been     identified    as    areas    of   relative
underperformance in Europe vis-à-vis the United States. For example, Van Ark et al.
(2003) concluded the following in their study of the reasons for lower productivity
growth in Europe: “The results show that U.S. productivity has grown faster than in the
EU because of a larger employment share in the ICT producing sector and faster
productivity growth in services industries that make intensive use of ICT.” Moncada-
Paternò-Castello et al. (2009), Hall and Mairesse (2009), and O’Sullivan (2006) all
point to the differences in industrial structure, specifically the smaller ICT producing
sector as the main cause of lower R&D intensity in Europe.

It is also true that the ICT share of investment by firms in all sectors is lower in Europe
than in the United States. Figure 1 shows the R&D investment-GDP and ICT
investment-GDP shares for the EU15 and the United States over the 1995-2007 period.
Both show a significant gap and the ICT gap is somewhat larger than that for R&D.
Thus not only is the ICT-producing sector smaller in Europe, but it is also true that less
investment in ICT is taking place relative to GDP. So it is natural to ask whether ICT
investment results in innovation and productivity growth in European firms, and how
this kind of investment interacts with R&D investment. Do European firms invest less
in ICT because the productivity of such investment is low, or are there other causes for
this low investment rate? Looking at ICT investment within Europe, as we do in Figure
2, we can see that the laggards in ICT as a share of all investment are Austria, Italy,
Portugal, and Spain.2 This is one of the reasons why the current paper directs its
attention to data on Italian firms.

There is also considerable policy interest in the implications of these kinds of
investment (R&D and ICT) for the skill composition of the workforce. One might
expect that R&D would be targeted mainly at new and significantly improved product


2
  The figure shows ICT investment as a share in gross fixed capital formation from the OECD website
for 13 EU countries and the United States. No data is available for Luxembourg and Greece, the
remaining members of the EU15.



                                                  2
innovation (following the results of much earlier surveys, such as Mansfield, 1968). In
contrast, ICT investment has frequently been found to be accompanied by innovations
in processing and the organization of work within the firm (e.g., Greenan et al., 1996).
To our knowledge, very few papers have investigated R&D and ICT investment jointly
and tried to assess their relative importance and to what extent they are complements or
substitutes. The few papers in the literature have produced conflicting results. For
example, while Cerquera and Klein (2008) find that a more intense use of ICT brings
about a reduction in R&D effort in German firms, Polder et al. (2009) find a
complementarity effect of ICT with respect to innovation in the service sector only in
the Netherlands, albeit one that is small in magnitude.

In this paper we use a version of the well-known model of R&D, innovation, and
productivity that is due to Crepon, Duguet, and Mairesse (1998) to go beyond prior
work in this area. We treat ICT in parallel with R&D as an input to innovation rather
than simply as an input of the production function. By doing this, we take into account
the possible complementarities among different types of innovation activities. In
addition we add measures of organizational innovation to explore the interaction among
all these factors. Our analysis examines the firm level relationships between product,
process and organizational innovation, labor and total productivity, and two of their
major determinants, namely R&D and ICT, using data on firms from a single European
country, Italy. The evidence is based on a large unbalanced panel data sample of Italian
manufacturing firms in the 1995-2006 period, constructed from the four consecutive
waves of the “Survey on Manufacturing Firms” conducted by Unicredit.

Taking advantage of our previous work (Hall, Lotti and Mairesse 2008 and 2009), and
in the spirit of Polder et al. (2009), we rely on an extension of a modified version of the
CDM model (Griffith et al., 2006) that includes ICT investment together with R&D as
two main inputs into innovation and productivity. This extension of the model
specification leads to augmented difficulties in estimation owing to the increased
number of equations with qualitative dependent variables: we bypass some of these
difficulties by estimating the different blocks of the model sequentially, while still




                                            3
correcting for endogeneity and selectivity in firm R&D investment.3 We first consider a
model of R&D investment (consisting of a probit for the presence of the investment
and a regression that predicts its level). Next, we test different sets of (univariate and
quadrivariate) probit equations for binary indicators of product, process, and
organizational innovation with the levels of R&D and ICT investments as predictor
variables. Finally we estimate the productivity impacts of the different modes of
innovation in a production function, controlling for physical capital.

The next section of the paper reviews the micro-econometric evidence on the use of
information and communication technology to enhance the productivity of firms. This
is followed by a presentation of our model, data and the results of estimation. The final
section offers some preliminary conclusions.


2.    ICT and productivity: a micro perspective

The earliest studies on the link between ICT and productivity at the macro level were
mainly aimed at understanding the so-called Solow Paradox, i.e. the fact that
“computers were visible everywhere except in the productivity statistics” (Solow,
1985).

In fact, measuring ICT correctly at the aggregate level is a non-trivial issue. The ideal
measure capturing the economic contribution of capital inputs in a production theory
context is the flow of capital services, but building this variable from raw data entails
non-trivial assumptions regarding the measurement of the investment flows in the
different assets and the aggregation over vintages of a given type of asset. Moreover,
deflators must be based on hedonic techniques given the rapid technical change in this
sector.

Availability of data at the firm level enables one to overcome some of the
aforementioned issues and at the same time to account for heterogeneity. In fact, many
studies find an impact on productivity that is greater than that for ordinary non-ICT


3
  To correct for the use of sequential estimation, we estimate panel bootstrap standard errors for some of
our models, and find relatively small increases in the standard errors on the coefficients of the
instrumented (predicted) variables.



                                                    4
investment, measuring ICT with alternative proxies, like a measure of the stock of a
firm’s computer hardware at the establishment level (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 1995,
Brynjolfsson and Yang 1998, Brynjolfsson et al. 2002), ICT use at the firm level
(number of PCs, the use of network, number of employees using ICT; Greenan and
Mairesse, 1996) and ICT investment expenditure. The latter measure is clearly
desirable, as it provides a direct measure of investment outlay that can be easily used in
a production function and we will rely on it in our empirical analysis. Also, when
working with cross section data, as we do here, such an investment measure is highly
correlated with the corresponding capital stock measure at the firm level, and much
easier to measure.

Even if based on different indicators, the relationship between ICT and productivity at
the firm level is generally positive (Black and Lynch (2001) and Bresnahan et al.
(2002) for the US, Greenan et al. (2001) for France, Bugamelli and Pagano (2004) and,
more recently, Castiglione (2009) on Italy), but ICT alone is not enough to affect
productivity. In fact, Black and Lynch (2001) and Bresnahan (2002) focus on the
interaction between ICT, human capital and organizational innovation. Ignoring these
complementarities may lead to overestimating the effect of ICT on productivity. In fact,
development of ICT projects requires reorganization of the firm around the new
technology, but reorganization needs time to be implemented and, more importantly, it
implies costs, like retraining of workers, consultants, management time. See also
Brynjolfsson et al. (2002) on the firm valuation effects of information technology
acquisition, which they show to be partly proxying for the costs of the organizational
change that accompanies such acquisition.

Therefore, we treat ICT as an input, both of the production function and, more
importantly, of the knowledge production function. In the first case, we reconcile with
a more traditional view: ICT enables “organizational” investments, mainly business
processes and new work practices which, in turns, lead to cost reductions and improved
output and, hence, productivity gains. In a less traditional view, ICT is an input for
producing new goods and services (like internet banking), new ways of doing business
(B2B) and new ways of producing goods and services (integrated management).
Consequently, in our modeling framework we treat ICT as a pervasive input rather than
an input of the production function only. By doing so, we take explicitly into account

                                            5
possible complementarities with innovation activity, mainly R&D but also
organizational innovation.

We directly incorporate ICT expenditure into a structural model based on the “CDM”
framework (Crépon-Duguet-Mairesse, 1998). Crépon, Duguet and Mairesse (1998)
propose a model of the relationship among innovation input, innovation output and
productivity. The structural model allows a closer look at the black box of the
innovation process at the firm level: it not only analyzes the relationship between
innovation input and productivity, but it also sheds some light on the process in
between the two. The CDM approach is based on a three-step model following the
logic of firms’ decisions and outcomes in terms of innovation. In the first step, firms
decide whether to engage in R&D or not and the amount of resources to invest. Given
the firm’s decision to invest in innovation, the second step is characterized by a
knowledge production function (as in Pakes and Griliches, 1984) in which innovation
output stems from innovation input and other input factors. In the third step, an
innovation augmented Cobb-Douglas production function describes the effect of
innovative output on the firm’s labor productivity. We extend the CDM model to
include an equation for ICT as an enabler of innovation and organizational innovation
as an indicator of innovation output, as in Polder et al. (2009). Using data from
different sources (mainly surveys) at the Statistics Netherlands on firms belonging to
the manufacturing and services industries, Polder et al. find that ICT is an important
driver of innovation. While doing more R&D has a positive effect on product
innovation in manufacturing only, they find positive effects of product and process
innovation when combined with organizational innovation in both sectors.


3. The extended CDM model

The model we use has three blocks, as reported on Figure 3. The first consists of the
decision whether to invest in R&D, and how much to spend on the investment.4 The




4
  We chose not to treat ICT investment in parallel to R&D because the problem of unobserved ICT
investment is not likely to be of the same order of magnitude as that for R&D. Roughly 30 per cent of
firms report that they did not invest in ICT during the past three years, and we included a dummy for



                                                 6
second consists of a set of binary innovation outcomes during the previous three years:
introduction of a new or significantly improved process, introduction of a new or
significantly improved product, organizational change associated with process
innovation, or organizational change associated with product innovation. These
outcomes are presumed to be driven by the investment decisions of the firms with
respect to R&D, physical capital. The element of novelty is the inclusion of ICT
expenditure at this stage to explain innovation activity. The final equation is a
conventional labor productivity regression that includes the innovation outcomes as
well. All of the equations in the model are projected on a list of “exogenous” variables
that include a quadratic in the log of firm size, a quadratic in the log of firm age, year
dummies, survey wave dummies, 20 two-digit industry dummies, and 20 regional
dummies. The survey wave dummies are a set of indicators for the firm’s presence or
absence in the four waves of the survey.5 The left-out categories are the 1998 year, the
machinery industry, the Lombardy region (including Milan), and the first wave pattern.

To summarize, productivity is assumed to depend on innovation, and innovation to
depend on investment choices. Of necessity, our estimation is cross-sectional only, for
two reasons: first, we have few cases with more than one year per firm (the average
number of observations per firm is 1.4). Second, the timing of the questions of the
survey is such that we cannot really assume a direct causal relationship between
investment and innovation, since both are measured over the preceding three years in
the questionnaire. Therefore the results that we report should be viewed as associations
rather than as causal relationships. This use of a cross-sectional approach also means
that the use of investment flows rather than stocks in the innovation equations is
inconsequential. The following subsections discuss the models estimated in more
detail.




these firms in the regressions where ICT is included on the right hand side. Note also that we dropped the
few cases where total investment (ICT and non-ICT) was zero.
5
 For example, a firm present in all the four waves will have a “1111” code, “1000” if present in the first
only, “1100” if in the first and in the second only, and so forth. These codes are transformed into a set of
fourteen dummies (24 = 16 minus the 0000 case and the exclusion restriction).



                                                     7
3.1.   The R&D decision

In this first stage, as in the standard CDM model, we treat the decision to invest in
R&D. A firm must decide whether to do R&D or not, then, given that the firm chooses
to do R&D, it must choose the investment intensity. This statement of the problem can
be modeled with a standard sample selection model. We use X to denote R&D
investment, and define the model as follows:

                                       1 if     DX i*  wi   i  c
                                DX i                                                  (1)
                                       0 if     DX i*  wi   i  c

DXi is an (observable) indicator function that takes value 1 if firm i has (or reports)
positive expenditures on X, DXi* is a latent indicator variable such that firm i decides to
perform (or to report) expenditures if it is above a given threshold c , wi is a set of
explanatory variables affecting the decision, and is the error term. For those firms doing
R&D, we observe the intensity of resources devoted to these activities:

                                      X *  zi   ei if     DX i  1
                                Xi   i                                                (2)
                                     0                if     DX i  0

where Xi* is the unobserved latent variable corresponding to the firm’s investment, and
zi is a set of determinants of the expenditure intensity. We measure expenditure
intensity as the logarithm of R&D spending per employee. Assuming that the error
terms in (1) and (2) are bivariate normal with zero mean and covariance matrix given
by

                                             1           
                                            
                                                       
                                                                                              (3)
                                              
                                                       2




the system of equations (1) and (2) can be estimated by maximum likelihood. In the
literature, this model is sometimes referred to as a Heckman selection model
(Heckman, 1979) or Tobit type II model (Amemiya, 1984).

Before estimating the selection model for R&D, we performed a semi-parametric test
for the presence of selection bias (see Das, Newey and Vella, 2003, and Vella, 1998 for
a survey). Results are in Table 3 in the Appendix. Unlike the case in Hall et al. (2009),
which used only small and medium-sized firms, we found significant bias in the R&D
equation from selection, so we included the selection model in our estimation strategy.
                                           8
3.2.           Innovation outcomes

In the second step, we estimate a knowledge production function but, unlike the
original CDM model, we add ICT investment as a possible determinant of innovation.
In order to account for that part of innovation activity that has not been formalized, we
do not restrict estimation to R&D or ICT performing firms only. This is likely to be
especially important for SMEs, which represent nearly 90% of our sample. The
outcomes of the knowledge production function are four types of innovation: product,
process, and organizational innovation associated with either of these:6

                         INNOi j   j RDi*   ICT
                                                j   ICTi   Ij I i  xi j  u ji   j  1,..., 4 ,           (4)

where RDi* is the latent R&D effort, which is proxied by the predicted value of R&D
from the model in the first step, ICTi is ICT investment intensity, Ii is physical
investment intensity7 (other than ICT) , and the error terms {uj} are distributed normally
with covariance matrix Σ.

We measure ICT and ordinary investment intensities as the log of annual expenditure
per employee. We argue that including the predicted R&D intensity in the regression
accounts for the fact that all firms may have some kind of innovative effort, but only
some of them report it (Griffith et al., 2006). Moreover, using the predicted value
instead of the realized value is a sensible way to instrument the innovative effort in the
knowledge production function in order to deal with simultaneity problem between
R&D and the expectation of innovative success. However, given the fact that the model
is estimated in sequential stages, conventional standard error estimates will be biased
and we present standard errors computed via a panel bootstrap. In general, using a
bootstrap makes relatively little difference to the standard errors, except those for the
innovation probability in the productivity equation.



6
  We present the general form of the model here, with the four distinct types of innovation. In practice we
found the effects difficult to identify separately and later on we explore various reductions of the model
to 2 or 3 innovation variables only.
7
  Since in the empirical specification we take the log of the ICT investment variable (and as a
consequence firms with zero ICT investment would turn into missing observation), we add a dummy
variable for non-zero ICT investment.



                                                      9
We also explored the use of our measures of skill in predicting innovative activity. We
have two types of measures available: the number of employees with diploma
superiore degrees (high school) and laurea degrees (college), and the number of
employees that are executives or white collar workers. It turns out that the degree
shares were much weaker predictors, so we chose to focus on the share of executives
and white collar workers as a proxy for the employee skills. There are several reasons
why the degree shares are not good predictors: first of all there are substantially more
missing values than for the other skill indicator. Nonetheless, looking at the raw
numbers, only 4.7 % of the employees in our sample have a college degree: too few for
a robust identification. Second, it is more plausible that the respondent has a clear idea
about the partitioning of the labor force in terms of share of executives and white collar
rather than for its level of education. Third, educational and skill mismatches are a very
common phenomenon, especially in smaller firms (Ferrante, 2010).

Equation (4) is estimated as a quadrivariate probit model using the GHK algorithm
(Greene 2003, Cappellari and Jenkins, 2003), assuming that the firm characteristics
which affect the various kinds of innovation are the same, although of course their
impact may differ. We also estimate a univariate, and various bivariate and trivariate
probit versions of the model, finally concluding that the various types of innovation and
their predictors are so correlated that it is not possible to extract more than one
dimension of innovation from them.


3.3. The productivity equation

In the third and final step of the model, production is modeled using a simple Cobb-
Douglas technology with labor, capital, and knowledge inputs:

                                   y i   1 k i  INNOi* 2  Z i   i                    (5)

where y is labor productivity (sales per employee, in logs), k is the log of capital per
worker, INNO* is the predicted probability of innovation from the second step, and the
Z are the controls included in all equations. Note that Z includes the log of employment
(size), so that this production equation does not impose constant returns to scale.

We tried to include in the productivity equation alternative combinations of the
predicted probabilities of process, product and organizational innovation, but the high

                                              10
levels of correlation between them prevented us from obtaining stable results.
Therefore, in line with the results from Table 4, we decided to simply include the
probability of any kind of innovation instead.


4.    Data and descriptive statistics

We use firm level data from the 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th waves of the “Survey on
Manufacturing Firms” conducted by Unicredit (an Italian commercial bank, formerly
known as Medicredito-Capitalia). These four surveys were carried out in 1998, 2001,
2004 and 2007 respectively, using questionnaires administered to a representative
sample of Italian manufacturing firms. Each survey covered the three years
immediately prior (1995-1997, 1998-2000, 2001-2003, and 2004-2006) and although
the survey questionnaires were not identical in all four of the surveys, they were very
similar in the sections used in this work. All firms with more than 500 employees were
included in the surveys, whereas smaller firms were selected using a sampling design
stratified by geographical area, industry, and firm size. We merged the data from these
four surveys, excluding firms with incomplete information or with extreme
observations for the variables of interest.8

Our final sample is an unbalanced panel of 14,294 observations on 9,850 firms, of
which only 96 are present in all four waves. Table 1 contains some descriptive statistics
for the unbalanced panel. Not surprisingly, the firm size distribution is skewed to the
right, with an average of 114 employees, but with a median of 35 only. In our sample,
two-thirds of the firms engage in some sort of innovation activity, but only 34% invest
in R&D, with an average of 3800 euros per employee. While nearly 70% of the firms in
the sample invest in ICT, the intensity with which they invest is much lower when
compared to R&D, less than one thousand euros per employee. Roughly 20 per cent of
the employees at the median firm are white collar workers, and although the average


8
  In addition to requiring nonmissing data for everything except R&D and ICT investment, we require
that sales per employee be between 5000 and 10 million euros, capital per employee between 200 and 10
million euros, growth rates of employment and sales between -150 per cent and 150 per cent, and
investment, R&D, and ICT investment per employee less than 2 million euros. In addition, we restrict the
sample by excluding the very few observations where the age of the firm or total investment (ICT and
non-ICT) is missing. For further details, see Hall, Lotti and Mairesse (2008).



                                                  11
number of “executives” is 1.8 per cent, the median firm has none, which may reflect
some errors in reporting. We use the sum of white collar workers and executives as a
proxy for skill in the regressions.

Turning to the variables we will use to determine the R&D investment choice, 42% of
the firms in the sample report that they have national competitors, while 17% and 14%
have European and international competitors, respectively. A quarter of the firms
belong to an industrial group. Interestingly, 42% of the firms in our sample received a
subsidy of some kind (mainly for investment and R&D; we do not have more detailed
information on the subsidies received). Only one third of the sample consists of firms in
high-tech industries, reflecting the traditional sector orientation of Italian industry.

In Table 2 we look at some of the innovation indicators more closely. A firm that
invests in R&D is also slightly more likely to invest in ICT (compare 34%*68% = 23%
to 27%). For 27% of the firms product and process innovations go together, while 24%
are process innovators only. Only 30% of the firms report that they have undertaken
organizational change associated with innovation; not surprisingly organizational
change associated with either product or process innovation is more likely to
accompany the corresponding type of innovation.

In the last panel of Table 2 we show the distribution of the various combinations of
innovation activities: product, process, and organizational. There are 23 = 8 possible
combinations but only four account for three quarters of the observations: No
innovation (33%), only process innovation (15%), product and process together (15%),
and all together (12%). In general, as we saw above, process innovation is more likely
than product innovation for these firms, and either one more likely than organizational
innovation. The final two columns in the bottom panel of Table 2 also show that there
is some association between the various forms of innovation and both doing R&D and
investing in ICT, although the association is stronger for R&D.


5.     Results and discussion

5.1.          R&D, ICT, and investment equations

To test for selection in R&D reporting, we first estimated a probit model in which the
presence of positive R&D expenditures is regressed on a set of firm characteristics:
                                       12
firm size and its square, firm age and its square, a set of dummies indicating
competitors’ size and location, dummy variables indicating (i) whether the firm
received government subsidies, and (ii) whether the firm belongs to an industrial group,
along with industry, region, time, and wave dummies; the results are reported in Table
A3 in the appendix. From this estimate, for each firm we recover the predicted
probability of having R&D and the corresponding Mills’ ratio. Then we estimate a
simple linear (OLS) for R&D intensity, adding to this equation the predicted
probabilities from the R&D decision equation, the Mills’ ratio, their squares and
interaction terms. The presence of selectivity bias is then tested for by looking at the
significance of those “probability terms”.9 The probability terms were jointly
significant, with a χ2(5) = 34.1. We therefore concluded that selection bias was present
and estimated the full two equation model by maximum likelihood (the final two
columns of Table A3). The results confirmed the presence of selection, with a highly
significant correlation coefficient of almost 0.4. The interpretation of this result is that
if we observe R&D for a firm for whom R&D was not expected, its R&D intensity will
be relatively high given its characteristics. Conversely, if we fail to observe R&D, its
R&D intensity is likely to have been low conditional on its characteristics.

Turning to the R&D intensity equation itself, we first observe that selection appears to
have biased the coefficients towards zero in general, but did not have much effect on
their significance (compare columns 2 and 4 of Table A3).10 R&D intensity falls with
size, reaching its minimum at about 380 employees and then rising again. It also falls
with age, but this is barely significant. Firms facing European or other international
competitors have much higher R&D intensities (by 20 or 30 per cent), as do firms that
are members of a group or who receive subsidies of some kind. These last two results
suggest that financial frictions may be important for these firms.




9
  Note that this is a generalization of Heckman’s two step procedure for estimation when the error terms
in the two equations are jointly normally distributed. The test here is a semi-parametric extension for
non-normal distributions.
10
  In the case of a single positive regressor and positive correlation between the disturbances, one can
show that the effect of estimating without controlling for selection will indeed be downward bias to the
coefficient.



                                                   13
For comparison to the R&D equation, we also estimated equations for ICT and non-
ICT physical investment using ordinary least squares. Table 3 presents the results,
along with our chosen specification for R&D investment. We do not expect that
reporting bias or selection is as an important an issue for these kinds of investment,
both because they are more easily tracked, and also because they do not exhibit the
same magnitude of threshold effects arising from intertemporal nonseparability and
sunk costs that cannot be recaptured.11 In general, we find that these kinds of
investment are somewhat harder to predict than R&D. Like R&D, ICT and non-ICT
intensities fall with size, but reach a minimum at smaller sizes of 100 to 200 employees
and then increase again. The nature of competition does not appear to have much
impact, but group membership and subsidies do. Being a member of a group boosts
ICT investment by 25 per cent and receiving subsidies (which are often investment
subsidies) increases non-ICT investment by 40 per cent. Interestingly, there is regional
variation in R&D and ICT investment, but not in ordinary investment.

Summarizing these results, we conclude that European or international competition is
only associated with higher R&D intensity, and not with higher tangible investment
intensity. Financial constraints to R&D and ordinary investment are more likely to be
mitigated by subsidies (which directly target these forms of investment), whereas ICT
investment is more likely to be encouraged by group membership, probably because the
costs are partly spread across the group, and also because the decision to install
communication networks and computerize various functions may be a group decision.

Based on the results of this exploration of selection issues in the reporting of the three
types of investment, in the next section of the paper we will use the predicted values of
R&D intensity (the expectation of R&D intensity conditional on the other firm
characteristics) and the reported values of ICT and non-ICT investment intensity to
explain the propensity for different kinds of innovation. This approach is justified both
by the evidence that there is reporting bias in R&D, but not in the other kinds of
investment and by the observation that R&D is more difficult to measure, especially in


11
  In fact, we tested for selection in the ICT and non-ICT investment intensity equations, and found that
there was a weak selection effect for the ICT equation and none for the non-ICT equation.



                                                  14
smaller firms, because it occurs as a byproduct of other activities and may not be
separately tracked.


5.2.         The innovation equations

Table A4 in the appendix presents the results of estimating a quadrivariate probit
model for the four types of innovation as a function of predicted R&D investment, ICT
and non-ICT realized investment, and the size, age, and dummy variables. All four
innovation variables have similar relationships to the size and R&D intensity of the
firm, with the probability of innovation peaking somewhere between 500 and 1000
employees, and increasing strongly with R&D intensity. ICT investment intensity is
associated with product and organizational innovation, but not with process innovation,
although not having any ICT investment is strongly negative for process innovation.
Older firms are more likely to product-innovate, but the age of the firm is not
associated strongly to other types of innovation. Finally, the residual correlation of the
innovation variables after controlling for these factors is much higher than the raw
correlations (see table A5), suggesting that the firms have a strong idiosyncratic
tendency towards innovation.

The model estimated in Table 4 can be used to generate the predicted probabilities of
the 16 = 24 possible combinations of types of innovation, all of which exist in our data.
Unfortunately, we encountered considerable difficulty when we attempted to include
these predicted values in the labor productivity equation, in the form of coefficient
instability due to multicollinearity of the various predicted values. The upper panel of
table A5 in the appendix shows the correlation between the actual four types of
innovation dummies; as expected, organizational innovation related to process or
product innovation is highly correlated with the corresponding innovation type. The
middle panel shows the correlations between the predicted innovation dummies,
computed from the estimates of the quadrivariate probit model for innovation shown in
Table A4. As one can observe, correlations are nearly doubled with respect to the
actual values, ranging from 0.25 to a 0.86. For this reason, the estimates were also quite
sensitive to the inclusion and exclusion of other right hand side variables, and to the
exact form of the innovation equation. It appears that having only dummy variables for
four different types of innovation is simply not enough information to measure the

                                           15
complex innovation profile of individual firms. Because we observe all 16 possible
combinations in fairly sizable numbers in the data, the problem is not merely that some
types of innovation are always accompanied by others, but more one of the substantial
measurement error introduced when translating innovative activity into a simple,
dichotomous “yes or no” question.

To mitigate this problem and to attempt to obtain more stable results for the
productivity equation, we considered collapsing the innovation indicators in all possible
ways to make 3, 2, or 1 indicators, and then estimated the appropriate trivariate,
bivariate, or univariate probit model on the resulting data (results are not shown for the
sake of clarity). We looked at the explanatory power of each model used by computing
twice the log of the likelihood ratio for the fitted model versus a baseline multinomial
model where the theoretical probability of each innovation combination is equal to the
actual probability. These chi-squared measures capture to degree to which the fit of the
model is improved by including the 64 regressors (size, age, R&D, ICT, investment
along with year, wave, region, and sector dummies) in each probability equation.

Using the criterion of highest chi-squared improvement per coefficient, the most
preferred specification turned out to be the simplest, where innovation is defined as
simply any one or more of process, product, or organizational innovation associated
with process or product, and the next most preferred combines the organizational
innovation variables with the corresponding process and product variables. Our
conclusion is that the answers to the four different innovation questions do not really
provide information on four completely different activities, but rather on aspects of one
or two kinds of innovative activity. That is, being innovative in the sense of introducing
something new to the market or firm practice manifests itself in several directions at
once, but the yes/no answer to the various ways the question is asked are sufficiently
noisy to obscure this fact. Moreover, it is very likely that firms that introduce one type
of innovation would naturally develop others to pursue efficiency in the production,
whether or not they report them. To explore this issue, we will perform possible
complementarity tests between the different kinds of innovation in a subsequent
section of the paper.

Table 4 shows the results for two versions of the innovation probability equation,
where innovation is defined as at least one of process, product, and organizational
                                           16
innovation. The first equation shows that the most powerful predictor of innovation is
the firm’s R&D intensity, with a doubling of (predicted) R&D intensity leading to an
increase in the probability of some kind of innovation equal to 20 per cent. The other
types of investment have much weaker impacts. The likelihood that a firm has at least
one innovation increases strongly with firm size, reaching a maximum at about 400
employees. In this table, we also show standard errors obtained via 100 replications of
a panel bootstrap on the R&D model and the innovation equation. They are roughly the
same as the heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors computed by clustering on the
firm, sometimes smaller and sometimes larger, so we conclude that estimating the
model sequentially has not introduced much bias in the standard error estimates.

In the second column of Table 4, we show the results of predicting innovation when we
add a skills variable (the share of executives and white collar workers in the firm’s
employment) and its interaction with predicted R&D intensity. The other coefficients in
the equation are largely unchanged by the addition of these variables, with the obvious
exception of that for R&D intensity. The interaction term is quite significant and
implies that a one standard deviation increase in the skilled share at the mean R&D
intensity is associated with an increase in innovation probability of 4.4 per cent. We
also investigated the interaction of skills with ICT, finding no effect on innovation. So
we conclude that the share of white collar workers is complementary with R&D but not
with ICT in innovating.


5.3.         The labor productivity equation

In the last part of the analysis we look at the productivity impacts of innovation
activities. Table 5 shows estimates of equation (5) with and without measures of R&D
and ICT investment, and for two alternative indicators of innovation activities: the
predicted probabilities of any innovation computed from the estimates in columns (1)
and (2) of Table 4. Conventional variables (capital, employment and the firm’s age) are
included in each specification and their estimates are usually not very affected by the
inclusion of the innovation variables.

There are two sets of three estimates each, first for the probability of innovation
predicted by R&D, ICT and investment, and the second where the skill share of
employment and its interaction with R&D has been added to the innovation prediction
                                           17
equation. In regressions not reported, we found that the dummy variable for the actual
report by the firm of any kind of innovative activity would suggest that innovation has
no effect on productivity, even in the absence of R&D or ICT investment. However,
when we proxy innovation with the predicted probability of any innovation conditional
on R&D, ICT, and the other firm characteristics included in Table 4, we find a positive
effect: doing any kind of innovation increases productivity by 28 percent (column 1).
Using the predicted probability instead of the actual presence/absence of innovation is
more appropriate to account for possible endogeneity issues concerning knowledge
inputs. In effect, we have instrumented the very poorly measure innovation dummy
using inputs to innovation (R&D, ICT investment) and other firm characteristics.

Nevertheless, when we include R&D and/or ICT investment in the productivity
equation (columns 2 and 3), the predicted probability of innovation activity loses
(almost) all its significance. ICT investment per employee appears to be a much better
predictor of productivity gains than the probability of innovation predicted by ICT and
R&D investment. When we include both predicted R&D and ICT investment, the
innovation coefficient becomes negative, probably because of collinearity between
innovation that is predicted using predicted R&D and predicted R&D by itself (net of
the other variables in the regression). The interesting result is that when we use the skill
variable to help predict innovation (columns 4 to 6), the collinearity problem is
mitigated, and we find that innovative activity helps to explain productivity, unless we
also include the predicted R&D variable.

Columns 2, 3, and 6 of Table 5 also shows panel bootstrap standard errors, computed
by estimating the entire system (R&D selection and regression, the innovation probit,
and the labor productivity equation) on samples drawn from our data.12 This approach
takes account of the predicted nature of R&D and the probability of innovation, but as
can be seen in the table, the bootstrap standard errors are roughly the same as those


12
     The panel bootstrap is implemented by drawing repeated samples of the same size as our panel from
our data, using the firm (rather than the observation) as the unit drawn, estimating the entire model
recursively on each draw from the data, and averaging the resulting estimates. The number of
replications used for this procedure is shown in the tables.




                                                     18
computed in the conventional way allowing for heteroskedasticity and firm-level
random effects.

The remaining variables in the productivity equations are fairly standard and not very
affected by the choice of innovation variables. Capital intensity has a somewhat low
coefficient, albeit reasonable in light of the included industry dummies, which will tend
to depress it. Productivity falls with size and age, and in the case of size it reaches a
minimum at around 120 to 160 employees, suggesting that the larger medium-sized
firms in Italy are less productive than the smallest or largest.

Our conclusion is that there is a substantial return to both R&D and ICT investment in
Italian firms, as they both help to predict innovation and have a large impact on
productivity. The median R&D-doing firm in our sample has an R&D-to-sales ratio of
one percent. An output elasticity of 0.1 therefore implies a return of approximately 10
to every euro spent on R&D. For ICT, the number is even higher: the median ICT-
investing firm has an ICT-to-sales ratio of 0.2 per cent, which corresponds to a return
of 45 for every euro invested in ICT. Given these numbers, it is hard to escape the
conclusion that Italian firms may be underinvesting in these activities.


5.4.         Testing for complementarity of innovation strategies

Due to the high levels of correlation between the predicted probabilities of process,
product and organizational innovation, it was not possible to include them in the
productivity equation to get sensible results. Nevertheless, correlations as high as those
reported in Table A5 in the appendix, may suggest some degree of complementarity
between the different kinds of innovation, which is worth further exploration. To do
this, we run some tests of supermodularity on the production function (see Milgrom
and Roberts, 1990 for a definition of supermodularity). An important result we use for
our empirical analysis is that whenever the dimension of the set containing all the
combinations of the variables of interest is higher than 2, it is sufficient to check for
pairwise complementarity (Topkis, 1978 and 1998). Recall that in our data we have
four variables for innovation outcomes (process innovation, product innovation,
process related organizational innovation and product related organizational
innovation), all measured with a 0/1 dummy variable: therefore, each combination of
innovation outcome can be expressed with a four-element vector like (0,0,0,0),
                                             19
(1,0,0,0),…, (1,1,1,1) for a total of 24=16 possibilities. Since we check pairwise
supermodularity, we must test 24 inequality constraints.13 Results, reported on Table 6,
indicate that there is no overall complementarity between the four kinds of innovation.
If anything, some of the innovation strategies appear to be substitutes, although we are
reluctant to draw strong conclusions given the high level of correlation among the
predicted innovation dummies, and the fact that with 24 such tests, one would expect
that one or two might be significant at the 5 per cent level.


6. ICT and R&D: complements or substitutes?

Despite the difficulties in measuring innovative activity, what emerges from the
estimation of the modified CDM model is that both R&D (actual or predicted) and ICT
investment make a significant, positive contribution to the firms’ ability to innovate and
to their productivity. Of course, the channels through which two kinds of investment
exert their effects are not the same. As a consequence, the question whether R&D and
ICT are complements or substitutes is a legitimate one, especially for a country like
Italy where the presence of small firms is massive and innovation is often embedded in
machinery and in technology adoption. In this specific case, we would like to know
whether marginal returns to R&D increase as ICT investment increases and vice versa.

As we did in the previous section, we perform a supermodularity test to check whether
there is complementarity between R&D and ICT with regards to firms’ ability to
innovate and their productivity. We do this test in two ways: first, as in the previous
section we use dummy variables for the presence of R&D and ICT investment. Second,
we use predicted or actual log levels of R&D and ICT investment per employee. In the
first case, if the returns to ICT and R&D together are higher than the returns to the
R&D and ICT alone, we can conclude that they are complementary. In the second case



13
   For example to check whether process and product innovation are complementary we must look at 4
inequalities with all the possible combinations of presence/absence of process and product related
organizational innovation. For process and product innovation with process and product related
organizational innovation the condition to be satisfied is: QP(1,1,1,1)-QP(1,0,1,1)-
QP(0,1,1,1)+QP(0,0,1,1)0, where QP(.) is the coefficient corresponding to the predicted probability
from the quadrivariate probit used as a dependent variable in the productivity equation. The remaining
inequalities are analogous.



                                                 20
we merely check the sign and significance of an interaction term between R&D and
ICT intensity: if it is positive, the two types of investment are complements in
generating innovation or productivity, at least in our data (we cannot check that this
result holds everywhere, as would be required for supermodularity).

We first run a bivariate probit where the dependent variables are the presence/absence
of R&D and ICT, with a few firm-level control variables (Table A6, columns 1 and 2),
to recover the predicted probabilities of doing R&D, ICT and both, to be used later in
the complementarity tests. In the middle two columns of Table A6, the impact of the
presence of R&D and ICT investment (actual and predicted) on labor productivity is
estimated: the null of no complementarity cannot be rejected.

The same exercise for innovation is reported on Table A7. Again, using both actual and
predictions, R&D and ICT turn out to be neither complements nor substitutes, since the
value of the test is never significantly different from zero. Essentially, what the table
says is that the impact on innovation of adding ICT investment to a firm is not affected
whether it does R&D or not. Our interpretation is that while these two kinds of
investment are very different from each other – R&D is risky and leads to intangible
assets, ICT reflects more an investment and it is basically embodied technological
change – they both contribute to the development of innovations and to productivity,
but through different channels.

In the final three columns of Table A6, we report the results of the labor productivity
regression that includes both R&D and ICT investment, and their interaction. When we
use the actual levels of investment or our preferred model with predicted R&D and
actual ICT investment, the interaction term is clearly zero, implying no
complementarity or substitution. When we include the predicted values of both
variables, their coefficients are large and of opposite sign and the interaction term
becomes slightly negative. We interpret this result as another manifestation of the
limitations of instrumenting two somewhat similar variables using the same set of
predictors (as we saw in the case of the innovation variables), and conclude that R&D
and ICT are indeed unrelated in their impact on productivity.




                                           21
7. Conclusions

In this paper we examine the firm level relationships between product, process and
organizational innovation, productivity, and two of their major determinants, namely
R&D and ICT, using data on firms from a single European country, Italy. The element
of novelty of our approach is that we treat ICT in parallel with R&D as an input to
innovation rather than simply as an input of the production function. By doing this, we
acknowledge the existence of possible complementarities among different types of
innovation inputs. Our empirical evidence is based on a large unbalanced panel data
sample of Italian manufacturing firms in the 1995-2006 period, constructed from the
four consecutive waves of the “Survey on Manufacturing Firms” conducted by
Unicredit. We extend the CDM model to include an equation for ICT as an enabler of
innovation and organizational innovation as an indicator of innovation output. We find
that R&D and ICT both contribute to innovation, even if to a different extent. R&D
seems to be the most relevant input for innovation, but if we keep in mind that 34 per
cent of the firms in our sample invest in R&D while 68 per cent have investment in
ICT, the role of technological change embodied in ICT should not be underestimated.
Importantly, ICT and R&D contribute to productivity both directly and indirectly
through the innovation equation, but they are neither complements nor substitutes.
However, individually they each appear to have large impacts on productivity,
suggesting some underinvestment in these activities by Italian firms.

Although we looked briefly at the role of skills in innovation, finding that a simple
measure of the white collar worker share had substantial predictive power and was
complementary with R&D, we have been unable to study the role of skills in detail due
to data constraints. There is some consensus in the literature about the enabling role of
skills with respect to organizational innovation and, in turns, to the effectiveness of ICT
investment (Greenan et al, 2001, Bugamelli and Pagano, 2004), but we found this
difficult to identify using the limited information on organizational innovation available
to us.

A relevant, more general result worth to be further explored in the future, is related to
the way innovation is measured. Although definitions of product, process and
organizational innovation are standardized, being binary variable (yes/no), on one side


                                            22
they fail to measure the height of the innovation step, on the other they do not capture
the complexity of the innovation processes within the firm.




                                          23
References
Black, S. E., and L. M. Lynch (2001). How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices
        and Information Technology on Productivity, Review of Economics and Statistics
        83(3), 434–45.
Bresnahan, T. F., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. M. Hitt (2002). Information Technology, Workplace
       Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 117(1), 339–76.
Brynjolfsson, E., and L. M. Hitt (1995). Information Technology as a Factor of Production: The
        Role of Differences Among Firms, Economics of Innovation and New Technology 3
        (January).
Brynjolfsson, E., and L. M. Hitt (2000). Beyond Computation: Information Technology,
        Organizational Transformation and Business Performance. Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 14 (4), 23-48.
Brynjolfsson, E., L. M. Hitt, and S. Yang (2002). Intangible Assets: Computers and
        Organizational Capital. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 137-199.
Brynjolfsson, E., and S. Yang (1998). The Intangible Benefits and Costs of Computer
        Investments: Evidence from the Financial Markets. MIT Sloan School and Stanford
        Graduate School of Business. Manuscript.
Bugamelli, M. and P. Pagano (2004), Barriers to Investment in ICT, Applied Economics,
      36(20), pp. 2275-2286.
Cappellari, L., and S.P. Jenkins (2003), Multivariate Probit Regression Using Simulated
       Maximum Likelihood, Stata Journal, 3(3), pp. 278-294 (http://www.stata-
       journal.com/sjpdf.html?article=st0045)
Cappellari, L., and S.P. Jenkins (2006), Calculation of Multivariate Normal Probabilities by
       Simulation, with Applications to Maximum Simulated Likelihood Estimation, ISER
       Working Paper, n. 2006-16.
Castiglione C. (2009). ICT Investment and Firm Technical Efficiency, paper presented at
        EWEPA 2010, Pisa, June.
Cerquera D. and G. J. Klein (2008). Endogenous Firm Heterogeneity, ICT and R&D
       Incentives, ZEW Discussion Paper No. 08-126.
Crépon B., E. Duguet and J. Mairesse (1998). Research, Innovation and Productivity: An
       Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level, Economics of Innovation and New
       Technology, 7(2), 115-158.
Draca M., R. Sadun and J. Van Reenen (2007). Productivity and ICT: A Review of the
      Evidence, in Mansell, R., C. Avgerou, D. Quah and R. Silverstone (Eds.), The Oxford
      Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies, Oxford University Press.
Ferrante, F. (2010). Educational/skill mismatch dei laureati: cosa ci dicono i dati AlmaLaurea?,
        in XII Rapporto sulla condizione occupazionale dei laureati, Il Mulino 2010.
Greenan, N., and J. Mairesse (2000). Computers and productivity in France: Some evidence.
       Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 9(3), 275-315.
Greenan N., A. Topiol-Bensaid and J. Mairesse (2001). Information Technology and Research
       and Development Impacts on Productivity and Skills: Looking for Correlations on
       French Firm Level Data, in Information Technology, Productivity and Economic
       Growth, M. Pohjola ed., Oxford University Press, 119-148.

                                              24
Greene, W.H. (2003). Econometric Analysis, 5th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, pp.
        931-933.
Griffith R., E. Huergo, B. Peters and J. Mairesse (2006). Innovation and Productivity across
         Four European Countries, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 22(4), 483-498.
Hall, B. H. and J. Lerner (2010). The Financing of R&D and Innovation. In Hall, B. H. and N.
        Rosenberg, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Elsevier, forthcoming April.
Hall B. H., F. Lotti and J. Mairesse (2008). Employment, Innovation and Productivity:
       Evidence from Italian MicroData, Industrial and Corporate Change, 17 (4), 813-839.
Hall B. H., F. Lotti and J. Mairesse (2009). Innovation and Productivity in SMEs: Empirical
        Evidence for Italy, Small Business Economics, 33, 13-33.
Hall B. H. and J. Mairesse (2009). Corporate R&D Returns, Knowledge Economists’ Policy
        Brief N° 6, DG Research, European Commission.
Mairesse, J. and Y. Kocoglu (2005), Issues in Measuring Knowledge: The Contribution of
       R&D and ICT to Growth, Paper presented at the Advancing Knowledge and the
       Knowledge Economy conference, National Academies, Washington, DC.
Mansfield, E. (1968), Industrial Research and Technological Innovation: an Econometric
       Analysis, W.W. Norton & Co, New York.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1990), The Economics of Modern Manufacturing, Technology,
       Strategy and Organizations, American Economic Review, 80, 511-528.
Moncada-Paternò-Castello, P., C. Ciupagea, K. Smith, A. Tübke and M. Tubbs (2009). Does
      Europe perform too little corporate R&D? A comparison of EU and non-EU corporate
      R&D performance, Seville, Spain: IPTS Working Paper on Corporate R&D and
      Innovation No. 11.
O’Sullivan, M. (2006). The EU’S R&D Deficit and Innovation Policy, Report of the Expert
        Group of Knowledge Economists, DG Research, European Commission.
Polder M., G. Van Leeuwen, P. Mohnen and W. Raymond (2009). Productivity Effects of
       Innovation Modes, Statistics Netherlands Discussion Paper n° 09033.
Topkis, D.M. (1978). Minimizing a Submodular Function on a Lattice, Operations Research,
        26, 305–321.
Topkis, D.M. (1998), Supermodularity and complementarity, In: Kreps, D.M., Sargent, T.J.,
        Klemperer, P. (Eds.), Frontiers of Economic Research Series. Princeton Univ. Press,
        Princeton.
Van Ark B., R. Inklaar and R. H. McGuckin (2003). ICT and productivity in Europe and the
      United States: Where do the differences come from?, CESifo Economic Studies, Vol.
      49 (3), 295-318.
Van Reenen J. and L. Chennells (2002). The Effects of Technological Change on Skills, Wages
       and Employment: A Survey of the Micro-econometric Evidence , in Productivity,
       Inequality and the Digital Economy: A Transatlantic Perspective, N. Greenan, Y.
       Lhorty and J. Mairesse eds., MIT Press, 175-225.




                                             25
Appendix
Variable Definitions

R&D engagement: dummy variable that takes value 1 if the firm has positive R&D
expenditures over the three year of each wave of the survey.

R&D intensity: R&D expenditures per employee (thousand Euros), in real terms and in
logs.

Process innovation: dummy variable that takes value 1 if the firm declares to have
introduced a process innovation during the three years of the survey.

Product innovation: dummy variable that takes value 1 if the firm declares to have
introduced a product innovation during the three years of the survey.

Process related organizational innovation: dummy variable that takes value 1 if the
firm declares to have introduced a process related organizational innovation during the
three years of the survey.

Product related organizational innovation: dummy variable that takes value 1 if the
firm declares to have introduced a product related organizational innovation during the
three years of the survey.

Share of sales with new products: percentage of the sales in the last year of the survey
coming from new or significantly improved products (in percentage).

Labor productivity: real sales per employee (thousand Euros), in logs.

Investment intensity: investment in machinery per employee (thousand Euros), in logs
(ICT excluded).

ICT investment intensity: investment in ICT per employee (thousand Euros), in logs
(three year average).

Public support: dummy variable that takes value 1 if the firm has received a subsidy
during the three years of the survey.

Regional – National – European –International (non EU) competitors: dummy
variables to indicate the location of the firm’s competitors.

Large competitors: dummy variable that takes value 1 if the firm declares to have large
firms as competitors.
                                            26
Employees: number of employees, headcount.

Share executive and white collar: number of executive and white collar employees,
divided by the number of employees.

Age: firm’s age (in years).

Industry dummies: a set of indicators for a 2-digits industry classification.

Time dummies: a set of indicators for the year of the survey.

Region dummies: a set of indicators for the region where the firm is located (20
variables).

Wave dummies: a set of indicators for firm’s presence or absence in the three waves of
the survey




                                            27
                                             Figure 1


                             R&D and ICT investment relative to GDP
                                       (whole economy)
6.0%


5.0%                                                                                              ICT in
                                                                                                  EU15
                                                                                                  ICT in
4.0%                                                                                              US
                                                                                                  R&D in
                                                                                                  EU15
3.0%
                                                                                                  R&D in
                                                                                                  US
2.0%


1.0%


0.0%
       1995         1997          1999     2001        2003       2005       2007




                                             Figure 2

                   ICT investment share in Gross fixed capital formation (OECD data)
       35



       30                                                                              Italy
                                                                                       Austria
                                                                                       Portugal
       25
                                                                                       Spain
                                                                                       Japan
       20                                                                              Germany
                                                                                       France
                                                                                       Finland
       15
                                                                                       Switzerland
                                                                                       Belgium
       10                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                                       Denmark
                                                                                       United Kingdom
       5                                                                               Sweden
                                                                                       United States

       0
            1991   1993    1995     1997   1999    2001    2003    2005    2007




                                                  28
           Figure 3 – Basic and Augmented CDM model



              R&D



         Innovation
(process, product, organizational)
                                                      ICT




         Productivity


       Basic CDM model                     ICT augmented CDM model




                             29
                         Table 1 - Descriptive statistics, unbalanced sample
 Period: 1995-2006
                                                 14,294             Firms with large firms as
Num. of observations (firms)                     (9,850)            competitors                         39.1%


N. of employees (mean/median)                    114/ 35            Firms with regional competitors     16.1%


Age (mean/median)                                27/ 22.5           Firms with national competitors     41.9%


Firms with non-ICT investment                     86.7%             Firms with EU competitors           17.4%
                                                                    Firms with international
Firms with R&D                                    34.3%             competitors                         14.0%


Firms with ICT                                    68.3%             Firms within a group                24.7%
Share of executives in employees
(mean/median)                                  1.8% /0.0%           Firms subsidies’ recipients         37.2%
Share of white collar workers in
employees (mean/median)                      26.2%/ 21.7%           Firms with product innovation       38.9%
non-ICT investment intensity for
firms that invest* (mean/median)                8.67/ 4.55          Firms with process innovation       50.9%
R&D intensity for R&D-doers*                                        Firms with both product and
(mean/median)                                   3.79/ 1.66          process innovation                  26.9%
ICT intensity for ICT investors*                                    Firms with organizational
(mean/median)                                   0.79/ 0.34          innovation for product innovation   15.0%
Average capital intensity*                                          Firms with organizational
(mean/median)                                   52.0/ 25.8          innovation for process innovation   24.0%
Labor productivity*
(mean/median)                                 219.5/ 157.8          Firms with high skill intensity     39.0%

*Units are real thousands of euros (base year=2000) per employee.
                     Table 2 - Innovation relationships across firms
                                           Investing in ICT
                                            No         Yes     Total

                              No          24.8%      40.9%     65.7%
Doing R&D                     Yes          6.9%      27.4%     34.3%
                              Total       31.7%      68.3%


                                                                               Org change for
                                          Product innovation                 process innovation
                                            No        Yes                      No         Yes

                              No          37.1%      12.0%             No    44.7%       4.4%
Process innovation            Yes         24.0%      26.9%             Yes   31.3%      19.6%

Organizational change for     No          59.1%      25.9%             No    71.2%      13.8%
product innovation            Yes          2.0%      13.0%             Yes    4.8%      10.2%


                                      Patterns of innovation
                                                     Cum                      R&D-        ICT-
Innovation dummy patterns       Obs       Share      share                   doers     investors
None                           4,683      32.8%     32.8%                    13.8%       27.7%
Process only                   2,199      15.4%     48.1%                    12.1%       15.5%
Product and process            2,087      14.6%     62.7%                    20.1%       14.6%
All (prod/proc/org)            1,755      12.3%     75.0%                    22.1%       15.3%
Process and organizational     1,234       8.6%     83.7%                     9.7%       10.3%
Product only                   1,212       8.5%     92.1%                    12.0%        7.7%
Organizational only             624        4.4%     96.5%                     4.3%        4.6%
Product and organizational      500        3.5%     100.0%                    5.8%        4.2%
Total                         14,294                                         34.2%       64.1%
Any product innovation         5,554      38.9%                              60.0%       41.8%
Any process innovation         7,275      50.9%                              64.1%       55.7%
Any organizational change      4,113      28.8%                              42.0%       34.4%
            Table 3 - R&D, ICT, and non-ICT investment per employee
                                                   Sample selection                 OLS                       OLS
Dependent variable                                     Log R&D                    Log ICT               Log investment
                                                     per employee               per employee             per employee
Log employment                                         -0.242***                    -0.126***               -0.050***
                                                        (0.029)                      (0.019)                 (0.017)
Log employment squared                                  0.060***                    0.045***                0.037***
                                                         (0.012)                     (0.009)                 (0.007)
Log age                                                  -0.049                       0.031                  -0.025
                                                         (0.030)                     (0.021)                 (0.020)
Log age squared                                           0.011                       0.007                   0.009
                                                         (0.029)                     (0.020)                 (0.019)

D(Large firm competitors)                                 0.044                       0.014                   0.024
                                                         (0.039)                     (0.027)                 (0.026)
D(Regional competitors)                                  -0.107                      -0.080                   0.028
                                                         (0.082)                     (0.057)                 (0.049)
D(National competitors)                                  -0.081                      -0.007                  -0.018
                                                         (0.072)                     (0.050)                 (0.044)

D(European competitors)                                 0.225***                      0.067                   0.029
                                                         (0.079)                     (0.056)                 (0.049)
D(International competitors)                            0.329***                      0.086                   0.017
                                                         (0.082)                     (0.058)                 (0.051)

D(Received subsidies)                                   0.398***                    0.089***                0.451***
                                                         (0.043)                     (0.028)                 (0.026)

D(Member of a group)                                    0.241***                    0.239***                0.092***
                                                         (0.047)                     (0.035)                 (0.032)
Employees at minimum                                       350                        190                       90
Chisq or F-test for competitor vars#                     80.1***                     3.3***                     0.8
Chisq or F-test for industry dummies                     277.7***                    7.3***                   31.7***
Chisq or F-test for regional dummies                     68.7***                     3.6***                    1.7**
Chisq or F-test for time dummies                         224.0***                    15.0***                  40.0***
Chisq or F-test for wave dummies                           18.2                      4.8***                   3.9***

Standard error                                       1.278 (0.022)                    1.237                    1.283
R-squared                                                0.175                        0.059                    0.100
Number of observations                             14294 (4896=1)                     9,678                   12,034
Coefficients and their standard errors are shown. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the ﬁrm
level.
* = signiﬁcant at 10%, ** = signiﬁcant at 5%, *** = signiﬁcant at 1% .

Industry, wave, regional, and time dummies are included in all equations.
Reference groups: D(provincial competitors), Lombardia, 1997, first wave pattern.
# The first column shows a chi-squared test, and the others show F-tests.
                              Table 4 - Probability of Innovating
                                                     (1)                                      (2)
Dependent variable                             Any innovation                           Any innovation
                                         Coeff (s.e.)#    Marginal               Coeff (s.e.)#     Marginal

Predicted R&D intensity                   0.611***                0.199            0.538***                0.189
  (in logs)                             (0.046,0.053)                           (0.052, 0.058)

Share of exec & white                                                               0.118*                 0.041
 collar workers                                                                 (0.067, 0.063)

Interaction of pred. R&D                                                           0.221**                 0.078
 and skilled share                                                              (0.087, 0.094)

ICT inv. per employee                      0.025**                0.015             0.022*                 0.008
  (in logs)                             (0.012,0.012)                           (0.012, 0.012)

D (no ICT investment)                     -0.374***              -0.128           -0.370***               -0.134
                                        (0.029,0.028)                           (0.029, 0.028)

Investment per employee                    0.105***               0.023             0.106***               0.037
  (in logs)                             (0.010,0.009)                           (0.010, 0.009)

D (no investment)                          -0.176***             -0.097             -0.178***             -0.065
                                        (0.037,0.032)                           (0.037, 0.032)

Log employment                            0.299***                0.095            0.304***                0.107
                                        (0.017,0.028)                           (0.017, 0.028)

Log employment squared                    -0.067***              -0.021           -0.069***               -0.024
                                        (0.008,0.012)                           (0.007, 0.012)

Log age                                     0.031                 0.010             0.031*                 0.011
                                        (0.019,0.022)                           (0.019, 0.022)

Log age squared                             -0.009               -0.003             -0.008                -0.003
                                        (0.018.0.023)                           (0.018, 0.023)

Employees at max (s.e.)                           438 (87)***                               425 (85)***
Number of observations                                14294                                     14294
Pseudo R-squared                                      0.101                                     0.102
Log likelihood                                       -8126.6                                   -8118.1
Bootstrap replications                                 100                                       100
Coefficients and their standard errors are shown. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at
the ﬁrm level.
* = signiﬁcant at 10%, ** = signiﬁcant at 5%, *** = signiﬁcant at 1% .
#The second s.e. in this column is a bootstrap estimate based on the R&D equations, with the number of replications
given.
Industry, wave, regional, and time dummies are included in all equations.
Reference groups: D(provincial competitors), Lombardia, 1997, first wave pattern.
A dummy for missing skill variables and its interaction with R&D intensity are included in column (2).
                                            Table 5 - Labor productivity equation
Dependent variable                                            Labor productivity = Log(net sales per employee)
                                             Probability predicted by Table 4(1)                Prob predicted by Table 4(2)

Predicted probability of any            0.275***            0.111        -0.310***                 0.372***           0.285***            0.055
  innovation                             (0.057)       (0.073,0.104)# (0.102, 0.109)#               (0.057)            (0.074)       (0.101, 0.108)#

Predicted R&D intensity                                                        0.166***                                                     0.095***
  (in logs)                                                                 (0.028, 0.038)                                               (0.027, 0.039)

ICT inv. per employee                                     0.092***             0.098***                               0.090***              0.093***
  (in logs)                                             (0.006,0.005)       (0.006, 0.006)                             (0.006)           (0.006, 0.005)

D (no ICT investment)                                     -0.097***           -0.152***                              -0.070***             -0.101***
                                                        (0.018,0.020)       (0.020, 0.021)                            (0.018)            (0.020, 0.021)

Log (capital per employee)              0.150***          0.140***             0.147***            0.146***           0.134***              0.138***
                                         (0.006)        (0.006,0.008)       (0.006, 0.007)          (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.006, 0.007)

Log employment                          -0.109***         -0.089***           -0.036***            -0.116***         -0.101***             -0.071***
                                         (0.010)        (0.010,0.009)       (0.013, 0.013)          (0.010)           (0.010)            (0.013, 0.013)

Log employment squared                  0.043***          0.038***             0.023***            0.044***           0.040***              0.031***
                                         (0.004)        (0.004,0.004)       (0.005, 0.004)          (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.005, 0.004)

Log age                                 -0.028***         -0.029***            -0.021**            -0.028***         -0.029***              -0.024**
                                         (0.010)        (0.010,0.010)        (0.010,0.011)          (0.010)           (0.010)            (0.010, 0.011)

Log age squared                           -0.005            -0.006               -0.008              -0.005            -0.006                -0.007
                                          (0.009)       (0.009,0.009)        (0.009.0.009)           (0.009)           (0.009)           (0.009, 0.009)

Employees at minimum (s.e.)            167 (15)***       119 (14)***          103 (17)***         176 (15)***       166 (15)***           148 (17)***

Standard error                            0.606              0.599               0.598               0.605              0.599               0.598
R-squared                                 0.238              0.256               0.257               0.239              0.256               0.257
Number of observations                    14294              14294               14294               14294              14294               14294
Bootstrap replications                                        25                  100                                                        100

Coefficients and their standard errors are shown. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the ﬁrm level.
* = signiﬁcant at 10%, ** = signiﬁcant at 5%, *** = signiﬁcant at 1% .

#The second s.e. in this column is a panel bootstrap s.e. based on the R&D and innovation equations with the number of replications given.
Industry, wave, regional, and time dummies are included in all equations.
Reference groups: D(provincial competitors), Lombardia, 1997, first wave pattern.
   Table 6 - Results of complementarity tests using four equation innovation
              model (process, product, org process, org product)
                                                                                  p-value
                                                                                  of one-
                                                  Test value   F-test    t-test              S.e.
                                                                                   tail t-
Complementarity test                                                                test

                               Using Quadrivariate Model of innovation
org proc and org prod / without proc and prod       1.323       0.13     0.361     0.359     3.668
org proc and org prod / without proc, with prod    -2.959       0.42     0.648     0.258     4.566
org proc and org prod / without prod, with proc    -0.098       0.00     0.032     0.487     3.104
org proc and org prod / with proc and prod         -0.495       0.18     0.424     0.336     1.166
prod and org prod / without proc and org proc      -3.262 *     2.27     1.507     0.066     2.165
prod and org prod / without proc, with org proc    -4.398       1.14     1.068     0.143     4.119
prod and org prod / without org proc, with proc    -4.683       0.61     0.781     0.217     5.996
prod and org prod / with proc and org proc         -1.934       1.18     1.086     0.139     1.780
prod and org proc / without proc and org prod       4.281       1.05     1.025     0.153     4.178
prod and org proc / without proc, with org prod    -0.255       0.07     0.265     0.396     0.964
prod and org proc / without org prod, with proc     2.860       0.35     0.592     0.277     4.835
prod and org proc / with proc and org prod          2.209       0.24     0.490     0.312     4.509
proc and org prod / without prod and org proc       3.505       0.54     0.735     0.231     4.769
proc and org prod / without prod, with org proc     2.369       1.30     1.140     0.127     2.077
proc and org prod / without org proc, with prod    -0.777       0.04     0.200     0.421     3.884
proc and org prod / with prod and org proc          1.972       0.19     0.436     0.331     4.524
proc and org proc / without prod and org prod      -0.925       0.45     0.671     0.251     1.379
proc and org proc / without prod, with org prod    -5.461 *     1.97     1.404     0.080     3.891
proc and org proc / without org prod, with prod    -5.207       0.63     0.794     0.214     6.560
proc and org proc / with prod and org prod         -5.858 **    2.89     1.700     0.045     3.446
proc and prod / without org proc and org prod       0.707       0.90     0.949     0.171     0.745
proc and prod / without org proc, with org prod    -3.830       0.83     0.911     0.181     4.204
proc and prod / without org prod. with org proc    -0.429       0.01     0.100     0.460     4.293
proc and prod / with org proc and org prod         -1.081       0.05     0.224     0.412     4.833
                                                 Table A1
                                  Industrial distribution of the sample
                                                                         Share     Share    Median   Median
                                                                       nonzero   nonzero   R&D per   ICT per
Sector                                         Firms    Observations      R&D        ICT    empl.*    empl.*
Food and beverage                               984           1,397     27.8%     64.0%     1291.1    342.5
Textiles & apparel                              829           1,215     33.0%     68.0%     1842.6    322.4
Leather & other                                 297             427     29.7%     69.6%     1125.9    326.0
Footwear                                        390             560     31.3%     63.6%     1294.1    196.5
Wood products                                   275             416     24.3%     65.6%      717.3    271.9
Paper products                                  295             430     18.1%     65.8%     1067.6    313.0
Publishing & printing                           314             429     17.5%     71.1%     1291.1    598.6
Oil refining                                     43              59     32.2%     66.1%     1700.7    636.0
Chemicals                                       494             699     46.5%     65.4%     2646.8    438.4
Rubber & plastics                               559             818     33.1%     66.6%     1597.4    329.8
Stone, clay, glass                              644             927     27.3%     61.6%     1273.5    230.1
Primary metals                                  396             610     23.4%     66.2%     1320.1    302.3
Fabricated metals                             1,217           1,756     26.5%     68.8%     1702.4    309.4
Machinery                                     1,423           2,142     47.4%     73.1%     1912.8    390.5
Electrical mach & com                           419             576     47.7%     74.8%     2086.4    432.8
Electronics                                     205             293     53.6%     73.7%     2709.8    410.1
Scientific instrument                           193             299     56.5%     72.2%     2885.2    499.9
Motor vehicles                                  204             275     41.5%     74.5%     1275.8    320.9
Rail and trams                                   94             131     41.2%     70.2%     1812.9    266.8
Misc manufacturing                              575             835     34.6%     70.1%     1327.8    299.1
Total                                         9,850          14,294    34.2%     68.3%     1662.7     337.0

                                                  Distribution by year
                                                Firms                    Share     Share    Median   Median
                                             starting                  nonzero   nonzero   R&D per   ICT per
Year                                          in year   Observations      R&D        ICT    empl.*    empl.*

1997                                          4,006           4,006     29.8%     69.0%     1335.7    344.8
2000                                          2,887           4,065     35.6%     80.8%     1519.0    322.8
2003                                          1,460           3,451     41.2%     68.5%     1443.9    298.6
2006                                          1,497           2,772     30.0%     48.9%     3296.1    446.9
Total                                         9,850          14,294    34.2%     68.3%     1662.7     337.0

* in euros, for firms with nonzero values.
                                                    Table A2
                                    Sample distribution by region and year
                                                                                              Shares
Area   Code   Regione               1998    2001     2004      2007    Total R&D doer        ICT Innovator Org. innov
  1      1    Piemonte                407     386     324       294     1411    39.1%      70.0%     64.4%    31.5%
  1      2    Valle D'Aosta             4       4       5         2       15    60.0%      73.3%     60.0%    46.7%
  1      3    Liguria                  45      41      39        28      153    37.9%      73.9%     64.1%    25.5%
  1      4    Lombardia             1,179   1,100     919       848    4,046    35.4%      69.4%     64.4%    30.2%
  2      5    Trentino Alto Adige      40      49      55        32      176    39.8%      71.6%     69.9%    35.8%
  2      6    Veneto                  579     492     465       347     1883    34.3%      73.2%     65.5%    29.1%
  2      7    Friuli Venezia          136     118     116        92      462    37.7%      70.1%     63.0%    32.9%
  2      8    Emilia Romagna          429     486     464       340     1719    38.2%      66.6%     61.7%    27.9%
  3      9    Marche                  158     192     145       122      617    31.6%      69.5%     61.9%    25.4%
  3     10    Toscana                 408     481     327       224     1440    32.6%      64.0%     59.0%    26.3%
  3     11    Umbria                   34      59      51        52      196    40.3%      66.8%     65.8%    30.1%
  3     12    Lazio                    79      97      86        70      332    33.4%      66.6%     63.0%    34.9%
  4     13    Campania                121     173     124        87      505    27.1%      68.9%     60.2%    23.6%
  4     14    Abruzzo                  85      93     109        60      347    28.2%      63.7%     60.2%    23.9%
  4     15    Molise                   15      10      11         7       43    30.2%      53.5%     55.8%    27.9%
  4     16    Puglia                  110     136      84        71      401    22.2%      60.3%     58.9%    23.9%
  4     17    Basilicata               16       9      10         8       43    20.9%      62.8%     51.2%    30.2%
  4     18    Calabria                  9      17      14        12       52    19.2%      69.2%     57.7%    21.2%
  4     19    Sicilia                 105      84      69        39      297    18.5%      62.6%     56.9%    21.5%
  4     20    Sardegna                 47      38      34        37      156    19.9%      57.1%     62.2%    32.1%
              Total                 4006    4065     3451      2772   14294    34.3%      68.3%     62.9%    28.8%

                                    Sample distribution by broad area and year
 1            Northwest             1635    1531     1287      1172    5625       36.5%    69.7%     64.4%     30.4%
 2            Northeast             1184    1145     1100       811    4240       36.5%    70.1%     63.8%     29.3%
 3            Central                679     829      609       468    2585       33.1%    65.9%     60.7%     27.5%
 4            South                  508     560      455       321    1844       24.0%    63.6%     59.2%     24.3%
              Total                 4006    4065     3451      2772   14294      34.3%    68.3%     62.9%     28.8%
                                    Table A3 - R&D equation with selection
                                                          (1)                    (2)                   (3)              (4)
                                                        Probit                  OLS                  Sample selection model
Dependent variable                                       Prob                 Log R&D                 Prob           Log R&D
                                                     R&D nonzero            per employee           R&D nonzero     per employee
Log employment                                         0.232***              -0.326***               0.233***              -0.242***
                                                        (0.016)               (0.026)                 (0.016)               (0.028)
Log employment squared                                 -0.037***              0.075***              -0.036***              0.060***
                                                        (0.007)                (0.011)               (0.007)                (0.011)
Log age                                                   0.021                -0.056*                 0.020                -0.050*
                                                         (0.018)               (0.029)                (0.018)               (0.028)
Log age squared                                           -0.003                0.012                  -0.005                 0.011
                                                         (0.018)               (0.029)                (0.018)                (0.028)

D(Large firm competitors)                               0.057**                 0.024                0.058**                  0.044
                                                        (0.025)                (0.038)               (0.025)                 (0.038)
D(Regional competitors)                                   0.031                 -0.123                 0.032                  -0.108
                                                         (0.047)               (0.080)                (0.048)                (0.082)
D(National competitors)                                0.126***                -0.135*               0.125***                 -0.083
                                                        (0.041)                (0.070)                (0.042)                (0.071)

D(European competitors)                                0.388***                 0.079                0.387***              0.224***
                                                        (0.046)                (0.075)                (0.047)               (0.079)
D(International competitors)                           0.444***                0.172**               0.447***              0.330***
                                                        (0.048)                (0.079)                (0.049)               (0.081)

D(Received subsidies)                                  0.307***               0.293***               0.309***              0.400***
                                                        (0.026)                (0.041)                (0.026)               (0.041)

D(Member of a group)                                    0.079**               0.218***               0.081***              0.243***
                                                        (0.030)                (0.045)                (0.030)               (0.045)


Chi-squared (5) for selection                                                  34.1***
                                                                               (0.000)

Standard error                                                                  1.212                      1.279*** (0.021)
Correlation coefficient                                           0.0                                      0.416*** (0.042)
Number of observations (nonzero)                              14294 (4896)                                   14294 (4896)
Loglikelihood                                           -8218.99        -7853.68                               -16067.6

Coefficients and their standard errors are shown. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the ﬁrm level.
* = signiﬁcant at 10%, ** = signiﬁcant at 5%, *** = signiﬁcant at 1% .

Industry, wave, regional, and time dummies are included in all equations.
Reference groups: D(provincial competitors), Lombardia, 1997, first wave pattern.
# The first, third, and fourth columns show chi-squared tests, and the second shows F-tests.
                        Table A4 - Probability of Innovating
                                                      Quadrivariate probit
Dependent variable                          Innovation            Organizational innovation
                                       Process       Product       Process         Product

Predicted R&D intensity               0.426***           0.568***           0.505***           0.492***
  (in logs)                            (0.043)            (0.043)            (0.045)            (0.049)

ICT inv. per employee                   0.000            0.030***             0.012            0.061***
  (in logs)                            (0.011)            (0.011)            (0.012)            (0.013)

D (no ICT investment)                -0.286***           -0.291**          -0.372***          -0.383***
                                      (0.028)             (0.028)           (0.031)            (0.034)

Investment per employee               0.122***           0.035***           0.059***            0.023**
  (in logs)                            (0.010)            (0.010)            (0.011)            (0.012)

D (no investment)                    -0.132***          -0.080***          -0.116***          -0.090***
                                       (0.037)            (0.038)            (0.043)            (0.047)

Log employment                        0.236***           0.280***           0.255***           0.255***
                                       (0.016)            (0.016)            (0.017)            (0.019)

Log employment squared               -0.035***          -0.053***          -0.055***          -0.053***
                                      (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.008)            (0.008)

Log age                                 0.008            0.065***             0.029             0.038*
                                       (0.018)            (0.019)            (0.019)            (0.022)

Log age squared                         0.004             -0.011             -0.029             -0.031
                                       (0.017)            (0.018)            (0.019)            (0.020)

Employees at max (s.e.)                  1246                660                477                521
Number of observations                                              14,294
Log likelihood                                                     -27,388.3

Coefficients and their standard errors are shown. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustered at the ﬁrm level.
* = signiﬁcant at 10%, ** = signiﬁcant at 5%, *** = signiﬁcant at 1% .
Industry, wave, regional, and time dummies are included in all equations.
Reference groups: D(provincial competitors), Lombardia, 1997, first wave pattern.
                    Table A5 - Correlation of innovation variables
                                                                                   Process-            Product-
                                              Process             Product         related org         related org
                                            innovation          innovation          change              change

                                                       Actual
Process innovation                             1.000
Product innovation                             0.292              1.000
Process-related org change                     0.346              0.128               1.000
Product-related org change                     0.163              0.412               0.433                 1.000

                                          Predicted latent variables*
Process innovation                           1.000
Product innovation                           0.400            1.000
Process-related org change                   0.587            0.462                   1.000
Product-related org change                   0.466            0.893                   0.719                 1.000

                                            Predicted probabilities*
Process innovation                            1.000
Product innovation                            0.396           1.000
Process-related org change                    0.674           0.285                   1.000
Product-related org change                    0.446           0.859                   0.544                 1.000

                             Estimated correlation of the disturbances*
Process innovation                      1.000
Product innovation                      0.449            1.000
Process-related org     change          0.551            0.184          1.000
Product-related org     change          0.295            0.624          0.640                               1.000

*These are computed from the estimates of the quadrivariate probit model for innovation shown in Table 4.
                                       Table A6: Performing formal R&D and ICT investment:
                                               complementarity tests for productivity
                                          Bivariate probit                  Labor productivity                                  Labor productivity
Dependent variable                       R&D           ICT                R&D and ICT dummies                                 R&D and ICT continuous
                                                                           actual      predicted                  actual           predicted      RD pred, ICT act

R&D investment                                                           0.090***           2.305***            0.055***                 -0.341***     0.104***
                                                                          (0.023)            (0.400)             (0.011)                  (0.057)       (0.023)

ICT investment                                                             0.005            -1.554***           0.066***                 1.015***      0.096***
                                                                          (0.014)            (0.195)             (0.008)                  (0.088)       (0.006)

R&D*ICT                                                                  0.072***           -0.557***              0.009                 -0.069**       0.009
                                                                          (0.016)            (0.119)              (0.007)                 (0.035)      (0.009)
Test for complementarity                                                  -0.023            -1.308***
                                                                          (0.026)            (0.358)
Log capital per employee                                                 0.157***           0.158***            0.140***                 0.154***      0.139***
                                                                          (0.006)            (0.006)             (0.006)                  (0.006)       (0.006)
Log employment                        0.232***         0.198***          -0.094***          -0.076***           -0.080***                -0.067***    -0.065***
                                       (0.016)          (0.016)           (0.009)            (0.012)             (0.009)                  (0.009)      (0.009)
Log employment squared               -0.037***        -0.058***          0.040***           0.015***            0.036***                 0.011***      0.030***
                                      (0.007)          (0.007)            (0.004)            (0.005)             (0.004)                  (0.004)       (0.004)
Log age                                 0.020           0.040**          -0.028***           -0.011             -0.028***                -0.067***     -0.023**
                                       (0.018)          (0.019)           (0.010)            (0.010)             (0.010)                  (0.011)       (0.010)
Log age squared                        -0.003            0.012            -0.005              0.003                -0.006                  -0.012       -0.007
                                       (0.018)          (0.018)           (0.009)            (0.009)              (0.009)                 (0.009)      (0.009)

D(Large firm competitors)             0.057**           0.051**
                                      (0.025)           (0.025)

D(Regional competitors)                 0.030          0.124***
                                       (0.048)          (0.044)
D(National competitors)               0.123***         0.178***
                                       (0.042)          (0.039)
D(European competitors)               0.385***         0.310***
                                       (0.047)          (0.046)
D(Intl competitors)                   0.440***         0.332***
                                       (0.049)          (0.049)

D(Received subsidies)                 0.309***         0.227***
                                       (0.026)          (0.027)

D(Member of a group)                  0.079***          -0.014
                                       (0.030)          (0.031)

Rho                                      0.243*** (0.015)
Log likelihood                               -16239.9
Std. error (R-squared)                                                0.606 (0.239) 0.605 (0.241)             0.597 (0.261)        0.602 (0.248)     0.598 (0.258)
Number of obs nonzero                   4,896            9,678           14,294        14,294                    14,294               14,294            14,294

Coefficients and their standard errors are shown. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the ﬁrm level.
The first two columns show the results of a bivariate probit for doing R&D and having ICT investment. The next two columns are complementarity
tests using the predicted and actual dummies for having R&D and ICT. The last two columns perform the test using the levels of R&D and ICT
together with dummies for their absence.
* = signiﬁcant at 10%, ** = signiﬁcant at 5%, *** = signiﬁcant at 1% .

Industry, wave, regional, and time dummies are included in all equations.
Reference groups: D(provincial competitors), Lombardia, 1997, first wave pattern.
                          Table A7: Innovation as a function of performing formal R&D and ICT investment:
                                                       complementarity tests
                                                                                                       Probit for innovation
Dependent variable:                            Process                         Product                     Org process                Org product           Any innovation

R&D and ICT dummies:                    actual        predicted         actual        predicted         actual        predicted    actual    predicted    actual     predicted
R&D investment nonzero                0.469***          0.377         0.737***          1.229         0.350***        2.660***    0.466***     1.065     0.825***    1.952**
                                       (0.048)         (0.802)         (0.048)         (0.827)         (0.054)         (0.902)     (0.058)    (0.962)     (0.053)    (0.873)
ICT investment nonzero                0.243***        1.215***        0.191***          0.051         0.337***         1.034**    0.259***     0.394     0.282***     0.803*
                                       (0.029)         (0.402)         (0.031)         (0.414)         (0.035)         (0.452)     (0.041)    (0.508)     (0.029)     (0.415)
Both R&D & ICT nonzero                0.716***        2.160***        0.929***        2.304***        0.692***        2.314***    0.781***   2.216***    1.117***    2.699***
                                       (0.034)         (0.250)         (0.034)         (0.255)         (0.037)         (0.278)     (0.041)    (0.309)     (0.037)     (0.260)
ICT inv. per employee                 0.128***        0.119***        0.045***        0.040***        0.068***         .059***    0.040***   0.035***    0.119***    0.106***
  (in logs)                            (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.009)
D (no ICT investment)                -0.113***       -0.210***          -0.027        -0.124***        -0.076*        -0.180***    -0.030    -0.137***   -0.146***   -0.257***
                                      (0.037)         (0.034)          (0.038)         (0.037)         (0.043)         (0.043)    (0.049)     (0.047)     (0.038)     (0.034)
Log employment                        0.136***          0.009         0.139***          -0.009        0.154***          -0.007    0.139***     -0.011    0.149***      -0.021
                                       (0.015)         (0.022)         (0.015)         (0.023)         (0.016)         (0.024)     (0.018)    (0.027)     (0.015)     (0.023)
Log employment squared                  -0.007         0.020**         -0.013*          0.005         -0.022***         0.001      -0.011       0.01     -0.023***     0.002
                                       (0.006)         (0.010)         (0.007)         (0.010)         (0.007)         (0.010)    (0.007)     (0.011)     (0.007)     (0.010)
Log age                                 -0.019        -0.040**         0.032*            0.018          -0.003          -0.017      0.019      0.002       -0.007      -0.024
                                       (0.018)         (0.019)         (0.019)         (0.019)         (0.020)         (0.020)    (0.022)     (0.023)     (0.019)     (0.019)
Log age squared                         0.010           0.005           -0.007          -0.008          -0.026          -0.026     -0.034     -0.037*      -0.002      -0.005
                                       (0.017)         (0.017)         (0.018)         (0.018)         (0.019)         (0.019)    (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.018)     (0.018)
Test for complementarity                0.004           0.578           0.001           1.024           0.005           -1.380     0.056      0.757       0.010       -0.056
 (standard error)                      (0.066)         (0.931)         (0.066)         (0.959)         (0.074)         (1.047)    (0.082)    (1.131)     (0.071)     (1.001)

Log likelihood                         -8851.9         -9045.0         -8283.8         -8677.0         -7302.2         -7407.3    -5469.3     5617.4      -7753.6     -8209.3
Pseudo R-squared                        0.106           0.087           0.133           0.091           0.073           0.059      0.094      0.069        0.142       0.092
Number of observations                  14,294          14,294          14,294          14,294          14,294          14,294     14,294     14,294      14,294      14,294


Coefficients and their standard errors are shown. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the ﬁrm
level.
* = signiﬁcant at 10%, ** = signiﬁcant at 5%, *** = signiﬁcant at 1% .
Industry, wave, regional, and time dummies are included in all equations.
Reference groups: D(provincial competitors), Lombardia, 1997, first wave pattern.
